
Christian Lanng, CEO, TradeShift
Tradeshift, which aims to shake up B2B procurement with its business network platform, announced today it has raised a new round of $75 million in funding from a mix of venture and corporate investors, bringing total funding to date to more than $200 million.
The top three goals for the new funding, according to sources close to the company, will be:

Engineering and operations to expand platform capabilities and offerings
International expansion in Asia and Europe
Building the third-party developer community

The focus on expansion in Asia and Europe allows Tradeshift to grow in areas that are weaker for better-known but US-centric procure-to-pay vendors such as Ariba and Coupa. As we noted when we last looked at Tradeshift:
Tradeshift has a ways to go before it reaches the scale of better known procurement platforms, but it has a good track record of consolidating its presence in a market and then building out. It began with an e-invoicing solution in the Danish market and has since expanded into other global markets.
Landmark China deal
In March this year, Tradeshift signed a landmark deal with Baiwang, a leading provider of tax-related services in the Chinese market and one of two government-approved companies to provide tax control hardware and software as the country switches from its existing business tax (BT) regime to a new, more international-trade-friendly value-added tax (VAT) system. Industries including construction, real estate, financial services and consumer services were required to complete their conversion to VAT ahead of May 1.
The tie-up with Tradeshift allows Baiwang to offer paperless invoicing to its customers, and there are plans to add a tax cloud, tax-related financing, corporate credit, and other value-added services. Jessie Chen, CEO of Baiwang, said:
By partnering with Tradeshift, we’re aligning with the [Chinese] government’s goal to modernize its business technology infrastructure, which will play a major part in supporting China’s five-year plan.
In an email to diginomica today, a Tradeshift spokesperson expanded on the implications:
From a market access perspective, we have a ‘captive audience’ and the opportunity to upsell procurement and supplier management solutions and services to Chinese companies — as well as third-party applications delivered on our platform.
Global organizations with operations in China can choose Tradeshift in order to have an e-invoicing solution that is compliant with Chinese invoicing and tax regulations.
Finance partners
The rollcall of investors in today’s funding round include various partners who plan to offer trade finance, lending or payments on the Tradeshift network, such as American Express, HSBC and CreditEase. They see tremendous potential in allying with Tradeshift, according to a source close the ocmpany:
All of them can be future partners because of the opportunity to deliver financial offerings to our user base. The investors include some of the biggest financial services brands with access to millions of businesses and consumers. They see huge opportunity in our network of 800,000 users transacting billions of dollars of value on a next-generation platform.
Matt Ocko, co-managing partner and co-founder of Data Collective (DCVC), which led today’s round and who will join Tradeshift’s board of directors, commented in a prepared statement:
Tradeshift’s deep engineering for global scale transaction volume, machine learning for seamless invoice processing, fraud prevention, and 360-degree mobile workforce enablement, are the very things that enable the high-speed, risk-free solution deployments powering its global growth and its customers’ success.
Tradeshift is delivering a painless transition to higher agility and transparency that businesses need globally as they make a push toward greater digitization.
Tradeshift claims a total user base of 800,000 and grew the value of transactions on its network 250% from 2014 to 2015 (compared to 400% year-over-year growth from 2013 to 2014). Fortune 1000 customers among its account wins over the past year include Zurich Insurance Group, NHS SBS, LinkedIn, SAPA, RWE, Eberspächer Group, Tech Data, SUEZ, and Veolia, which came as a a result of a global reseller agreement signed with business process outsourcer Xerox Business Services.
My take
This innovative company is building a market presence in specific geographies and industries where it is able to form helpful partnerships. It’s a model that works well and allows Tradeshift to build out its market presence ‘under the radar’, away from the glare surrounding more richly funded, US-based competitors.
Definitely one to keep a wary eye on.
Image credit - Courtesy of TradeshiftDisclosure - Coupa is a diginomica premier partner at the time of writing. Read more on: Spend management 