
Rob Enslin – FKOM
Rob Enslin is SAP’s global head of sales. His official title: president of Global Customer Operations and is a member of the Executive Board and the Global Managing Board of SAP SE. Try getting that on your standard business card! At this time of year, Enslin’s the point person traveling the around the world and tasked with motivating 13,000 sales people to the SAP cause. I caught up with him in between sessions at SAP’s Las Vegas FKOM or Field Kick Off Meeting; but only for 12 minutes. It was fast and furious.
The main thing I wanted to understand is how he views the outlook for SAP in 2016 and in particular, all the applications that didn’t get much of a mention in the Q4 FY2015 results. I was expecting Enslin to make a big noise about the marketing messages that help the field, but no. Instead he spoke from what must be the in-field customer engagement perspective on topics like integration and the journey customers are taking. It was a real surprise to me but good to hear nonetheless.
What follows is my rehashed version of what he said over a crackly line. I have re-arranged part of what Enslin said so that it flows on reading.
The conversation
It is clear that SAP is centering its activities around S/4HANA. That is where SAP is convinced that its customers need to be in order to get the best out of the next generation of business applications. The problem is that S4 is still a work in progress but even so, Enslin was able to reference Swiss Property as a 100 user implementation that got done in two months:
Swiss Property isn’t a large company but that matters less than the fact they became referencable in a short time. It’s a good proof point. We continue to drive the industry flavors but we have to get the value equation right so that buyers see a reason to move.
That was a clear reference to addressing the many occasions on which SAP user groups have been far from complementary about SAP messaging on S/4 and HANA. How about the mix going forward based upon what’s happened in the most recent past?
We had a significant amount of commoditization in the on-premise and you saw that I’m sure but this will surprise you – we did good with CRM. Ariba have eventually got the user interface correct, we’ve got the value add in good shape for the supplier and so I’m now starting to see momentum. Ariba should do well. Concur is 25% SAP customers, so there is a lot we can do there but we’ve got to do a better job in non-SAP groups. Fieldglass gets better every quarter but it won’t blow you away.
Steve’s [Singh] focus is always about offering a best in class solution. So we see more integrations into S/4 and that’s OK. The same is true for SuccessFactors and the Fieldglass environment. A lot is going to be focused on integration. It’s inevitable. Elsewhere C4C is a defensive play for sure but you know what? Customers like Schlumberger are very happy. The challenge for SAP, the growth, Is less about acquiring customers although that’s always the case but about getting them referenceable.
If I go back to what we hold to be the cornerstone, we obviously perceive S/4 as the cornerstone for a digital business and when we execute well there then it gives us a much better chance of getting there with the rest of what we offer. When we launched S/4, the story was very centric around ERP – it took us time to visualize how it would come together and get the industry flavors together. The surprise in launching this into the field? We made a 10 pager, it was written in word not PowerPoint. We didn’t have to force it and it was the highest consumed material of anything we’ve got. I’m really pleased about that. It is telling me that we’re on the right track and getting the right content to these folk.
This was a frank conversation by any standards but I like it nonetheless. My experience is that companies which are self aware will more likely succeed than those that have drones churning out marketing pap that no-one except the PR/ARs believe. So, with that in mind, let’s unpack what’s really going on.
All change or plus ça change?
The last few years has seen SAP make a series of, by its standards, significant acquisitions. SuccessFactors and Ariba are the ones that immediately spring to mind but Concur is not exactly a light weight. The idea that everything has to be German engineered and designed has truly gone the way of history. That is a good thing but it doesn’t and should not mean that SAP has forgone its engineering heritage. That would be foolish. Say what you will about SAP, you can’t fault their commitment to their principles of writing the best code they can. It doesn’t always work out that way and cloud delivery models certainly make it hard for SAP to think about ‘minimum viable product.’ That is all part of the transition I have spoken about the last few years.
SAP is now heads down in working through what a digital platform looks like for its customers and endeavoring to weave in a compelling business proposition that the C-suite and LoB decision takers can buy into. That is not a trivial task from a technical delivery standpoint and Enslin demonstrated the seriousness with which he takes that in this conversation. I know from conversations with Steve Lucas who heads platforms that this is something that weighs heavily on the company because when SAP looks at the application portfolio today, it must ask itself – what do we stand for and what do we believe? Those may seem strange questions but as Enslin pointed out, this is not about S/4 the ERP but SAP the digital enabler.
The only piece I’ve not quoted above is Enslin’s discussion about the geographies where he said that SAP expects the partnership with Lenovo in China to yield results and that both Russia and Brazil are ‘coming back’ and his comment about Bill McDermott, CEO’s stage appearance of which Enslin said to me:
In all the years that I’ve known Bill at SAP, he says the same thing: if we look after the customers then the rest will look after itself.
That’s a good message to put over to sales people and, as I’ve said in the past, SAP’s account management is among the most admired in the enterprise business.
My take
I don’t have a problem with anything Enslin said. I like that he demonstrates an awareness of the customer journey and provides direct answers. My hope is that SAP figures out how to package the journey, putting it in terms that buyers will understand. That’s been missing in the last few years but the vertical market emphasis provides exactly that jump off point. Yes, of course SAP has to play nice with whatever buzzwords are fashionable in the moment (think IoT, sensors etc) but that’s not what customers care about and Enslin knows it. More important, the field knows it as well. The alignment therefore between leadership and the field is solid.
Going forward it is inevitable that our conversations move back to the individual solutions but I think that is short sighted. If you take the view that SAP is the right company to approach as a digital business enabler then we should instead focus on three things: how well do the piece parts work together? where are the gaps? how quickly will I see value? It need be no more difficult than that.
By the way – did anyone notice the absence of two pieces of SAP marketing in this conversation? Simple. Innovation. Yeah – they’re done. 😉
Disclosure: SAP is a premier partner at time of writing
Image credit: via Harald Reiter, who is a partner at Infosys, another premier partner. top image via SAP
Read more on: Analytics planning and data analysisSpend managementTalent management 