
SAPPHIRE Now 2015, along with Dreamforce and Oracle Open World are among the largest enterprise software events of the year. Making them work for you is always a challenge when there are so many people to meet and so much to see. Here are our survival tips  based on long years of experimentation and failure. Feel free to add your own.

Bring the most comfortable shoes you possess. It doesn’t matter if they’re scruffy. No-one will be watching your feet but a really comfortable pair will make all the difference at the end of a long day pounding the halls.
Talking of sore feet, try walking on the stand carpeting as much as possible as you make your way around. This is kinder on the feet than the walkway carpets.
Take a water bottle and drink plenty of water. Florida is hot and humid but the aircon will dry you out faster than a Dyson AirBlade.
If you are fortunate enough to get out of the halls and into the open, use copious amounts of sunscreen. Orlando is at a latitude guaranteed to burn. Without protection, you won’t feel it at the time but you’ll be in agony later in the day.
While the weather in Orlando at this time of year is usually sunny, there’s always the chance of heavy showers. Pack a collapsible umbrella. It will save your well pressed suit from ending up looking like crushed linen and won’t add a lot of weight.
If you have meetings starting almost immediately after the main keynotes, sit at the back. That way you avoid the exit crush and will get to your destination faster. You’ll see everything just fine as there will be massive screens inside the keynote hall.
The really smart people don’t attend the keynotes but catch them from the comfort of their hotel room or in one of the conference areas. That way they’re not fighting for wifi access with thousands of others or those flooding the networks with MiFi devices. And they get the benefit of the equivalent of a front row seat. The only thing you’ll miss is a sense of the atmosphere in the hall and the opportunity to engage in banter with your pals. Banter can always come later when comparing notes.
Take a backpack to carry all the marketing materials you want to keep. Forget the goody bags. A backpack keeps your hands free and is the most efficient way to carry stuff.
Only pick up the stuff you really want. It is far too tempting to carry a ton of paper that you end up discarding but which weigh you down during the day.
Pace your meeting schedule. There’s so much to see that it is tempting to go for the fully immersive experience. That will fry your brain. Schedule rest breaks every couple of hours so you can recoup and be in good shape for the next meeting.
The sales guys at the booths will want you for as long as it takes to wring a commitment out of you. Making sure the booth people know your hard stop time up front. It will sharpen their game and save you from missing other appointments.
Check out the informal events. These frequently cover edge topics that most people don’t know about but which are valuable for ongoing implementations.
If you are a user group member, you don’t need me to remind you about attending the ASUG events. But…if you have issues that are gnawing at you then make sure ASUG both knows about them and can point you in the right direction to get a resolution. That alone can make the cost of attending worthwhile.
Even if you have no interest in a topic today, it is always worth checking out sections of the campus that are peripherally on your radar. A ‘fly-by’ tour of 10-15 minutes will give you enough ideas that you can mentally note for the future or, perhaps encourage you to reschedule some meetings in favor of finding out more.
Take lots of pictures to remind you of things you’ve seen. Try filming 1-2 minute demos using a smartphone. These are very handy as reminders after the event to help you recall functionality that is important to you. If you plan on doing that then ensure you have a fast 32GB or 64GB SD card in your phone.
If the booth won’t allow you to film then walk away. It ain’t ready for prime time and is likely slide ware dressed up to look real.
Record useful conversations using a cheap voice recorder. You won’t remember them all and scrambling to make notes on the show floor is difficult. We use a Zoom H2N. It’s a cracker and will run a good few hours on a couple of AA batteries. You can always listen to the recordings on a flight back or in your car on iTunes as an aide memoire. They also make for a great resource as you disseminate everything you discover with your home team.
Attend as many of the expert sessions as your schedule allows. These provide invaluable learning experiences and are almost always a source of practical information you can use straight away.
There will be many invitations to parties hosted by the big players like Accenture, Deloitte, Infosys and others. These can be great events with which to find like minded souls but you need to pace yourself at these as well. It’s a common mistake to stay out too late, only to feel ‘tired and emotional’ the following morning.
Finally – make new acquaintances. We find there are always people from whom you can get a helpful and fresh perspective on issues around your implementation. I’ve found over the years that if you go with an inquiring mind, users will always share their experience whether that’s good, bad or indifferent.

Finally – have fun!! It’s not all business and no-one will resent a bit of downtime. You’ll need it come the last day!
Bonus points: while you might not be allowed in, you can usually catch the media Q&A with SAP’s executive board. While most of the questions will be softballs, there will always be a few that are incisive. Note those questions and the people who ask them. Collar them after the Q&A to get more color by asking what they were driving at. You might be surprised just how much you learn.
Disclosure: Infosys, SAP, Oracle and Salesforce are premier partners at time of writing.

Read more on: Cloud ERP financials and supply chain 