
Following yesterday’s announcement that communications service platform Twilio is buying email platform SendGrid, I had a chance today to hear from SendGrid CEO Sameer Dholakia why he believes email isn’t going away anytime soon.
As the head of a company whose business revolves around email, it’s a question he’s often asked — and in his position, he’s unlikely to answer any other way. But taken together, these five reasons seem pretty compelling.
Billions of people use email
While past performance is no reliable guide to the future, people are creatures of habit. Once enough people have adopted a particular way of doing things, those habits are difficult to shake off. As Dholakia points out, the sheer scale of email adoption is quite something:
Email has literally just been adopted by millions of people for two decades. Getting billions of human beings to do something — that they come to doing every single day in a certain way — that’s kind of hard to do.
It’s still the cheapest way to reach you
While there are many other communication channels around today, none of them are as cost-effective at scale as email:
The efficiency with which it happens is incredibly low cost for businesses to be able to send those messages to them.
How much we all depend on email to oil the wheels of modern life is evidenced by SendGrid’s own traffic metrics:
We reach 3 billion unique email recipients with a message on behalf of one of our 74,000 customers every single month. That’s 3 billion human beings who were asking for, ‘I need this message, I need this receipt, this password reset, this thing.’
Your email is where you keep stuff for later
While many of those messages may be marketing or reminders that we don’t need, many others are records of transactions that we can’t easily store in any other communications channel. These are messages that we don’t need to see right away, but we might need them later on, he explains:
There are those use cases where you actually would prefer it to be an asynchronous message rather than interrupt-driven on a device that will put up an alert for you. I don’t need that, but I want it to go somewhere. [For example] I donated to a charity and I want that receipt there later for when I file my taxes.
You need an email address to sign up for things
While you can use a mobile phone to sign up for some services, that’s not an option that’s open to everyone, he points out:
My [pre-teen] daughter and son had email addresses for years because they can’t sign up for their applications at school without an email address. Historically, that has been the identifier. They don’t have a cell phone number in their pocket, but they have an email address. It’s that online identifier that has existed for decades.
It’s worth pointing out too that, even when they’re old enough to have their own cellphones, they’ll still need an email address for verification and emergency access. It looks like there’s no getting away from it.
Other channels are on top of email, not in place of it
The proliferation of communication channels is simply expanding our ability to communicate in different ways, rather than each new format replacing its predecessor, he concludes:
It continues to be an ‘and’ rather than an ‘or’. It’s not that Messenger kills off text messaging. It’s just added to a plethora of other communication channels.
Put all these factors together, and Dholakia is confident email will be with us for a good few years yet:
It’s that combination of things that can allow email to endure for the last two decades, and the reason why I think it’ll be around for decades to come.
My take
Love it or loathe it, I don’t think there’s any escape. We need somewhere we can receive and store messages that have to be kept. In that role, email is the digital equivalent of paper-based mail … which also hasn’t gone away yet.
Image credit - Emails with young woman in chair holding tablet computer © TierneyMJ - shutterstockDisclosure - Twilio has funded the author's travel to attend its conference in San Francisco this week. Read more on: Collaboration sharing and digital productivityCRM and customer experience 