
diginomica content in Slack RRS
No sooner do we get our personalization engine up and running (yes – it worked and with great results which we will share once we have more experience in how it works) than we’re out of the traps with yet another way to consume diginomica content.
This time it’s via Slack, the collaboration/communication system some of us (ahem) love while others (cough) shun. As of today, you too can be a hotshot Slacker with diginomica. How does it work?
You need to head over to this page which Jon Reed carefully crafted to understand what you need to do and how it works. Trust me, it is very easy and made more so by a few tweaks we added via our developer team.
Here’s what’s going on:
Slack already has a nifty RSS integration. So all you need to do is to follow their easy instructions to add RSS to a Slack channel. You can make that channel public or private. (You’ll need to be a Slack channel owner to add the RSS integration, so if you’re not, just ping your Slack admin). If you have a Slack community/project on a particular topic, you can add a diginomica RSS based on your topic preferences as per below. You can also use this RSS list for your RSS reader, adding topics in any combination.
For those who thought RSS is dead then think again. In our case, it’s the mechanism by which you can consume the content inside your Slack. Breaking down what Reed said:

If you live in Slack (which I do for the 20+ notification types I need on a daily basis) then heh presto! You’ve got another way of not needing to go outside of Slack.
If you want selected content then you can grab it via the RSS feed into your chosen Slack channel(s)
If you want to share some content with some people and other content with other people then knock yourself out with multiple Slack channels.
If you are working on a topic specific project and want the diginomica content relevant to that project for the project team, then you can do that too. You can always kill that project channel later.
If you have extended your team to include third parties, as makes HUGE sense in live projects, then you can use selected diginomica feeds to help keep those people up to date what with what we’re thinking as part of your value add.

…and because we provide the title and excerpt, you won’t get sucked in by any unintended clickbait.
The feeds are nicely styled, courtesy of our developer partners at Devrix as you can see from the image at the top right of this story.
One word of warning – kind of. Slack’s RSS integration doesn’t automatically go out and suck a shitload of content from the feeds. It waits until it sees a fresh piece of content and then sends it to the feed, after you’ve created the RSS integration. This is a good thing because it means you start with a blank slate and build up content for consumption as you go along. For those who need more context for whatever they see, there is always our super duper search function.
We think this is a big step forward. We already offer multiple ways to consume diginomica content but felt that with Slack’s growing popularity, it makes sense to hook into their network methods. We think there is more that we can do with this but for now – this is it.
What say you? Please let us know.
Image credit - via the authorRead more on: Digital and content marketing 