
Fast growing online gaming company 888 Holdings has said that it’s continued success is down to its “first-class” proprietary technology and its expertise in CRM, marketing and analytics.
The company, which has just dropped a joint bid with Rank Group for William Hill, also spoke about its on-going focus on mobile development and about how it is blending the game-playing experience for different form factors, so as to keep customers engaged, coming back and making more deposits.
888 Holdings today this week said that it saw a 19 per cent increase in revenues to $262 million for the six months to 30th June, while pretax profits increased 39 per cent to $27.8 million.
Itai Frieberger, Chief Executive Officer of 888 Holdings said:
The business is performing very well across all key parameters. We’re delivering the business goals we previously outlined mainly substantial in growth through our best-in-class casino and significant push to grow our sports vertical.
These have been successfully delivered through our proprietary technology and marketing innovation where as the core of our DNA. It allows us to innovate while we expand into international.
Cyclical business model
Frieberger told investors about the company’s core business model, which focuses on creating a ‘never ending cycle’ for online business. You can see an image of this below, which focuses on investing in marketing to acquire customers, who then make deposits, which is followed up with CRM activities. This hopefully then leads to more online gaming activity and a net gaming revenue for 888 Holdings.
888 Holdings online strategy
Frieberger said:
Our success is based on a never ending cycle shown on the slide, which we constantly measure and monitor through our business intelligence, analytics and profit. Our job if you want to simplify, it is to make sure that the cycle always show positive returns.
Our platform and products, whether home grown or integrated are developed and optimized to make sure this is the case. The cycle is also implemented across the non-UK regulated market with the required adaptation. This is the future of the online gaming view in my view.
888 Holdings has found that its proprietary offerings are the ones that are gaining traction with customers. For example, the company said that unique internally developed content continues to dominate its growing Casino platform.
Users are now favouring 888 Holdings content on the platform by 59% to 41% for this half of the year, versus 52% and 48% for the same period last year. A definite growing trend.
Frieberger said:
Casino has enjoyed strong growth from both organic and cross-sell channels. New interesting features content were deployed across our core markets and regulations, both proprietary and third party. This all integrated into our back office business, CRM methodology.
Our marketing teams are becoming more and more proficient and sophisticated in using the tools they themselves helped to develop. 777, launched last year, is a great example of our multi-brand strategy already contributing a significant portion of the casino growth.
We would emphasize that all this applies to what is already the biggest offering in the online gaming industry. Growing an already a sizeable business is challenging, and I’m happy to show that we made that challenge once again. The online casino market is a highly competitive environment but we have plenty of more room to grow. In the UK for example casino accounts over half the total online gaming market, worth well north of $5 billion.
Mobile
Finally, 888 Holdings pointed to mobile driving growth across all product verticals. It said that mobile now accounts for over half of all UK revenue (56%), which is up from the same period last year (43%).
Again, 888 is seeing benefit in developing its own solutions for market, as opposed to buying in third party content. Frieberger said:
Our mobile share has constantly risen now at record levels. You should remember that we are still a predominantly casino and poker operator, in contrast to sport operator. This is referenced in July approximately 85% of our revenue on 888sport came from mobile. These numbers are result of constant improvement being delivered to a mobile proposition with every feature and game today deploy simultaneously across all platform.
We’re now reading the benefits of our investment in proprietary mobile solutions, and it is clearly the growth engine for the industry. We are in control over our own destiny and providing our players with a seamless and streamlined web and mobile experience. This offering is a key strength of our product portfolio.
Interestingly, the company is also considering how games that traditionally required longer sessions, and thus were more suited to desktop use, could be integrated with a mobile offering going forward. Frieberger added:
Poker has traditionally been the slowest verticals in terms of mobile penetration but was mainly attributed to the nature of the game, which includes longer sessions with several participants. We have recently deployed a new version of 888poker, mobile and our next major release poker 7 and 8 will have a lot to do with addressing mobile as a growth engine when we look at the player from mobile prospect as a blueprint for future product releases.
Without going into too much detail, the idea is to enable a player to move seamlessly between devices and products that enhancing the stickiness and cross-sell potential of poker. 888poker is maintaining a strong track record, as a number with vertical and the second biggest network in the world.
My take
A company that obviously has technology at its core. As online services become more and more commoditised, it’s unsurprising that those that can differentiate with a unique alternative may see gains. Getting this right, however, isn’t easy. Understanding the market and being able to iterate quickly to changing behaviours is essential – if 888 Holdings can keep this up, it may be on to a winner.
Image credit - Images sourced via 888 Holdings Read more on: Digital enterprise in the real world 