
It’s only in the past few years that consumers have suddenly become so demanding of customer service. That’s not to say anyone was happy in the old days, when you had to hang on the line for ages and when you did get through, the agent was rarely able to resolve your issue. But it was the norm — you hoped never to need customer service, but if you ever did have to log a call you just put up with it.
Then the Internet came along, we all got smartphones and social media, and suddenly our expectations changed radically because we saw what was possible when companies used these connected technologies to deliver joined-up customer service. And we found we had a voice to call out those that didn’t live up to our new-found expectations of responsive, effective customer service.
Trouble is, most consumer goods manufacturers were still saddled with customer service systems that were good enough in the old world, but have no hope of keeping pace with what consumers now expect. They have all had to undergo a radical overhaul of the customer service function — many are still working through it.
Customer service from the dark ages
When Carole Edwards became head of customer contact at UK-based floor care appliance maker Vax in 2012, the customer service team was still using one of those systems from the pre-digital dark ages.
I’ve had 30 years in customer service. Before there was call centers, it was customer service sitting in an office. It was almost like going back to that.
There were multiple databases around the company, with legacy information in and nothing joined up. The system — I wouldn’t call it a CRM solution — the system the agents were using was just no more than a notepad for keeping records.
It was an on-premise solution. The flexibility and the reliability of it had a huge impact on us. We had frequent downtime.
The system was so unfit for purpose, agents were frequently reduced to tears of frustration. And with no configuration options, Edwards was helpless to do anything to improve matters.
We couldn’t do anything to alleviate our agents’ experience. [They were] navigating multiple screens and trying to make a picture from pieces all over the place.
The customers’ experience was horrendous. We didn’t know them, so we couldn’t make any decisions around their products, who they were, route them, anything. So it was tough. It was tough for the people, tough for the customers.
Intelligent routing
An impending office move crystallised the decision to move to a new system, and after evaluating the options, the team implemented a Salesforce and NewVoiceMedia system on an aggressive 6-week timescale.
It forced the issue. We wanted our agents to leave the old site and log in [to the new system] on the Monday morning seamlessly. That’s what happened. We did it.
Eighteen months later, the team now works with 2.7 million customer contacts in a single database, and the system uses that information to intelligently route and prioritize customer calls as they come in. First contact resolution rates have risen from 78% to 87%, average call handling time has shortened and employee satisfaction in the contact center has rocketed. Meanwhile, use of the platform has expanded beyond the customer service team into many other areas of the company.
We’re eighteen months in now, and going from it being a really painful experience and embarrassingly bad for our customers, we’re in a different place today.
There was no gameplan that it was going to go across the company. As you use it to do business with your customers, the other areas of the company start to get engaged, and it just organically grows. So today we have Service Cloud, Marketing Cloud and Sales Cloud deployed. It absolutely does transform the way you do business.
Consumer expectations
That has brought Vax into line with the huge change that’s taken place in consumer expectations and behavior, says Edwards.
Customer demands and their expectations are rising. I think it’s the biggest change I’ve seen in my whole career. I think it’s exciting, I think it’s the right thing.
Customers are controlling the channels they want to contact in. It’s no longer you sitting there and defining the strategy, because the customers are forcing you now to communicate with them in the channels that they wish to communicate.
They hop. They don’t stay in one channel, it’s wherever they are, on the move, and they expect it to be joined up and they don’t get it when it’s not.
The system at Vax is already integrated into the ERP, warehouse and carrier delivery systems and the Magento online store. The next move is to plug it into the product management database, which stores all the product documentation. Then the plan is to add an online self-help capability.
Meanwhile, future generations of Vax product will likely be wifi-enabled to connect into a consumer mobile app, or they’ll begin to manage their own maintenance through an Internet of Things capability — opening up a whole new chapter of customer service potential that Edwards is looking forward to.
I couldn’t think of a better way to end my career. You come in and you have huge changes through all your career — I’m at this window in my career now and there’s this huge change now, it’s amazing.
My take
There’s been a remarkable change in consumer expectations of customer service over the past decade, driven by a huge change in what companies are now able to deliver with the right technology and processes in place. But that has put massive pressure on often creaking legacy systems that have been caught on the hop by change on a scale they were never designed to accommodate. Edwards tells a familiar story — fortunately this one has a happy ending.
Image credit - Vax carpet cleanerDisclosure - At the time of writing, Salesforce is a diginomica premier partner.Read more on: Customer service managementDigital transformation - frictionless enterpriseUse cases 