
While us CRM types love facts and figures, qualitative customer data is often missing from the overall assessment picture. Here’s a real world example.
A recent weekend in Manhattan couldn’t have been better except for the hotel. Here’s where my CRM background caused my antennae to stand up. The experience was mediocre and when I checked out, I said so in response to the perfunctory question. I was shocked that the front desk clerk didn’t ask a follow up to my obviously begging question. This isn’t a revenge piece so I am not naming the hotel but I will use the experience as a CRM teachable moment.
Let’s put aside questions like, Was the clerk too busy to ask? Why didn’t you go to the concierge with your complaints? And anything like that. Truthfully there was ample opportunity and time to do the right customer service thing but it just didn’t happen. So the real question to ask is why didn’t anything happen after I dropped what I consider to be a CRM bomb?
I think the answer is that the hotel, like many vendors today, only collects quantitative data about a stay and blithely ignores the opportunity to collect the qualitative kind. Training might also have something to do with it, or it could be that they run on a form of automatic pilot that ignores anything unexpected. Colleagues have seen this before as in this oft repeated story by Den Howlett:
Virgin store cashier: And how you are you today sir?
Den: Actually I’ve got a stinking hangover and just stubbed my toe on one of the display cabinets.
Virgin store cashier: That’s wonderful  now will that be cash or charge?
A couple of years ago I wrote an article for Computer Law Review International about data and security which forced me to relearn the truth about data and this might be valuable to you.
Data types
Do you know how many kinds of data exist? There are two kinds of quantitative data, the aptly named quantitative type that we’re all familiar with and that we can do math on, and interval data, which might have numbers but upon which performing math makes no sense. Phone numbers and postal codes (in the US they only contain numbers) are useful examples.
There are two kinds of qualitative data too. Hair or eye colors are examples of data that has no order—blond and blue eyed might be your preference but there’s nothing ordinal about them. Since there’s no ranking for them so they are described as nominal. On the other hand, letter grades are ordinal because they have an order.  A digital photo file can be considered qualitative data that is also ordinal in that the order of the data’s rendering, i.e. transformation into a picture, matters quite a bit.
Quantitative data is nicest to have; it’s the kind we most often think of and it’s easily massaged and analyzed so it’s preferred. Unfortunately, quantitative data is also vendor data in that it’s data a business or vendor collects about itself and what it deems important. Qualitative data is squishy and involves customers and their amorphous feelings and it often must be normalized before you get to hard numbers. However, this is not an either/or situation and you need both kinds of data to run a business.
Qualitative customer data and reputational risk
Why should you care? Because lurking in the qualitative data are potential risks to your reputation, the kind that can damage a brand through word of mouth or social media. But according to a recent Harvard Business Review article qualitative data is also the least collected. In Don’t Trust Your Company’s Reputation to the Quants, Harlan Loeb and Eric J. McNulty observe that,
In a recent survey of risk executives by the American Institute of CPAs, more than a third of respondents admitted they conduct no formal assessment of strategic, market, and industry risks,
which the authors explain involves capturing and analyzing qualitative customer data. The article points to the Reputation Quotient (RQ), a tool developed by the Harris Interactive team that measures

Social responsibility
Emotional appeal
Products and services
Vision and leadership
Financial performance
Workplace environment

Quick aside, do you know your RQ?
Loeb and McNulty’s main point is that not only can you not rely exclusively on quantitative data but that there are people within your organization, which they call “Qualts” who have a handle on this if you ask good questions. They are
The executives and other employees who internalized the values and larger purpose of the organization, and grasp how powerful these are in maintaining healthy connections between the company, its customers, employees, and other stakeholders.
And,
…they are the leaders who appreciate the interdependencies of these elements and the potential consequences of running afoul of society’s expectations.
Net Promoter Score fallacies
Back to my Manhattan experience—I filled out a routine customer satisfaction survey, which I fully expect will be used in a Net Promoter Score calculation (you can easily see what a survey is angling for with just a bit of practice.)
My responses were comfortably below the threshold value of 9, which will be misleading despite the best efforts aimed at implementing the methodology.
NPS asks if you would recommend a product, vendor, or brand and there are many reasons for saying no; in fact the methodology acknowledges that scores will usually be underwhelming in a quantitative sense (a score of 60 on a scale of 200 might be considered good, for instance). But vendors assume that even small scores, if trending up show a business that’s on course.
So even a ‘good’ NPS still indicates a lot of customers who are not raving about one or more things that go into a Reputation Quotient. But to really get a better RQ, vendors need to collect customer qualitative data, analyze it, and use it as the raw material for improvement initiatives.
My take
As a practical matter, there’s never been a better time to collect qualitative data from customers.
We’ve tried surveys and focus groups but they suffer from the same shortfalls of slowness and expense. By the time we’ve spent money and gotten results, the market has moved on.
Communities offer a unique way to quickly and inexpensively capture both qualitative and quantitative data and feed it back into reputation building approaches for the business.
Community technology is on the upswing and will be an essential part of the digital disruption, however you choose to define it. Of course it comes with its own caveats—spoiler alert—community solutions are not perfect. But it’s pretty good, especially if your default position is to collect quantitative data alone and ignore what your customers want to tell you.
Image credit - Story image via UserVoice, featured image via igmarketcareRead more on: Analytics planning and data analysisCRM and customer experience 