
 
For the majority of businesses, and in particular the Small and Medium-sized Businesses (SMB), there is still a fundamental issue at stake – getting the business into the cloud involves getting onto the cloud in the first place. As has happened in the past with so many other business sectors, the safest and quickest way for many of them has been to engage with third party support, usually in the form of the reseller channel.
But when it comes to moving into the cloud, one of the key drawbacks is that many players in the current channel make the subject just as techie as the primary Cloud Service Providers. Alternatively, they are big systems integrators that specialize in providing the right type of more business-focused services, but normally only for the large enterprise community.
The business specialist channel that emerged firstly off the back of the minicomputer boom of the 1970s, and the PC small business systems of the 1980s has, generally speaking, not yet managed to make a real impact in moving the SMB community into the cloud.
It is a fair bet that a good part of this comes from them not really understanding the new relationship of the technology to the business needs of their customer any more than their customers do. The other side of the coin can probably be best seen in the one channel sector that should be jumping on delivering cloud services to SMB, but are generally lagging behind, the Managed Service Providers (MSPs).
The suggested reason for this is that so many of them have engineered long term service contracts with their customers that are steady and safe for both parties, leaving both to pass by the potential of the cloud boat.
What is needed is what could be termed a ‘fourth party’ – a third party for the third parties that can give them the tools needed to move themselves to a place where they can deliver cloud services coupled with their own areas of business or product sector expertise.
In the same way that the role of these third party businesses is to make it a no brainer for their customers to exploit existing IT services and applications, such a ‘fourth party’ could offer that channel community a ‘no brainer’ option on acquiring the tools and services needed to accommodate their customers’ next move….. into the cloud.
Cloud leap
One candidate now directly pitching at that `fourth party’ opportunity is US-based start up, Cloudistics. The company has recently launched itself into the European, Middle East and Asia market sector, following the US launch of its Accelerate channel program in the USA. This targets the existing Value Added Reseller (VAR), Technology Alliance Partner and MSP members of that channel community.
The proposition is the provision of a Cloud Platform as a Service offering that gives them the technology underpinning on which to build cloud services that incorporate their own intellectual property and marketplace expertise. In addition, the aim is to help them create end user services that are outside the world of public cloud services and much more like private cloud services operating behind users firewalls.
The idea is to provide the channel partners with the tools that can provide each customer with a dedicated turnkey solution that gives both much greater management and control than is possible with public cloud services. This could be particularly relevant for the management of operational costs, where end users – and even some in the channel partner community – are liable to tumble into the pitfalls that lie betwixt and between paying too much for a thoroughly over-specified public cloud environment and under-specifying the resources required in an attempt to keep costs down.
As has been observed before, the big public Cloud Service Providers have resource options that number well over a million, With the best will in the world this creates a minefield of possible service choices for even enterprises with large and well-skilled IT departments. For the typical SME if can be a financially dangerous place to be.
The Cloudistics toolset offers the channel with the capability to orchestrate the provisioning of resources and manage its overall performance in real time. This can build a federated, unclustered environment that can be run by the end user SME as an on-premise private cloud, or in a third party hosting environment as a co-located service. This takes them away from having to deal with Public Cloud service providers directly.
It also integrates with the Cloudistics Application Marketplace, which is being built up as a repository of pre-built, re-useable applications templates that can be readily deployed as read-to-run services. According to the company, it is also designed to work with many existing applications so that they can be brought forward in to the cloud world with the minimum of aggravation. This could be an obvious benefit to VARs, MSPs etc that have already invested in the development of specific applications and other Intellectual Property. Their useful life can be extended by moving in to the cloud.
For those channel partners that do not have either the IT resources or the inclination to invest in such resources, Cloudistics is already partnering with IBM Bluemix as a hosting option customer, and is expected to settle a similar deal with Microsoft Azure in the not too distant future.
My take
My view of this is pretty straight forward. It fits the needs of not only the SMB community but also the departmental requirements of larger enterprises, and from the CIO’s perspective has the potential to offer them a known and definable baseline of not just services but the capabilities and the reliabilities of those services.
As the line between SMBs and enterprises become less well-defined as the latter start to patch in and exploit the expertise and niche service capabilities of the former – a possibility that the cloud makes much easier and more likely – CIOs may just feel more comfortable in using such business partners if the cloud services underpinning what is being offered are based on something known and understood.
Image credit - Change, Same Green Road Sign Over Clouds © Andy Dean - Fotolia.comRead more on: Cloud platforms - infrastructure and architecture 