
Royal Bank of Scotland, the parent company of Natwest in the UK, launched its social media channel for customer support two days before the bank’s entire system went into meltdown, leaving its customers without access to their money for days.
Alice Fryatt, transformation manager for the bank, describes the experience as a “baptism of fire”. But one which, in hindsight, she claims now benefitted her team, as it proved the worth of using social channels to communicate with customers.
Fryatt said:
Day two of having it was the day that Natwest had its meltdown and everybody’s card stopped working and all the systems crashed. A little bit of a baptism of fire, which taught us a lot. Exceeded my yearly target within the first 6 hours of the number of tweets we were going to do!
I bet.
But, Fryatt believes now that this incident was good for the team’s positioning within the bank. She said:
That baptism of fire probably did us a favour. If we had gone live at a normal time, we would have probably had a lot of risk managers and asset managers and PR managers sat all over us. But because of what was happening, they were all busy fighting fires. And we just had to get on and manage. Because of that we developed very quickly what the right way was to deal with customers.
However, social media at Royal Bank of Scotland wasn’t always a customer services priority. Fryatt, speaking this week at Oracle’s Digital Transformation IT Summit, explained that social at the bank has shifted from a marketing exercise to a critical channel for support. She said:
Social, Twitter and Facebook was run by the marketing team, by two lovely people up in an ivory tower in London, sending out lots of nice pretty posts. But we started to get feedback from customers, as social media started to rise, about service questions. Marketing teams are not set up to manage those kinds of service questions.
Customers want to be serviced in that channel, they don’t want to be phoned up, they don’t want to have a call while they’re on the train to Euston. They want to be in that channel, they want answering in that channel.
What’s important
 Fryatt said that her team focuses on things that are critically important to the customer, such as speed of response, and the bank has a service level of 7 minutes response time, which it his 90% of the time. She added that Royal Bank of Scotland has changed suppliers a “couple of times”, but now believes Oracle works well for its needs.
For us, and the tools that we use, speed of response is equally important. Reputationally manageable – we have to get back out there. We have to be able to operationally control and sustain it, so you need to be able to work out who has performed best, you need to work out how many is coming in, how many is going out, how quick they went out, what the customer thought at the end of it.
And now that the bank has a fully functioning social media support, made up of 17 people, Fryatt is all too aware of how information on social is in the public domain. She said:
One of the things we realised very quickly is how much we are monitored. I can remember being on calls at 3 in the morning and putting the blanket tweet out and then suddenly seeing my tweet was on Sky News 10 seconds after I pressed send. It’s a little unnerving, but big brother is definitely out there.
The agents
Fryatt explained that she tends to recruit people to the team from other internal functions at the bank, as they likely have a broader knowledge of how the organisation operates, which she believes is important. And recruitment largely focuses on the personality of the individual and their capability to react quickly and intelligently to what’s coming in on the social channels.
The team even has training in areas such as how to deal with sarcasm and how to interact with other brands.
But most importantly, Fryatt argues that social media support agents should have the freedom to respond how they see fit and to lose the ‘corporate bank voice’ that may be found in other channels. Basically, she believes that customers should be spoken to in the language that they are used to speaking in. She said:
These guys are not managers, these guys are senior frontline agents. They have the empowerment to respond to customers how they feel is right. We do not check their tweets before they go out, we just let them go out. We train them and then we let them go. Occasionally we might have to do a little bit of repair work, but very rarely in fairness. The empowerment is paramount. Let them do what they do best, let them speak to customers in the language that is natural to the customer. If you’re in the financial industry, don’t put your grey suit on, it isn’t going to work.
Equally, Fryatt’s team is using social to monitor the bank’s network and is providing feedback on new services and features to other individual teams within the organisation. And whilst Fryatt was reluctant to talk about specific returns on investment, she does believe that the value gained outweighs the costs. Fryatt said:
I’d love to say cost is never a factor, but hell we are a bank and our customers wouldn’t thank us for that. Cost is a factor and value for money is a factor. However, what benefit can you put against [a viral tweet]? You cannot put a price against it and the benefits that it may or may not bring. Cost is a factor, it has to be built into any budget, but it was spotted that it was a channel that was going to grow.
It was a channel that was going to happen anyway. If you didn’t have a social media team, that wasn’t going to stop customers tweeting Natwest. It had to happen, it’s a service channel. You can’t put a value against it. Is it expensive? Not particularly, but it can make a massive difference reputation ally if you don’t get it right. The cost of the channel isn’t that bad.
She added:
There is an awful lot of feedback [you get from social]. We learnt very quickly that one of the primary benefits of Twitter is that it can tell you, sometimes quicker than your own heartbeat monitors, that you have got a problem with one of your systems. So Twitter and our incident management team are very connected for that very reason.
How has the latest advert gone down? How has the latest website gone down? Absolutely. All of that information, those relevant tweets are pulled together and sent to the team. When we redesigned the website we pulled those comments and sent them. They get both honest and rough feedback.
Read more on: SocialUse casesBest of 