
 
Adobe Summit kicked off in London today, and as part of the proceedings a number of digital honchos from some of the world’s leading brands took to the stage to discuss what digital means to them, how it is impacting their business and how it is transforming some of their key services.
Some of the guests speaking included Shell, Renault, Phillips (its personal care division) and BNP Paribas. And although none of them had enough stage time to provide an in-depth look at what each of their companies is doing across all digital activities, I still thought it might be useful to collate some of the key themes that emerged from the discussions.
But before we do that, here’s a list of the speakers that will be mentioned throughout this article:

Thierry Derung, head of wealth management digital solutions at BNP Paribas
Lenze Boonstra, VP and head of global marketing at Phillips
Patrick Hoffstetter, chief digital officer at Renault
Ricardo Carvalho, head of digital at Shell

The impact of digital
One of the most interesting points that was raised across the discussions with the digital leaders, was their perception of how digital has impacted them. The answers provided varied from the impact on their customers, to the impact on employees and their relationships with customers, to their role within the organisation. For me, one of the most interesting things to note is that all of them either explicitly stated or implied that ‘digital’ actually had very little to do with technology.
BNP Pariba’s Derung said:

I am very involved in digital transformation as the Chief Digital Officer. Of course digital is about new technologies, new tools; so digital transformation means training on hard skills – but it is not only limited to that.
Digital is a new opportunity, it is a business opportunity. And for that you really have to teach everybody inside the enterprise how to make the most from those opportunities and new ways of doing things.
I feel sometimes like a nice teacher explaining to the people how to work differently, how to take the most from those new solutions, how to improve relationships with our customers, better serve them and have a real connection with them. Transformation is the most important word in digital and it involves a lot of efforts.

Renault’s Hoffstetter said:

When you talk about mobility or transportation, it has changed quite a bit. The whole customer journey has been tremendously impacted by digital, especially by social. Social is actually our second point of influence in terms of car buying now.
There are two main direct consequences of that. The first one is that the number of brands that people used to have in mind and take into consideration before buying a car moved from four to six. And as a direct consequence the number of people switching brands dramatically increased over the past four to five years. For example, in the European car market, it is now up to 50%.
You no longer have this traditional family buying a Renault, or a Citroen, or a VW, everything is changing and moving fast. And the second impact in terms of business, which we call an opportunity, is social CRM. How we can leverage our customer base, the 25 million people driving Renault, to actually push and increase your brand.

Shell’s Carvalho said:

When you think about Shell, most people would think about our stations on the corner of every street. We have 45,000 of them, so you are bound to come across one of them. But Shell is an energy company that has a lot of different businesses; and the way that we communicate with our stakeholders, digital is becoming pervasive across these landscapes.
A lot of our businesses are becoming more and more aware of how the user experience and the user behaviour is changing in regards to digital. It’s not all about technology, technology is a big part of it, but how the behaviour of our users is changing is far more important. And how we can engage with our stakeholders in a way that they are used to doing with other brands as well.

The right structures (or lack of them)
Surprisingly, another key theme that emerged involved overcoming the processes and structures of traditional enterprises. Many of the speakers said that digital bodies within the organisation needed the freedom to be agile and creative without the confines of enterprise structures limiting their scope. BNP Paribas hinted that getting people to do things differently isn’t always possible, but added that the traditional way of doing things must be challenged. Whilst Phillips’ approach of separating out employees to give them some distance to work on digital was particularly insightful.
BNP Pariba’s Derung said:

Our customers our changing, this is the way it goes. So our employees must follow and really be able to deal with those changes for the customers. And private banking is something that is very old, for over 150 years we have been doing private banking. We have habits. Those habits we have to break to work differently for our customers.
The most difficult challenge for us is tradition. We have been working in a relationship model for a long time, but it’s really been about a human relationship and face-to-face. You have to look to me as a ‘disruptive gentleman’, but I have to push new ways of working. New ways of having a relationship with the customer. This is really difficult for us, we operate in a complex world with many constraints. Regulation, legal and so on.
Changing everything isn’t always so easy, we have a lot of rules. But at the same time we have old rules that we have to challenge, because they are old. And digital is something new. So sometimes it is a bit of a fight with people in their comfort zone, confusing rules with habits. But at the same time rules are rules and there are some we have to follow.

Shell’s Carvalho said:

The way that we have been evolving at Shell, is by look at what areas we gain advantage from by centralising. And what are the areas that we get advantage from by decentralising to get agility? I think when we are talking about strategy tools, those are areas that we prefer to centralise because we can get economies of scale there.
But we also we want to empower our local businesses and people working in the front-lines, so that they can execute in a more agile way. So it’s a good balance between centralisation and decentralisation, and understanding where you can get most of the value in the quickest time possible.

Phillips’ Boonstra said:

Our fundamental belief is that you shouldn’t focus too much on the organisational set up, you need to break down silos. It’s all about bringing people together, with a mindset of working together. That’s basically what you are doing. In personal care, we have a few digital accelerators, where we bring people together from different disciplines – from marketing, from design, from UI – bring them together outside of the corporate HQ, in an entrepreneurial environment, and get them to work on this innovation.
They have to be somewhere else, so that we can protect the ideas that they are working on. Protect them from too many people being involved. Get them outside of the organisation, work in a small team, protect the ideas and then come back later.

Marketing and mobile
No Adobe conference would be complete without nods to the impact of mobile and marketing. Renault in particular provided some useful insights into how it is planning to introduce a loyalty programme for customers that have bought a Renault car, which will then be linked to an app soon after purchase. It is also consolidating its mobile app estate.
Renault’s Hoffstetter said:

Often people ask, how can our company become digital? And now the question is, how can our company become mobile? If you look across the globe, 35% of our audience is already coming from mobile. Then the hot debate we will always have is between surfing the web on mobile and apps.
We ran an audit a few weeks ago, we have over 400 apps coming from Renault across the globe, which obviously isn’t ideal in terms of customer experience. So we are trying to focus our strategy towards two main apps – one for prospects and one for customers. Once you are a customer, you are going to officially become a My Renault member, with that you will get your My Renault app getting all the classic services and information. That is where we are shifting today and connecting that with the connected car.

Whilst Shell’s Carvalho said:

Mobile for us is key, obviously. With our B2C presence on the streets, mobile is becoming a main channel of choice for us to work in digital. But not only on B2C, we are also looking at how we use mobile on B2B. But also how we enable our people to work more effectively with mobile technologies. So all of those three areas are really key for us.
Marketing is also pretty important for us, but the way that we see digital is that it goes beyond marketing. Marketing is probably the area in Shell that is being most quickly disrupted in Shell in terms of digital, but digital needs to influence different areas in the company. From digital enablement of our people, to communication areas, to stakeholder engagement.

My take
Some interesting insights from some of the world’s most influential digital leaders. I’m particularly keen on Phillips’ approach to digital development, but separating out a function into an entrepreneurial environment, bringing a number of different teams together to share ideas.
I also like the way BNB Pariba’s Derung describes himself as the “disruptive gentleman” – a novel way to describe a leader of disruption.

Read more on: CRM and customer experienceDigital and content marketingUse cases 