
The growth in social and mobile has created a whole host of opportunities for companies to push their brands and campaigns on a variety of digital channels and platforms. However, given the market’s relative infancy, it’s obvious to many a consumer that plenty of these companies are just firing in the dark. It’s becoming increasingly apparent hat eyeballs on an ad doesn’t necessarily translate into anything tangible or meaningful.
Which is why social media platforms like Twitter are investing a tonne of money into research that looks into how people ‘unconsciously’ (or subconsciously) engage with brands. If it understands how to optimise ads on its platform, it has a much better chance of selling that real estate.
Twitter’s global lead for market research, Matt Taylor, was speaking at an event hosted by ad agency Tug, as part of London Tech Week, discussing just this. He has been looking at how consumers are now interacting with content in different ways on mobile platforms – by swiping, pinching, tapping their way through ads – and trying to figure out what impact this has on a brand’s strategy. Taylor said:
Some 80% of users in the UK access Twitter via mobile. We are living in a world where we interact with content in very different ways, we are physically interacting with advertising in a way that we haven’t done before. Does it mean that content delivered on mobile is more memorable, because we are physically interacting with it? Is there anything going on our minds that made us retain that information in different ways? And does that mean we can use that in different ways to deliver advertising?
Experiment 1
Twitter has worked with a company called Neuro-Insight to carry out a test to understand both how effective its platform is in engaging people with content and to assess what types of content work best. Neuro-Insight uses a patented EEG technology called Steady State Typography, which assesses the brain’s reactions when it is shown content to understand how people are responding.
The social network ran a study across a group of 114 people, split up into smaller groups of around 10-15 people, which were first of all shown some ‘mild TV’ to establish a baseline reading and then exposed to a number of different websites, Twitter feeds and Vine videos. Twitter was looking at three different aspects to their response:

A feeling of relevance or familiarity with the content
Emotional intensity
How these two things combined impact long-term memory

Neuro-Insight also has a database of over 100 different studies from which to compare the results to, according to Taylor. The first bit of feedback from the study was somewhat self-serving, but still interesting nonetheless.
So, in terms of personal relevance, Twitter found that its platform is 51% more effective at stimulating the part of the brain that gives users that sense of familiarity. Taylor said that this is hardly surprising, given that Twitter is essentially your own personally curated platform of content. You follow the people you want to see content from. Interestingly though, the only previous study that beat Twitter on this was one where people opened their own personal mail.
Secondly, Twitter was 75% more effective than other digital services that were tested when it comes to users experiencing emotional intensity. Again, given that Twitter is a platform that is most interesting when hugely emotional events are taking place – e.g. breaking news stories, world sports competitions – this isn’t particularly surprising.
Finally, Twitter also found that it was 56% more effective than other services at creating long term memories. Taylor puts this down to the fact that so many unique ‘moments’ or ‘stories’, which are often personal and highly emotional, play out on the Twitter platform.
However, there were other points gleaned from the experiment that are worth highlighting. For example:

How identifiable you are has an impact – you need to make sure you are instantly recognisable in those few seconds that someone flies by your brand on Twitter. This is largely achieved through use of the avatar, your name, your Twitter handle and your tone of voice (more detail on these points later).
Drive an emotional response – Taylor said that this may seem obvious, but “being brave enough to genuinely drive a strong emotional response from people through advertising is something that can make you really strong, but is very rare”.
Prompt people to react and engage – This is often at odds with digital advertising, according to Taylor, as so many people focus on “impressions, impressions, impression”. People assume that passively consuming content is good enough, when it’s not. For example, Twitter now believes that it’s most reliable evidence of engagement is when someone actually replies to a brand or a tweet, as opposed to favouriting, re-tweeting or clicking on a link.
Create a linear narrative – The group was shown two sets of Vine videos, one set where the videos were abstract, repetitive patterns, whilst the other was narrative-led. For example, Taylor showed us one used by a brand of a girl dancing. And then showed us one of a guy throwing a ball, which hits the hood a car, and then bounces through a basketball hoop. The latter got a much higher engagement rate because it has a narrative.

Experiment 2
The second experiment Taylor focused on looked at how users subconsciously view brands on Twitter and how different changes to that brand’s followers, tone of voice etc., changes their perception of the brand. He said:
We wanted to know what it is, in that short amount of time, that affects whether you’d like to purchase from them, whether you trust them, whether you like them.
Taylor said that this was born from the behavioural theory of ‘anchoring’, which suggests that when you have no research to back up a decision, you make some assumptions based on first impressions to support a choice. For example, when on holiday and presented with two restaurants, you are far more likely to choose the restaurant that is very busy than the one that is only a quarter full. How does this translate online and on the Twitter platform?
It was fascinating to me to take that observation and look at the profile of a brand. When people look at your brand page your eye typically goes to the avatar, to the follower count, to the bio and then to the timeline. Do you have a bounce back or perception problem from those first few seconds you interact with a brand?
The theory would suggest you do. If you’re asked to make an assumption about something you know nothing about, you will cast around subconsciously for anything to anchor that guess to. So you’re not completely shooting in the dark.
To do this, Twitter invented a fake brand called ‘Resident’, which it decided was going to be a successful denim brand in the US that was planning to launch in the UK (all fictional, of course). It then populated a Twitter feed for the brand and created an avatar, Twitter handle, and all the rest of it, so if you were looking at it, you would assume it was a real company.
Taylor then went out and found approximately 5,000 people and split them into cells of 250, where they each saw a tweet from ‘Resident’ based on three categories. The tweet could suggest industry validation, so a magazine was talking about the brand for example; it could be in reference to London Fashion week, because that was an event going on at the time; or it could have referenced a competition for consumers to win a prize. The Tweet would either appear in front of users as an organic tweet, or it would appear in front of them as a paid for, promoted tweet.
Twitter then altered the tone of voice for these tweets as either being funny, serious or indicating social responsibility. And it varied things like the number of followers. Once everyone was exposed to one of these tweets, Twitter pulled them all in and asked them a number of “typical brand KPI type questions”.
Some of the results were a bit obvious, such as users were 27% more likely to trust a brand that had a high number of followers. That makes sense; I’m more likely to trust a brand that has 1 million followers as opposed to one that has 100. But, interestingly, this even translated from trust into willingness to purchase.
Also, Twitter found that it’s promoted tweets scored 20% higher than organic tweets when it came to brand consideration. Again, this does make sense, as I’d be more willing to trust a business that had the money to promote itself on Twitter.
One of the most interesting results, however, was with regards to the use of a brand’s tone of voice. So depending on whether you used a funny, serious or socially responsible tone of voice, would depend on whether a user just liked you, or whether they would consider buying from you or recommending you.
As you can see from the image below, funny and socially responsible tones tend to make people like your brand, it brings the human touch. But if you want people to trust your brand and buy from you, being funny in your tweets drops down as a priority and a serious tone is more important. However, Taylor finished by saying that companies shouldn’t take this to mean that they have to be serious all the time, as consumers are smart enough to deal with changes in tone.

Taylor said:
Having worked for a company in the past that was so desperately in control of its tone of voice, where it wouldn’t change it, ever, this highlighted to me that it’s okay to change it – people are fine with that. If you are trying to just drive likeability, if you’re trying to build relationships, by all means bring through the human tone. But if the objective changes half way through, don’t feel worried about switching the tone of voice to something more serious. Consumers are pretty sophisticated, they know that you’re there to sell them things.
My take
This is a very Twitter-orientated focus. And as we know, Twitter isn’t as successful on the ads front as Facebook is. But the fact that these studies are taking place, shows the importance of getting this right for the company.
Also, some of this may seem obvious. But given the amount of time I spend online cursing the terrible content that is aimlessly thrown my way, on Twitter and other platforms, I thought it may serve as a useful prompt as to what works and what doesn’t.

Read more on: Digital and content marketing 