
Another day, another nail in the coffin of Privacy Shield.
Earlier this month members of the European Parliament put the US Government on notice to meet its obligations under the terms of the Privacy Shield transatlantic data transfer agreement or the deal would be suspended, with inevitable consequences for global tech firms.
The clock is still ticking and equally there’s no sign of the Trump administration either blinking or indeed even giving a damn about the European threats. With the President now openly calling the European Union (EU) a foe, that’s unlikely to change before the deadline.
Meanwhile more voices are calling for the suspension to go ahead. Yesterday the Council of Bars and Law Societies of Europe (CCBE), which represents the views of more than one million European lawyers, added to those calls on the basis that “the US does not ensure a level of protection of personal data that is essentially equivalent to the one guaranteed by the EU”:
The CCBE calls on the [European] Commission to suspend the Privacy Shield and to offer its re-implementation on the condition that the necessary guarantees and safeguards, which are currently lacking, have been implemented.
The CCBE cited a number of reasons for its plea:

Lack of binding legislative control.
Lack of judicial and independent oversight mechanisms.
Lack of effective legal remedies.

Nothing comes of nothing
So far, so pretty-much-what-everyone’s-been saying. But in an interesting twist, the CCBE criticises the European Commission for failing to address these issues in its first review of Privacy Shield, which was published last October:
The CCBE has analysed the Report and come to the conclusion that, despite the length of the Report, none of these crucial issues are sufficiently addressed in the Report.
For example, on the subject of binding legislative control, the CCBE notes that “the issue is not even mentioned in the Report”. It had previously warned that the term “national security” in Privacy Shield’s case is “not circumscribed with adequate specificity”, but again observes that this has not been tackled by the Report:
The Report mentions the term “national security” many times and acknowledges that the concept of national security is being used to limit rights of individuals…Despite recognising the importance of the term “national security”, the Report does not in any way address the issue that this crucial term is not clearly defined in the Privacy Shield.
On the lack of independent oversight mechanisms, again the Report is found to be severely lacking, according to the CCBE, which has argued:
External oversight is provided by what is said to be judicial bodies, including the intelligence committees of the Congress and the Privacy and Civil Liberties Oversight Board. The latter two are not judicial bodies, so the requirement of supervisory control can only be fulfilled by FISA Court. However, the procedure before this court is ex parte, meaning that the individuals concerned might not be heard, or they even might not be aware of the case.
The Commission meanwhile says:
Nothing. While extensively discussing the oversight mechanisms in place, the Report fails to even mention these structural deficits in any way.
One of the biggest criticisms of the US implementation of Privacy Shield has been the failure to appoint an independent Ombudsperson, a role that was cited as providing assurances and safeguards for non-US citizens. Again, says the CCBE, the European Commission’s Review chooses to turn a blind eye:
The Report fails to even mention the lack of effective powers of the Ombudsperson. Instead it appears that the Report finds it sufficient that the Ombudsperson may report any findings to the Secretary of State, even though the Secretary of State is part of the U.S. Government which is responsible for the threats from which the Privacy Shield seeks protections. Likewise, the report of the art. 29 Working Party doubts the powers of the Ombudsman are sufficient vis-à-vis the intelligence authorities.
The CCBE also voices concern that, according to the Commission’s report, the US Department of Commerce has not made use of the possibility provided in the Privacy Shield to request copies of the contractual terms used by certified companies in their contracts with third parties to ensure compliance”. Or in other words:
So far there is no effective control whether certified companies actually comply with the provisions of the Privacy Shield. The CCBE is very worried by this observation and fails to understand why the Commission obviously does not see the need to draw consequences from this observation.
With nice timing, a case has just been settled between a Californian online training company and the Federal Trade Commission (FTC) that illustrates the CCBE’s concerns. According to the FTC, ReadTech stated on its website that it was ““in the process of certifying that we comply” with Privacy Shield, but that while this process was indeed started in 2016, it was never completed.
But such cases remain the exception rather than the rule. Only four cases of misrepresentation have been brought by the FTC to date, while over 4000 US companies are currently self-certified under the scheme.
My take
This matters partly as another powerful voice pointing out the utter inadequacy of Privacy Shield as a robust mechanism, but also because the second annual Review of how it’s working is coming up.
I predicted a couple of weeks back that the Eurocrats will find themselves between a rock and a hard place and will fail to follow through on their threats, most likely signing off on a second report saying, ‘must do better, but everyone deserves another chance’.
The only rogue factor here might be what state US-EU diplomatic relations have hit by then. If it’s a full-scale trade war, then Brussels might sprout a spine. But as the CCBE has so helpfully noted in its comments, based on the last report, the inclination is more likely to be to turn a blind eye again – which helps no-one.
Image credit - PinterestRead more on: Data privacyRegulation 