
Each day I pore over numerous feeds looking for stories that might be of interest to at least some of our readers. Some of these are then fed into the daily email I send to those who say they’d like a digest of diginomica content.
To date, the only way to get that selection  is via the dailies and I plan to keep it that way for the forseeable future. However, every now and again, it’s useful to provide a wider audience with a view on the topics that float past my screen as a way of understanding the directions we are moving in.
Here is a selection from the last week:
Monday:

You don’t think your small business will get hacked? You’re wrong – Corilyn Shropshire makes sure everyone is safe.
A Suspected Network Of 13,000 Twitter Bots Pumped Out Pro-Brexit Messages In The Run-Up To The EU Vote – Buzzfeed investigates.
The New Kingmakers Then and Now – Stephen O’Grady revisits his eponymous book.
The Crypto World’s Fake Advisers – The Information on the not so shocking news that people make stuff up.
Lack of transparency obscures public cloud costs – Cliff Saran on an EU based study. in a good way.
Data sets and common sense: The cure for ABM overload – Erik Matlick recasting old as new.

Tuesday:

Why educating employees about cyber security isn’t the solution to stopping cyber breaches – Leonard Cooper provides pause for thought
How Russian Firm Might Have Siphoned Tools From the NSA – Kim Zetter questions the narrative around Kaspersky Labs potenttial involvement.
End of the road: will automation put an end to the American trucker? – Dominic Rush hauls his rig across this much discussed topic.
Tech Giants Are Paying Huge Salaries for Scarce A.I. Talent –from the NYT…so there really is a shortage.
This Company’s Robots Are Making Everything—and Reshaping the World – Joshua Hunt looks inside Fanuc.
3 AI Powered Ways To Fix Sales & Marketing Misalignment – Deborah Holstein provides solid advice few will heed.

Wednesday:

Canadian spy agency releases its top anti-malware tool as free software. – I’m betting this wont work out so well. via BoingBoing.
Hackers target security researchers with malware-laden document – Danny Palmer tells all.
Generation IoT Goes to Work: A New Look at Work Roles  – IoT for all spells out a breezy picture.
Oracle Joins The Blockchain Party – Roman Luzgin gives more reasons for being cheerful about Oracle stock
BBC Will Use Machine Learning to Target Video – The Verges ays that Auntie will use ML to figure out what we want to watch. Whatever is wrong with endless soaps?

Thursday: 

IoT ushers in a new era for supply chain fulfillment – Kelly Fray revisits last year’s favorite TLA
The DOJ’s Bizarre Subpoena Over An Emoji Highlights Its Ridiculous Vendetta Against A Security Researcher – Mike Masnick chews on an old bone that just got dug up again.
Dubai just appointed a “State Minister for Artificial Intelligence” – Dom Galeon assesses the latest moves.
Every company will use blockchain by 2027 – Mohit Mamoria states the bleeding obvious…to true believers.
How Mobile IoT networks can derive benefits from connected energy market – TelecomLead investigates.

Friday: 

Citizen development with @FlowForma and @JohnRRymer – Sandy Kemsley provides an excellent take on changes in the development community.
Russian Site-Blocking Operation Embroiled In Corruption Scandal – Timothy Geigner rolls his eyes in shock…
Russian cybersecurity company admits taking NSA code –  via Reuters, things aren’t getting any better for Kaspersky Labs.
Apple offers Walmart “everyday low cost” in IT savings. IBM estimates a deployment of 100,000 Macs – Daniel Eran Dilger talks about a day I never thought I’d see.
The High Cost of Buying Complexity – Hank Barnes, one of the very few Gartner analysts we enjoy reading, talks about easing the buying cycle.

Image credit - free imagesRead more on: Hits and misses 