
The world’s largest online betting and gaming group with revenues in excess of £1.8 billion and driven by digital at its heart. That’s the payout that’s on offer if Paddy Power and rival Betfair’s gamble on a potential merger comes up trumps.
The two rivals announced yesterday that they’ve entered talks that they hope will result in the creation of Paddy Power Betfair plc, a company that will be listed on the London and Dublin stock exchanges. Paddy Power  will own 52% of the merged business, with Betfair owning the remainder.
Paddy Power was founded in 1988 by the merger of three existing Irish bookmakers and now has more than 350 betting shops in Ireland and the UK, as well as a significant online and mobile proposition. Betfair meanwhile is an exclusively online business, best known for its marketplace exchange technology that allows gamblers to bet against each other.
The putative deal is the latest manifestation of merger and acquisition activity in the gambling sector. In the UK Ladbrokes announced plans to merge with Gala Cora, while in the US, 888 Holdings and Bwin.party have similar plans.
Paddy Power CEO Andy McCue argues that a potential merger with Betfair is a coming together of equals to create something stronger:
It accelerates our strategy. We have a very good organic strategy. Betfair have good momentum in their business. The combination of the companies becomes even more attractive and both are coming from a position of strength. It’s a rare opportunity for a merger equals, of two leading players in a sector.
Certainly both firms have turned in impressive performances of late. For the first half of the year, Paddy Power’s operating profit rose 33% to €80 million on revenues up 25% €527.8 million. Meanwhile yesterday Betfair announced revenues for the three months to July 31 up 15% to £135 million on pre-tax earnings of £41 million, up 19% year-on-year.
But both companies have come under pressure from new regulatory and tax environments. Betfair’s profits were hit by an additional £12.8m of tax paid under a new online betting duty introduced in the UK at the end of 2014, while Paddy Power’s operating profit would have been 68% higher were it not for €32 million in new taxes and product fees.
Such regulatory and financial pressures mean that bigger is better, hence the rise in M&A activity. For his part, McCue says:
We believe that combination of the two businesses has compelling strategic rationale augmenting organic growth strategy. It will create one of the world’s largest online gaming public companies with revenues of over €1.5 billion. It represents an attractive opportunity for both Paddy Power and Betfair to enhance their position in online betting and gaming with a large scale and capabilities leading to a better place to compete in existing and new markets.
The dual-brand strategy in Europe will utilize the distinctive and complementary brands of Paddy Power and Betfair and it will combine two companies with complementary online businesses and geographical mixes. And it will create a diversified group with strong platforms across online and retail in the UK and Ireland and attractive international growth opportunities in Europe, the US and Australia.
Digital direction
Both firms are also of shared mind about the prevailing direction of travel in the gambling markets. McCue explains:
Global market dynamics are clear and well established. Online growth is outpacing retail as consumers migrate from retail to online. Future foreseeable market growth virtually all lies in mobile and sports betting is the biggest segment of the market.
With that in mind, Paddy Power is particularly well-placed, with three-quarters of its profit coming from online and over two-thirds of those online revenues coming via mobile devices. To put that in context, that’s 40% of total group revenues.
Paddy Power continues to invest in new digital propositions, says McCue:
In quarter four this year, we will launch two new mobile applications in paddypower.com. Firstly, a new fully native iOS app built in house. The second release is a new HTML5 web app, also proprietary and improving our products across a whole distribution of platforms replacing our current Android and iOS web apps.
These new apps will greatly improve our customer experience by delivering hugely improved design and navigation resulting in apps that are easier and faster to use. Customers will be able to find and place bets quicker, for example, the number of taps from app launch to placing a pre-match triple bet is halved and placing accumulator bets will involve a much smoother customer journey, most notably for cross board betting.
Following their release on mobile, we will own the customer front end and be able to release new features and updates more rapidly. The new apps also lay a strong foundation for further innovations which we have in development and along with an increasingly global approach to product development fundamentally better position us with our competitive markets.
The firm is also looking to increase its own proprietary content offerings to sit alongside existing third party provider partnerships:
Proprietary content is becoming increasingly material to Paddy Power and paddypower.com as proportion of total revenues has doubled in the last year to 22%. During the first half we launched our first proprietary games in Italy and on our UK retail gaming machines. The game’s content we are producing is of the highest quality. Proprietary games significantly outperformed third party games and increasingly so. We are developing beyond the content with our new proprietary Bonus Engine Management System giving us the ability to use customer analytics to intelligently promote our proprietary products which will further drive growth.
My take
The deal had actually been jokingly hinted at in a tweet from Paddy Power last month after the Coral/Ladbrokes deal was announced:

A powerhouse in the making and with technology and digital hardwired into its corporate DNA.
This just has winner written all over it. A safe bet.
Read more on: CRM and customer experienceDigital and content marketingMobile 