
Shopping
UK grocery chain Sainsbury’s last week announced that it has appointed its first Chief Digital Officer in the form of Clodagh Moriarty, until recently the retailer’s Online Director.
Her task is to “create and lead the company’s digital strategy, ensuring customers experience an integrated and seamless digital experience across the Sainsbury’s, Argos, Sainsbury’s Bank and Nectar divisions”. She’ll also be embedded in the work to integrate Sainsbury’s and Walmart-owned Asda, assuming that the planned £12 billion merger passes the necessary regulatory hurdles.
Leaving that to one side, the decision to create a dedicated CDO role illustrates again the competitive nature of the online grocery business, with Amazon looming in the near distance, and the need to have a solid digital proposition. Sainsbury’s CEO Mike Coupe spells it out:
The creation of the new group Chief Digital Officer role demonstrates the importance we place in giving customers outstanding and seamless digital shopping experiences. Investment in this area is vital to our future success.
A recent report from research house IGD in association with The Consumer Goods Forum makes much the same point and provides an interesting ‘to do’ list for retailers in this space.
The study, based on a survey of 223 “senior industry members” across 42 markets, picks out three main drivers as to why any grocery retailer can’t ignore having a digital plan in play:

Across most of the world, online is already a fast-growing channel
Online and offline are merging, with an online store vital to complement physical stores
The digital world evolves faster than the physical one and online stores will become increasingly compelling.

On the first of these points, the IGD study notes different levels of digital penetration around the globe. The UK, which is among the most advanced markets, will see growth rates of 48% between now and 2022, with online accounting for 7.5% of the total market.
In contrast, the U.S., which is still getting its act together, can expect growth rates of 129% over the same period, but online will only account for 2% of total.
It’s China that’s the market to watch though, with online grocery sales enjoying growth of 286% year-on-year to account for 11.1% of the total market by 2022.
Work to do
On a global scale, there’s a lot of work to be done. Just over half (54%) of food and grocery businesses have digital transformation plans in place, while 11% are yet to begin.
This, despite a majority of respondents stating a belief that digital is going to change the way consumers interact and engage with their businesses:

78% of respondents think shoppers will use online price comparison services more regularly to switch to the cheapest retailer.
67% believe shoppers will be able to choose from a wide range of specialist online retailers underpinned by a common and consistent delivery service.
75% expect more manufacturers to sell directly to consumers online and cut out the middle man.

In order to meet the needs of the future consumer, the ideal online store needs to be able to tick off five features.
Personalisation
The store needs to be “a shopper’s personal micro store, offering individualised and online-exclusive products, personalised promotions, recommendations, advertising and loyalty schemes. Simon Mayhew, Online Retail Insight Manager at IGD, predicts:
AI will help to unlock personalisation. The store’s layout will be dynamic and able to predict the customer’s reason for shopping. So, if you need a meal for tonight, your homepage will display only the relevant solutions. When generally browsing, you will only see the products and pack sizes likely to meet your needs. Many products will only be buyable online where there is no constraint on shelf space, and in high-value categories, there will be customisable products, so you can create your own ideal shampoo or cereal.
Be a smart PA
The online store needs to become the customer’s personal assistant. This means being able to do things like preventing shoppers from opening the fridge and finding that they’re out of milk! IGD expects shopping to become “more inspirational, through personalised planners and sophisticated digital assistants like chatbots”. Mayhew says:
Smarter devices will make shopping simpler and more inspiring. The online store will help stop you running out of products. Shoppers will subscribe to have their favourite products delivered regularly and AI will predict when you may run out and make or suggest a reorder. Household devices, such as washing machines, will connect to your store and reorder when necessary. This will lock in customer loyalty.
Use tech that makes it easier, quicker and more efficient to shop
This will include login and payment options via facial, voice or touch recognition technology, while on the back end better fulfilment services will be need to ensure more deliveries, on time and in full and products delivered at the right quality and freshness. Of the last point, Mayhew explains:
Fulfilment will benefit from robotics and supply chain forecasting will be more accurate. This will mean online pickers have fresher products to select, helping overcome one of the biggest barriers to shopping online. Unattended deliveries to homes, cars, and even ‘straight to the fridge’, will grow in popularity. Improvements in service will reduce the number of returns and make deliveries quicker. We will see greater collaboration in the supply chain, including manufacturers pooling resources to sell directly to consumers. However, there will also be new challenges and potential inefficiencies. Shoppers will expect faster deliveries, and this means smaller, more frequent orders.”
The bad news here – 61% of respondents say their supply chain capabilities don’t understand or are only now starting to understand what to do about digital commerce, such as updating and re-prioritising supply chain KPIs.
A frictionless combined offline and online shopping experience.
Customers will expect to be able to switch seamlessly from shopping online and in-store and know that their data is up to date. This is going to be the biggest challenge for many retailers – over half of respondents to IGD’s survey (53%) admit they haven’t started or are only just starting work on online/offline integration.
This is also going to come back to a skills issue as 47% of respondents to IGD’s study say that their teams as a whole don’t understand or are only now just starting to understand the needs of digital commerce. There needs to be better leadership, states the research report:
Leaders are responsible for creating a plan fit for the future and securing the buy-in of employees and other stakeholders. Successful leaders will ensure teams understand the rationale for new KPIs, whilst keeping the entire business updated on performance.To remain competitive, winning leaders will create an agile, knowledge-sharing culture and ensure their business isn’t held back by fear of failure. The leadership team will also have to make the decision on how to upskill the organisation. Buy in the expertise? Develop in-house? Collaborate?
Be invisible when necessary/appropriate
Shoppers will be able to buy products from “shoppable digital content”, such as videos, photos and social media. Mayhew explains:
You won’t even need to visit your online store to buy products. Alongside voice ordering, the majority of digital content you see will be shoppable. You could be watching a video or see a still image and just click on it to buy the product.”
My take
It’s a tough checklist. The consolation for any retailer looking at it nervously is simple – there’s no-one out there who can do all of this today. So it’s a challenge, yes, but it’s also an opportunity. Platitudes aside, the online grocery space is, as we’ve been predicting, going to be the new front line in the digital retail wars. With mega mergers vying with predatory new competitors, this is digital disruption that’s about to get very dramatic. For the likes of Sainsbury’s new CDO, the stakes are high.
Image credit - Premier FoodsRead more on: e-commerceRetail e-commerce and the omni-channel 