
Whitman and Weisler
Both parts of what used to be Hewlett Packard (HP) have now reported their first set of financials and, at least for now, one child is outperforming the other, although there are several factors in play that may be skewing the picture. 
HP last year split into HPE – technology solutions – and HP Inc – printers and PCs. The former got the growth engines, the latter got the declining business units. That’s mirrored in their first quarterly numbers. 
For the three months to 31 January, net profit at HP Inc was $592 million, down 57% year-on-year, on sales which fell 12% per cent over the same period to $12.1 billion. Personal systems net sales were down 13%, while printing revenue was down 17%. 
Meanwhile HPE turned in earnings of $300 million on revenue of $12.72 billion, down 3% from the previous year. Under the covers of those numbers,  HPE server revenues declined by 1%, storage revenues declined by 3%, services declined by 6% and software declined by 10%. What’s the good news? Network revenue was up 54%, due to acquisition of Aruba Networks in May last year. 
So what’s the C-suite pitch from the two CEOs heading up the companies? 
The view from HPE
HPE’s Meg Whitman makes the claim: 

We’re off to a very strong start. We are already seeing the benefits of being a smaller, more focused and agile company across a number of fronts. Our customers and partners understand our strategy and appreciate working with a simplified, faster-moving organization.

Whitman points to the Aruba acquisition as a major asset for growth – and for putting money where mouth is when it comes to networking: 

The customers now believe we’re completely committed to the networking business. We are all in on networking, and while we had HP Networking before, I think people thought, ‘Well, maybe they are not 100% committed, maybe a bit below scale’. With the acquisition of Aruba, they’ve gained a great deal of confidence in our product roadmap and in our commitment to the business. So Aruba I think has cast a really nice glow over the rest of our HP networking business.

HPE continues to pursue a hybrid cloud strategy, says Whitman: 

What we’re hearing from customers is there is almost universal acceptance that their environments will be hybrid. There’s almost universal acceptance that it has to start with an analysis of the apps. How many apps does the customer want to have? Is there opportunities to reduce the number of apps and consolidate? And then what instantiation do you want that app to be on? Some apps are going to stay locked down in a customer’s data center, untouched by anyone’s hand other than their own employees, but some apps will go to a private cloud on-prem, a virtual private cloud, a managed private cloud, and then obviously to the public cloud. We’re seeing workloads move because even going from a traditional data center to the private cloud can be a 20% to 30% savings to a customer for that workload, which is meaningful.

There’s no regret about pulling out of the public cloud market, she adds: 

I think we’ve got the right strategy here. I think it was smart to get out of our spending on public cloud. I think that game has moved to Azure and AWS and maybe someday Google, and we’re really pleased with our Azure partnership [with Microsoft].

In terms of the competitive landscape, Whitman is keen to put distance between HP’s decision to break into smaller entities and Dell and EMC’s planned merger: 

It is interesting to note how we have taken very different strategies in this environment. There’s no question. My view of this is predicated upon the speed that this market is changing. So we decided to get smaller while they got bigger. We decided to lean into new technology while they’re doubling down on old technology in a cost take out play. They levered up while we de-levered. We’re super-focused on being fast and nimble for our customers.

She adds: 

Both strategies may work. I happen to like our hand better than the Dell-EMC hand.

The view from HPI
Over at HPI, CEO Dion Weisler is on much more of a back foot than his counterpart at HPE, talking of the impact of “macro-economic and market headwinds” on a company that is both a fledgling and yet mature. It’s the latter aspect he leans towards as indicative of future potential:


Remember that we operate in mature markets. This is an environment where we know how to win, gain share, and out-execute our competitors.

To that end, he argues that HP Inc is off to a strong start: 

We both defended our existing business and won new opportunities from incumbents. For example, we closed a large UK public sector contract, retaining desktop prior business and beating all the key competitors. And we won back significant business with one of the world’s largest multinational banking and financial service firms with our commercial EliteBook.

But there are issues to be addressed in the core markets of PCs and printers, he concedes: 

The overall PC market was slower to recover than expected…the PC lines are being redrawn at the moment. Our goal, as it has been consistently for the past three years, is to gain profitable share. We choose to play in certain areas; we choose not to play in other areas. So we have a fairly consistent formula here. We segment the market. We figure out where to play, where not to play. We continue to take costs out of the system. We continue to drive innovation into the system, and we’re not after share for share’s sake.

The PC business’s performance hasn’t been helped by lacklustre uptake of Windows 10: 

Whilst I still believe it’s a tremendous operating system platform and universal apps and continuing computing make devices like the Elite x3 a reality, we have not yet seen the anticipated Windows 10 stimulation of demand that we would have hoped for, and we’re carefully monitoring any sort of price developments that could further weaken demand. 

In the printers market, there is the “double-edged sword of the Japanese competitors leveraging a weaker yen, putting pressure on pricing” to contend with, says Weisler: 

Let me remind you of the competitive advantage the Japanese printing vendors have associated with the weakness of the yen, which allowed them to price more aggressively. Further market contraction compounded this situation. We also experienced weakness in emerging markets and tough economic conditions in key countries. As we said in Q4, we consider this to be the new normal, and we are executing to our plan.

Away from the market realities, Weisler talks of the responsibility of innovation:

A key driver of success in competitive markets is product innovation and differentiation. Innovation is the life blood of HP…as the global commercial PC leader, it’s incumbent on us to reinvent what the category is capable of.

My take
Early days of course. HPE benefited on Wall Street from its numbers, HP Inc did not. 
HPE’s hybrid cloud approach and its ‘we’ve proved we’re into networking’ messaging both stand to serve it well. On the other hand, HP Inc is in a market place with commodity pricing pressures on printing and a customer base that favours smartphones and tablets to  desktop PCs and workstations. 
Both companies are now engaged in cost-cutting and lay-offs as they bed into their new operating structures. Things will get messy, particularly at HP Inc where no-one should be betting against upping the headcount reduction. 
Image credit - HPE/HP IncRead more on: Cloud platforms - infrastructure and architectureInfrastructureInternet of Things 