
Costing out storage, especially over the long term, can sometimes be something of a black art. The options are many –  from cloud serviced through to bought-and-paid-for on premise, with many stops on between those points.
Leasing is one option but, as pointed out at the recent Pure//Accelerate conference in San Francisco, tax changes being brought in by the International Accounting Standards Board (IASB) will mean that businesses will need to think hard about their contract and payment options in order to avoid a future tax penalty.
The IASB regulation changes come in on January first next year and have international reach. It will change the way leases are accounted for, so operating leases for a wide range of equipment, including IT systems, will no longer be treated as expenses on the income statement.
As a result, the difference between operating leases and finances leases will disappear and all leases will be treated the same for tax purposes. In practice therefore, all leases will be capitalised and therefore brought on to a company’s books/ It is expected that the result will be that trillions of Dollars/Pounds/Euros worth of leases will be affected and brought onto the books by next year.
The changes will affect public companies first, and when implemented next 1 January, they will be obliged to apply the new regulations retrospectively to their 2017 and 2018 financial statements. Privately-held companies will not be affected by the regulation change until 1 January 2020, but will have to retrospectively apply the changes to their 2018 and 2019 statements.
This will certainly lead to businesses having greater level of assets on the books, though the liabilities side of the equation will also go up, but maybe not by so much, especially where long term leases are concerned. Options here for businesses across the board include trying to move to more short term leasing, or even a re-consideration of the merits of equipment ownership.
These changes, of course, apply across all kinds of business where long term leasing is an issue, such as in construction, engineering, healthcare and the rest. Much of current IT systems leasing is now more short term provision of front office equipment such as PCs, printers and the like. Leasing of big IT systems is less of a market than it was in days of yore, though one of its major protagonists back then, IBM, still has skin in that game to this day.
One option when it comes to IT is a move to cloud services and BYOD personal clients rather than on premise infrastructure and resources. As multi-cloud management systems get both more effective and commonplace, this will take over much of the leasing workload. But there will still be many users that want to have resources nearer to hand, and the storage of vital data – especially the large volumes now needed for real time AI and analytics work – are a particular case in point.
Pure solution
This is, at least in part, some of the thinking behind Pure’s Evergreen program. The aim here is to provide a cloud-like service that combines what users expect from on-premise systems – with some kit to purchase – with a cloud-like capability to upgrade and modernise as required, all paid for as a subscription service.
The new Evergreen Storage Service introduced at the Pure//Accelerate conference takes this a step further by adding full on Storage as a Service that operates, and is charged for, on premise. It provides a fully-elastic, scalable on-premises solution and it is available for terms as short as 12 months with a base commitment as low as 100 effective TeraBytes.
The aim is to help users get round the classic issue of to do a `forklift’ rip-and-replace job on major storage systems every three to five years, with all the attended downtime and commissioning problems and the risk of being obliged to `re-buy’ systems they already own. This is reckoned to fit better with those large enterprises that find on-premise storage, certainly of active data, give far better, faster results for analytical and AI workloads than cloud storage services.
This has also been a role where leasing large storage systems has also proved popular.
My take
To be cynical for just a second, there may be just a touch of coincidental happenstance about the link forged by Pure between the launch of Evergreen Storage Service and the change in IASB taxation regulations that now creeps up on us.
But setting that aside there is still a need for it. AI needs to be a real time capability if it is to do anything meaningful. Analytics is increasingly following suit, especially if predictions of any kind are the primary goal. Indeed, the latter is now the feedstock of the former. So damn big, damn fast storage systems are an essential component, and the ability to upgrade them on the fly increasingly important.
And for every CFO, there is some serious thinking to do about leaseheld systems and equipment by the end of this year. This could prove to be the straw that breaks the camel’s back in doubts about switching to the cloud, and quite likely to VDI services as well.
Image credit - HMRCRead more on: Cloud platforms - infrastructure and architecture 