
Hammond at the Mansion House
As formal Brexit negotiations kicked off in Brussels yesterday, Chancellor of the Exchequer Phillip Hammond used a major speech in London to outline a post-Brexit economic vision, which:
will almost certainly involve the deployment of new technology.
Speaking at the annual Mansion House address, delayed from last week after the horrific tower block fire tragedy, Hammond admitted that the shock result of the recent General Election had emphasised the need for a case to be made for how to grow a market economy:
Stronger growth is the only sustainable way to deliver better public services, higher real wages and increased living standards. I thought we had won that argument, but I learned in the General Election campaign that we have not, that we must make anew the case for a market economy and for sound money, the case for growth. And we need to explain again how stronger growth must be delivered through rising productivity.
With an eye to the widely-expressed concerns about sourcing talent post-Brexit, he noted:
It means the UK remaining open to the talent, the ideas and the capital that have driven the success of our economy in the past, and will drive it in the future. But it also means addressing the domestic weaknesses that have plagued us: under investment, both public and private; inadequate skills; and regional disparities.
The government has a plan to address all three, he insisted:
The National Productivity Investment Fund starts to address under-investment in economically productive infrastructure, T-Levels will overhaul our provision of technical education and the Industrial Strategy will tackle regional economic disparity.
Hammond also talked up the idea of what he called Globalisation 1.0, a need to reframe globalisation in a more positive context:
Our economy is 80% services. And many of our areas of greatest competitiveness are in services – for example, finance and insurance, ICT and communications. So for the UK to be able to share fairly in the benefits of globalisation, we need to lead a global crusade for liberalisation of services. And we must employ that logic in our Brexit negotiations, to agree a bold and ambitious free-trade agreement with our EU counterparts that covers both goods and services.
Hammond also reference the importance of businesses having access to funding to invest in innovation, citing the role of the European Investment Bank as a case in point:
The European Investment Bank, and its offshoot, the European Investment Fund, have been an important source of funding for infrastructure investment and for growth businesses. I want that access to EIB funding to continue while we are members of the EU on equal terms, so I am engaged with EIB and will provide the assurances it needs to sustain the flow of EIB and EIF funding to UK businesses and projects.
In the long-term, it may be mutually beneficial to maintain a relationship between the UK and the EIB after we leave the EU. We will explore the options together. But we cannot take chances. So we will be prepared, in case we do not maintain that relationship, because investment is crucial for the economic future of this country, and we will not let Brexit uncertainty slow us down. Investment is critical to securing economic growth.
Overall, Hammond argued that now that Brexit talks had begun formally, there was room to assume that uncertainties would be lifted:
The future of our economy is inexorably linked to the kind of Brexit deal that we reach with the EU. I am confident we can do a Brexit deal that puts jobs and prosperity first, that reassures employers that they will still be able to access the talent they need, that keeps our markets for goods and services and capital open, that achieves early agreement on transitional arrangements, so that trade can carry on flowing smoothly, and businesses up and down the country can move on with investment decisions that they want to make, but that have been on hold since the referendum. The collective sigh of relief will be audible.
Soft landing
The ‘soft Brexit’ tone of the speech met with some approval from UK technology trade association techUK, whose CEO Julian David commented:
Business needs a soft landing for Brexit which means that we need a long runway. It will take several years for the UK to agree a comprehensive trading relationship with the EU. The UK should therefore maintain its membership of the Single Market and the Customs Union for an interim period of five years. This is the best way to ensure we don’t have a crash landing that would put jobs and investment in jeopardy.
The Chancellor is right to say that investment in new technologies will be crucial in creating a frictionless customs process for the future. But even if we start work on this today, this will take a number of years to put into practice. We must be given the time to get this right. An efficient low friction customs system will be an important competitive differentiator  for Global Britain.
Finally, we are pleased the Chancellor has suggested that the UK retains a relationship with the European Investment Bank post-Brexit. UK tech is at the forefront of innovation and receives significant investment from the EIB. If we want to remain a global leader in the industries of the future, we must maintain the kind of cross-border funding the EIB provides and allow UK innovations to continue to thrive.
My take
The Mansion House address picks up and runs with the Soft Brexit shift of tone that we’ve seen since the election. Hammond’s comments aren’t the ‘no deal is better than bad deal’ rhetoric of a month ago. But there’s a long way to go yet.
Image credit - YouTubeRead more on: Digital government and public services

