
U.S. retailer Abercombie & Fitch (A&F) hasn’t had the easiest of times over the past few years. For a firm with a built-in core demographic of the elusive Millennial – retail’s Holy Grail – A&F has been playing catch-up on digital all-too-often.
But CEO Fran Horowitz reckons that there’s signs of life again after turning in a first quarter where net sales were up 11% to $730.8 million. There was one very important additional stat in the mix as well as Direct-to-Consumer (DTC) net sales were up 14% year-on-year and now account for 27% of total revenues.
Horowtiz says that more than 2/3 of digital traffic is coming from mobile with 17% of that coming from the firm’s app, “our fastest-growing digital platform”. These are positive signs, she argues:
Digital sales are an important driver of our business as customers increasingly start their shopping journey online. We are well positioned to capitalize on this trend and continue to invest to enhance our omni capabilities and roll them out globally.
The firm is looking CapEx spend of around $55 million this to be pumped into omni-channel and CRM capabilities, including expansion of the loyalty program. Horowitz says:
We continue to make progress through our loyalty program, growing member accounts to approximately 17 million across brands. Our loyalty club members continue to spend more and more often. These programs are providing valuable data and insight that enable us to direct special attention to our most valuable customers and explore how to harness their engagement through exclusive products and experiences.
Long game
But while the CEO was upbeat, Wall Street was less so after the results were announced, with concern about operating costs seeming to drive yet more short term thinking from retail sector watchers. But as Chief Operating Officer Joanne Crevoiserat is quick to point out:
This transformation process will be a multiyear endeavor with the initial stages being focused on testing and evaluating potential through pilot programs.
In other words, this isn’t a ‘chuck money at the problem and hope it goes away’ initiative. Crevoiserat explains:
We’re making investments in these transformation efforts while maintaining our disciplined approach to capital and expense management.
There are a number of focus areas that will drive the next phase of transformation, not least of which is around digital and omni-channel:
We continue to see the benefits of investments in our IT and omnichannel infrastructure with strong digital growth and penetration. With the recent expansion of our omni-channel capabilities, we now have pop-ins, order-in-store and ship-from-store in about half of the 20 countries in which we operate. The expansion of these capabilities have helped drive engagement as we’re seeing double-digit growth in pop-ins and order-in-store.
This has been a case of ‘learning as we go’ as well, she adds:
Over the past couple of years, we’ve built the functionality, and we are now focused on driving efficiency of the variable costs associated with digital sales and enhancing the customer experience, which is always at the forefront. While we are at the beginning stages of this work, we’ve seen early wins, for example, around shipping costs. One of our projects was focused on reducing the number of shipments required to fulfill a customer’s order, which helps us drive DTC shipping expense efficiency in the first quarter.
Marketing is also increasingly getting a digital makeover, pitching messaging to the Millennial’s ‘home territory’ of mobile and social platforms. Crevoiserat explains:
We’ve been very innovative, particularly in the social media space in helping our customers navigate social media and shop and — browse and shop from our social media platforms, and we are investing in our app. I don’t have the specific details around number of clicks-through, but we are seeing significant traffic improvement from our mobile sites and our apps, and our investments in both social media engagement as well as the investments we’ve made in our app are driving very, very strong growth in traffic, but also strong growth in conversion. We’re seeing double-digit growth and conversion from the changes we’re making and delivering in those spaces, again, on both the mobile, web as well as in our apps.
There’s also a push to develop better understanding of what’s going on when customers engage with A&F, she adds:
As we continue to scale our investments in marketing, the measurement, management and optimization of these investments is increasingly important. We are building capabilities and tools to support these efforts. Early learnings from this work have already enabled us to redirect marketing spend more effectively.
We are also focused on driving stronger engagement with our customers by leveraging our data to drive personalization and better targeting offers and experiences to reduce dependency on promotional messaging and increase the lifetime value of each customer.
At the end of the day this is about having a strong sense of direction, but being ready to listen to your customers in order to make any necessary course corrections along the way. Crevoiserat concludes:
We’re staying very close to our customers to understand those things they prioritize, the things that they value. We’ve got a very agile test-and-learn approach in delivering this functionality where we can learn about customers’ preferences and build and roll out very quickly and we’re continuing to focus on those.
My take
You don’t go too far wrong if you genuinely are listening to what your customers actually want, rather than what you think they want – or worse, what they used to want and don’t anymore. In that respect, A&F is talking the right talk. The trick, of course, is to walk the right walk and put that into practice. This was the second consecutive quarter of growth for the retailer, so the direction of travel has improved, although clearly it’s far from out of the woods yet. But A&F management can be pleased at the start to the new fiscal year, particularly as the first quarter is traditionally its weakest. We’ll have another browse around the shelves in a few months time.
Image credit - A&FRead more on: e-commerceRetail e-commerce and the omni-channel 