
A&F
According to company chairman Arthur Martinez, US retail giant Abercrombie & Fitch (A&F) has: 

measurably improved our customers’ experience both in-store and online. 

That’s a bold claim that stands in stark contrast to the results this week of a survey of 9,358 retail customers by American Customer Satisfaction Index (ACSI), which ranks A&F as the US’s most hated retailer. A&F scored lowest across all six categories in the study including department and discount stores, speciality retail stores and supermarkets.
Nonetheless, Martinez insists that the firm is delivering on its commitment to deliver “customer-centric shopping experiences” as part of its turnaround strategy. 

Our ongoing investment in direct to consumer and omni-channel and continued execution of our aggressive store closure program will also support our progress.

For now, this focus isn’t resulting in particularly impressive growth. For its most recent quarter, direct-to-consumer and omni-channel business accounted for 28% of total sales, compared to 27% for the same period last year.
But the customer-centricity push will continue, says Chief Operating Officer Jonathan Ramsden:

Customer-centricity means putting the customer at the center of everything we do. During 2015, we made numerous changes to make shopping experience for our customer easier, faster and more engaging. In our stores, these changes included giving more autonomy to our store management teams so they can be more responsive to their customers. They also included changes to the in-store experience such as improved lighting and shorter lines. In addition, we rolled out a new Hollister prototype store which is performing very well with traffic and sales up double digits relative to the control group. We will continue this rollout in 2016.
On the digital side, we continued to enhance our mobile capabilities with improved site design and upgraded apps. Mobile now accounts for over 60% of all online traffic and nearly 40% of direct-to-consumer revenue and continues to experience double-digit increases in year-over-year conversion rates.

Ramadan points to what he calls “important milestones” in the omni-channel strategy, including: 

expanding ship from store to another 290 stores in the US and activating click-and-collect and online returns to store in the UK. In 2016, we will continue to invest in digital to improve the customer experience, including the rollout of omni-channel capabilities outside the US.

Investment
Over the coming 12 months, the firm will spend a further $70 million on omni-channel and direct-to-consumer. Ramsden says: 

It’s a major area of focus for us from an investment standpoint. A lot of our CapEx dollars over the past couple of years have been going towards omni-channel and IT investments, mobile investments, to really make that customer experience when they are online, on their phone, very positive and over time more and more seamless would be in-store experience.
 We believe that’s a critical component of our long term strategy. We’re going to continue to invest in it. We will be rolling out omni-channel capabilities beyond the US increasingly, but overall I would just underscore this is a critical area of focus for us. We think we’ve come a long way and have been very successful here but we have a big opportunity ahead of us to keep that going.

Offline, the firm has also deployed new tools to track how customers are responding to changes in our store experience and merchandise assortment: 

What we are looking for is to get a good read on how our customer is reacting when they come into the store, are they having a positive shopping experience, are they feeling positive about the brand when they leave the store and obviously the same applies online. 
So it’s customer satisfaction measures, it’s an overall brand sentiment measures, that we’re now just going to be in a much more robust position to track going forward. Since we rolled out some of those tools relatively recently, we don’t have a long enough data period yet, but they are important to us internally so that we can get a clear sense of how our customer is reacting and give us evidence that we are making progress in improving customer experience, customer satisfaction and brand sentiment over time.

That’s assuming the nearest store to customers stays open of course. A&F is continuing its store closure program as the balance shifts more heavily in favour of online. Ramsden confirms: 

We have been closing 50, 60 stores a year for several years, we closed over a third of the fleet. We’re not ready today to say what that ultimate store count number is but we do have a lot of flexibility. We have a high proportion of our leases coming up for renewal in the next two or three years, so we have significant room to maneuver that. But importantly we think what we have done on store closures has been not a defensive move, but a proactive move to reflect the reality of how our customer is increasingly shopping over time. With 28% of our business in the fourth quarter coming through direct-to-consumer omni-channel, part of the corollary of that is reducing our store footprint over time.

My take
With a younger customer demographic than many other retail fashion outlets, A&F needs a solid digital strategy in place. Of the online sales it had in the fourth quarter, 40% of transactions were completed via mobile devices, which is a good baseline. 
But it’s an increasingly competitive market. H&M has already made its mark in the US, while Primark is about to enter the market in force. A&F needs to get its stall set out properly and soon. It can’t afford many more customer satisfaction studies like that while simultaneously protesting how integral the customer experience is to its business model. 
Read more on: e-commerceRetail e-commerce and the omni-channel 