
Abercrombie boy
A couple more examples of retail brands investing in digital in a bid to turn around their fortunes, in the shape of Abercrombie & Fitch (A&F) and Guess?.
A&F this week posted a loss for its fiscal second quarter of $810,000, against a year-ago profit of $12.9 million, on revenues down 8.2% to $817.8 million from $890.6 million a year ago.
With the firm in mid-transformation, Executive Chairman Arthur Martinez admits:
The Abercrombie brand carries a lot of the baggage, and the process of getting out from under that baggage is taking longer.
The firm’s digitally-related income isn’t growing fast enough. Across brand, the direct-to-consumer and omni-channel business now make up 21% of total sales versus, a small increase on last year’s 19%.
But there is further investment to come, says Chief Operating Officer Jonathan Ramsden:
We launched our first A&F Android mobile app during the second quarter and we’ll launch a redesigned iOS mobile app in the fourth quarter. For Hollister, we launched redesigned iOS and Android app with Club Cali integration in the third quarter. Mobile remains a major area of focus for us, now accounting for over 50% of our online traffic and with conversion growing strongly.
With regard to omni-channel, we are currently piloting reserve-in-store in six states and expect to roll out order-in-store and click-and-collect to the UK going forward. In addition, we expect to roll out various enhancements that will enable web-like search capabilities for order-in-store and increase SKU availability and fulfilment efficiencies to ship-from-store.
The company’s two brands are making their own moves to up their digital credentials. Hollister is making particular moves in the social media space, explains Brand President Fran Horowitz-Bonadies:
As we hone our brand and our customer messaging, we continue to drive strong engagement on Instagram and other social media platforms where our customer expects to be able to engage.
We partnered with Instagram on a new carousel advertising unit resulting in our strongest engagement ever and a shift in brand affinity. On Snapchat, we were the first global retailer to develop a custom filter on Hollister.
It’s important to keep up with new developments, she adds:
We continue to be early adopter of new platforms. For example, Hollister is amongst the most followed brands on We Heart It, a social platform targeting teenage girls. With clarity in our message and strong digital engagement, we continue to evolve our customer experience and deliver on-brand, on-trend products.
Meanwhile Christos Emilios Angelides, President-Abercrombie & Fitch Brands, is putting the emphasis on the customer experience, online and offline:
We’ve improved sight lines throughout the store by removing various props and fixtures. We’ve also made changes to the level of scent, volume and music, and the lighting in our stores. We’ve also improved our digital shopping experience, emphasizing convenience through on-figure product shots, expanded fit information, and lifestyle and editorial content that highlights the product.
Guess where?
Meanwhile Guess? is beginning a new era with a new CEO in the shape of Victor Amigo Herrero. He replaces co-founder Paul Marciano and knows that he’s coming into the role at a time when there’s a lot to be done. He says:
Over the last 35 years, Guess? has become a superb global company with a fantastic brand. But I take absolutely no comfort where we are today. The next few years, for me, will be like running a marathon interrupted every so often by a 100-yard dash just to make sure that I don’t get too relaxed.
Guess? girl
This week, Guess? posted a second quarter profit of $18.3 million, compared with a profit of $22 million a year earlier, on revenues down to $546.3 million from $608.6 million year-on-year. There is some comfort to be had from 20% top line growth during the quarter from e-commerce activities.
Investing in digital transformation is going to be a strategic priorty, says Herrero, with emphasis placed on digital marketing:
We will rejuvenate the brand experience as a distinct lifestyle concept that appeals to our global audience and allow us to adapt to changing times. Digital marketing and social media will play a very important role here. We will lower the average age of our customer and we will improve our interaction with millennials through social media, bloggers and fashionistas.
In order to be lot more strategic and operational online organization to engage millennials, we will hire a top-notch digital marketing officer, and we will build a strong digital marketing team. We will strengthen our online marketing efforts, not only from a technical point of view, but also as a generator of new ideas and as a crucial channel of customer feedback.
My take
Two retailers which recognise the position in which they find themselves and know what they need to do. Whether they can pull it off remains to be seen.
Read more on: CRM and customer experienceDigital and content marketinge-commerceMobileRetail e-commerce and the omni-channel 