
If you want a lesson on the consequences of not getting behind the omni-channel retail movement early enough, look no further than teen-focused Abercrombie & Fitch (A&F), which just turned in another quarter of losses as both US and international sales fell.
The firm’s now closing 60 stores across the US, citing business decline in cities that are tourist destinations. But the reality is that the store, once famed for its sexy advertising and topless male models greeting at the shop doors, has failed to keep up with its core market’s shift to an online and mobile world.
So priority number one for Chief Merchandising Officer Fran Horowitz-Bonadies is some rebranding and repositioning, supported by more social media and omni-channel activity. This relates to both the main A&F brand and its youth-oriented Hollister brand. She explains:
Our goal for Hollister is to be the iconic brand of the global teenage consumer. We know that today’s teens are under enormous pressure and have a desire for freedom, a freedom typically found in summer. We believe summer is not just a season but a state of mind. That is why we are positioning Hollister to deliver an experience that liberates the spirit of summer inside everyone. Using the carefree California attitude as our inspiration we are creating products that draws on natural styles, playful expressions, and idealistic spirit.
Now for A&F with its rich 125 year heritage, our goal is to be the iconic American casual luxury brand for today’s 20 something consumer. Research into today’s young adult consumer demonstrates a shift in what confidence means. It is no longer outer-directed but center-directed. Image is less important than character and it is more important to feel confident than to appear confident, which is why we are positioning A&F to deliver a casual luxury experience, that brings out our customers best self and inner confidence in casual, timeless looks, and special care, quality and attention to detail.
That means, in practical terms, re-thinking the customer profile:
The brand positioning that we have landed for Abercrombie is to be the iconic American casual luxury brand for the twentysomething consumer. Today [the] majority of our customers are over 20, so we are targeting that particular consumer. As we did research and we pressure-tested around the world, we actually had very positive feedback from both our existing and corporate future customers there was a brand position that really resonated with our customer base.
Omni-spend
To reach out to these brand audiences, A&F is investing in mobile and omni-channel capabilities, insists Horowitz-Bonadies and this is paying off:
We saw strong growth in direct-to-consumer (DTC), both domestically and internationally, including a nearly 60% increase for the last year in sales generated from order spike in mobile devices.
There have been rollouts of buy online, pick-up in store programs in the UK and US, with plans to extend into Canada. Horowitz-Bonadies says:
Buy online, pick-up in store continues to exceed our expectations, accounting for 7% of online orders. The customers shopping digital are now being served in store, we have seen high attachment rates to their purchases.
Online customers are more lucrative targets than their offline counterparts, adds Chief FInancial Officer Joanne Crevoiserat:
We continue to see our customer shifting in their shopping preferences and we are investing behind those opportunities and we will maintain flexibility and monitor those changes over time. We definitely value the online shopper. In fact we expect most customers are browsing, if not shopping, online.
I think the online shopper is and has been more price elastic. So there is definitely a customer out there for the clearance business online. However we see nice traction with the online shopper. Also with new products and increasingly we’re seeing that our customers shop on their mobile device and we have been very pleased with the conversion we’re seeing. The changes that we’ve made to reduce friction in the shopping experience on a mobile device have yielded nice strong improvements in overall conversion.
So we have been pleased with the DTC business and we continue to invest in that space and we know that it is important for our customer specifically as one point of entry to the brands. In terms of the basket size the online basket size is higher and in terms of new customers, we are capturing new customers through social media.
The firm is absolutely pushing to expand its social media presence, emphasises Horowitz-Bonadies:
Across brands, we have over 20 million Facebook fans, and close to 7 million Instagram followers, up 30% over last year and an average of over 120 million impressions and over 2 million post engagements every month. We continue to be active on Snapchat where our follower base has increased over 20% from last year. All of these efforts are informed by the programs in which we have invested to better understand and respond to our customers.
But there are still some curious omissions to the firm’s omni-channel thinking, most notably the continuing absence of a loyalty card scheme for A&F. It seems that there may be some shift in attitude here on the back of an initiative with the Hollister brand. Horowitz-Bonadies explains:
The Hollister Club Cali loyalty program in the US, which we rolled out in June, is strengthening our customer’s relationship with the brand and driving higher customer identification, retention, and sales. We see future opportunities to use this program to better personalize the customer experience. We are now in the process of developing a loyalty program for the A&F brand.
Better late than never.
My take
Late to the omni-channel party and paying the price.
Many retail analysts are sceptical that A&F can pull off the necessary brand repositioning expounded by Horowitz-Bonadies.
Frankly, I’m not sure that platitudes such as “[Confidence] is no longer outer-directed but inner-direct” or “Image is less important than character” are going to get those twenty-somethings through the door.
For a brand epitomised by beautiful models, A&F’s not a pretty sight.
Image credit - Abercrombie & FitchRead more on: CRM and customer experienceMobileRetail e-commerce and the omni-channelSocial 