
A&F models who didn’t get the mobile message
Given its youth demographic, US fashion retailer Abercrombie & Fitch has some interesting stats to trot out around its omni-channel thinking. For its most recent quarter, Direct-To-Consumer (DTC) sales made up nearly a quarter of total revenues with two-thirds of that coming from mobile devices.
It’s a near perfect affirmation of the ‘millennials and their mobiles’ mantra that has looked somewhat dubious in other retailers. For CEO Fran Horowitz, it’s validation of the spend that the firm has made to date on e-commerce:
This speaks to the investments we’ve made here driven by our understanding of the need to harness mobile devices for product discovery as well as a purchase platform. A growing number of customers are active in multiple platform and migrate between them and between online and physical.
We’re pleased with our e-com performance. We continue to leverage that channel. Our penetration overall in the e-commerce business is strong. We have 24% of very high penetration of digital business, and increasingly strong customer engagement on our omni-channel functionality that we’re rolling out. Our customer base is increasingly using digital as a way to engage with our brands, both pre-purchase and for purchase activity.
Mobile is the priority, she adds:
Over two thirds of our traffic is now coming through mobile devices and we are engaging our customers not only with our digital transactional information, but we are engaging our customers with our marketing efforts in the digital environment with very innovative marketing techniques that engage the customer prepurchase as they’re in the discovery process. That has aided our ability to drive the digital business. The investments we are making in that experience are driving strong double-digit conversion across the brands.
All of this is delivering more lucrative customers to complete transactions:
Our investment in omni solutions has enabled customers to shop seamlessly across channels. We have found our true omni customers to be our most valuable ones. We are focused on ensuring we can be there for them whenever, wherever, and however they want to engage with us. A good example of this migration is our tuck in Purchase Online Pick Up in Store capability that continues to show strong growth and deliver attachment purchases.
Learnings
Such is the importance of getting all this correct that A&F has undergone some organizational revamping. Horowitz explains:
We’ve recently completed a strategic combination and reorganization of our marketing and DTC organization. As part of that process, we’ve consolidated our research and feedback capabilities to develop a single view of the customer, enhancing our ability to stay close to our customers and anticipate, read and react to their needs. With these changes, we expect more focus in informed marketing will help emphasize the impact of important work done and investment we’ve made in omni product and stores through the course of this year.
Our on-going learning from our growth initiatives, test programs, and customer insights data continues to inform our people, processes, and products. We are adapting and executing better and faster, ensuring more distant delivery of the right product at the right time with the right brand voice and through the right brand experience.
Also of importance is the need to produce new customer outreach and engagement actions, says Horowitz, such as extending the firm’s loyalty program to almost 9 million members across the brand.
For particular brands, dedicated social media and outreach initiatives have been launched. Horowitz cites the example of Hollister as a case in point:
Our marketing efforts for Hollister is focused on brand engagement in media that we know resonates with our target audience, namely music, mobile video, and gaming. We held a branded series of Summer Solstice concert in collaboration with award-winning artist Charlie Puth.
We’ve partnered with DreamWorks’ AwesomenessTV and commissioned This is Summer Series, which incorporates multiple experiential touch points, including music, concert, and opportunities for comprehensive yet unintrusive [ph] products placement, and following the strong engagement metrics we saw from our first game. We recently launched our second retro 16 bit video game designed for mobile devices and also accessible through Snapchat.
It is already tracking ahead of our last game in terms of average time spent playing the game. These marketing activities are all that are tapping into our customer discovery process. By being present in their natural digital environment and providing an opportunity to engage with the brand outside of a transactional relationship, we are positioning our brand to be top of mind pre-purchase.
As with all retailers with real estate, A&F has to srike the right balance between online and offline activities. That includes closing some stores. Key to this is having online revenue streams in place to compensate for the loss of footfall. This is, at best, a work-in-progress, for A&F, says Horowitz:
We have historically seen fairly low recapture. It is fairly dependent on how close the proximity of another store in the market. We do see the DTC business to be a bit sticky after we close the store, but we don’t see a lot of the brick-and-mortar sales migrating. That recapture has been relatively low, again higher in places in markets where we have other stores. But the efforts underway with our loyalty programs are intended to help us engage and keep those customers more engaged in our brands even after a store closes.

Image credit - A&FRead more on: Retail e-commerce and the omni-channel 