
Laura Ramos, a Senior Analyst for Forrester, offers a few stats on ABM that might surprise some, and have others nodding their heads in agreement. She said that 73 percent of marketers think that ABM lacks specificity, meaning there’s no one definition that everyone understands, and it’s not applied inconsistently.
She also noted that 64 percent either haven’t started an ABM strategy, are just starting or have no plans. Of those doing ABM, 45 percent don’t have dedicated resources.
So what’s going on?
Alignment is critical
Personal experience – it’s really hard to explain account-based marketing to people. Not necessarily because you don’t understand what it means to communicate it well, but because as soon as you start talking about account-based marketing, people start developing their own ideas based on their personal experience. Sales will look at it one way, Marketing will look at it another and the CEO another. Getting everyone on the same track is hard work.
This reality demonstrates how important it is to start off by focusing on the fundamentals and getting alignment between Sales and Marketing. Both teams need to be onboard with ABM, approaching it as a joint team (SMarketing as Sangram Vajre likes to call the team). The latest Ascend2 Account Based Marketing Strategy Report confirms that this alignment is the top priority for Marketers in 2018.
If you are trying to understand each team’s role on the ABM team, here’s the best description I’ve seen (from the Terminus Blueprint to ABM Campaigns ebook):
Marketing’s role is to be the quarterback on the team, calling plays and cueing the other players. Sales is responsible for executing those plays to advance the ball closer to scoring the goal.
Together, the two need to agree on an approach and define what success looks like. If that alignment doesn’t exist, each team may go off and do its own thing thinking things will work out. Chances are, though, they won’t.
A key ABM tactic to include in your ABM strategy
Let’s switch gears slightly and get tactical. The Ascend2 report listed the most effective digital channels used to engage ABM accounts. Here are the top four:

Personalized content – 52%
Segmented email – 49%
Social Media – 45%
Targeted display ads – 31%

Personalization is the top tactic. However, it’s also the most challenging sitting at the top of the lists of challenges at 39%.
Personalization levels
What are some things you need to think about when you start looking at personalization? First, there are different levels of personalization depending on the type of account-based marketing you do.
If you follow ITSMA’s definitions of the three types of account-based marketing, you’ll see that they are primarily based on the number of accounts you deal with: 1-1, 1-few and 1-many.
In a 1-1 ABM situation, you are working with a small number of accounts, usually under 10. The smaller size gives you the ability to learn as much as you can about the account through email, phone, meetings at conferences and industry events, conducting in-depth research on the company and the key decision makers. You can then get a much better handle on the account’s specific pain points and needs. You can also find out exactly who is involved in the decision-making process. And what does all this information do? It enables you to create highly personalized content for that account – whether that’s email, phone calls, customized whitepapers and landing pages or something else.
Personalization in a 1-few situation isn’t that granular. With these accounts, you are typically grouping accounts by personas and similar pain points or needs, so the personalization is focused, but it’s not completely specific to one account. In this case, you might customize an email on a pain point or a persona need, serve up digital ads through social media using personas, or develop personalized web experiences by persona. It’s still personalization, but at a slightly higher level.
Personalized content types
I’ve mentioned some of the content types you can use personalization with, but let’s look at them again, and a couple more.
Personalized web experiences – When a contact comes to your website, wouldn’t it be nice to personalize their experience rather than offer the standard messaging you hope works for most? You could surface the most relevant content within easy clicking, offer recommended content and, if you do ads on your site, customize the ads. This one seems simple, but it’s a challenge for many.
Email – It’s easy to personalize email for 1-1, each email is created separately and highly customized to the account and the person in the account. But you can also create personalized emails in a 1-few situation. One example is to have an email template that is 75% static across all accounts focused on the main topic or theme, and then have a paragraph or sentence that is specific to the account that your marketing automation system adds into the email dynamically.
Landing Pages – It’s also easy to create a custom landing page whether it’s a 1-1 or a 1-few ABM account. Create a template and insert dynamic sections of the landing page that are dynamically populated based on who is looking at the page. When you link the landing page to an email, you can pass the id of the person along to the website, where the account information is retrieved from the CRM, and the page is then personalized. If you are personalizing by persona, that persona is used in the template rather than connecting to the CRM.
Personalized videos – This one is cool, and again, the level of personalization would depend on the type of ABM account. You could create a video specifically for an account – outlining key pain points and providing guidance, and other relevant content. But you can do a personalized video for a larger group of account too. I wrote about this in a video marketing column – mentioning Vidyard at the time, but I believe there are others that provide similar capabilities today such as Wistia and Twentythree.net.
Resource centers – Creating personalized resource centers sounds interesting. And it may not be that much work to do. I saw this content tactic offered by UberFlip, a content marketing software vendor. It offers the ability to send a stream of content from your library to a contact or account. If you could take that stream and load it into a custom resource center template for each account, that would be very nice.
There are lots of other ways to leverage personalization in ABM, but these are five that stand out for me and will be things I hope to try out this year.
My take
Aligning Sales and Marketing is critical, and there will be some give and take on both sides. As long as your final strategy is focused on the accounts and their needs, you should be fine. Be prepared to adapt your strategy as you go along though and find out what works best.
As for personalized content – think about your accounts. Do your research and find out what type of content works for them, whether it’s a specific account or persona. Again, I think it’s fine to try things and see what works, adjusting as you get more insights and feedback. Sticking to the same old thing every time will lose its luster after a while, so why not try something new?
Image credit - mailing list drawn by hand isolated on blackboard © Sergey Nivens - Fotolia.comRead more on: Content marketingDigital and content marketing 