
Bhaskar Ghosh, Accenture
The traditional IT services model is under pressure on multiple fronts. The accelerating adoption of a new generation of digital applications in the enterprise is challenging traditional approaches to application development and management. More iterative, agile approaches to business change don’t work well with the traditional, arms-length IT outsourcing model. Meanwhile, the prospect of AI-fueled automation means firms must re-evaluate how they structure the teams that deliver the bulk of their work.
I recently sat down with Accenture’s Bhaskar Ghosh to discuss the impact of these trends on the IT services giant. As group chief executive for Technology Services, Ghosh is responsible for the firm’s entire systems integration and application outsourcing business, along with its global delivery center network — a total of 200,000 people, delivering work to clients across 120 countries.
Ghosh agrees these are momentous times:
The IT services industry has been undergoing huge change for the last few years and now it has come to a tipping point.
The role of IT is changing, he says, from one that was focused on ‘keeping the lights on’ to much more of role in helping to grow the business.
Earlier, the role of the CIO was to manage business well, whether it was to manage cost, manage payroll, manage inventory, manage sales forecasts and so on.
Now their additional focus is, grow [the] business. They’re talking about coming up with a platform, coming up with a digital solution, for which you’ve created a differentiated user experience — open up the different channels, increase the market reach, so on and so forth. It is a more direct intervention to the business, to grow [the] business.
Because of the changing role of applications within organizations, the value proposition that Accenture offers enterprise CIOs is no longer so much focused on traditional measures such as cost, quality and productivity.
Now they are talking more about speed to market, agility, cloud, digital and so on.
That brings new, more agile and collaborative delivery models in its wake, fueled by innovation in the use of artificial intelligence and analytics, he tells me.
So the whole IT stack and the role of IT is changing. Expectations are changing, value props are changing, time-to-market is changing. No one expects that I’ll develop software which will take 18 months to implement, it has to be now. It’s all about the speed to market.
Liquid applications
A substantial slice of Accenture’s $800 million annual training budget is now being directed towards reskilling for digital and helping people adopt to the changed mindset that goes along with this new approach to application architecture. The firm’s vision for this future sees applications as “liquid, intelligent and connected,” says Ghosh.
Liquid — It is all about the agility and speed to market. All development we believe in the future will be in a cloud-first, digital-first mindset. We believe that agile and devops will be progressive as the standard methodology for this delivery. It will use more API-based architecture and microservices, so that it can be flexible, it can change with the business requirements.
Intelligent — More and more applications will be built with integrated analytics. That means that applications will have a self-healing, self-learning capability. This use of cloud and analytics should be an integral part of all the applications that we build.
Connected — No organization will survive with standalone applications. Applications are opening up more with an open API structure so that they can talk to other platform providers, other ecosystem providers. That is creating the business model. The other aspect [is], applications will be more connected with IoT-enabled devices. That opens up a whole new paradigm in terms of connected applications.
Bringing this vision into client organizations will require a multi-speed IT approach, says Ghosh.

The first part of this, he explains, is “automate to optimize” the existing IT estate — using automation driven by artificial intelligence to reduce operating costs and free up more resources for new investment.
The second element is “digitalize to grow” — moving applications to digital as the engine of future growth.
The final component is “modernize to make legacy future-ready.” This recognizes that, while legacy IT assets can’t go digital overnight, they must be able to operate alongside the new digital applications.

In many cases, this means taking legacy applications and porting them wholesale to the cloud, he explains:
I am taking this whole old application, putting that in a container, and moving it into the cloud — and making that more agile, flexible, with a high level of security — but I’m not really changing much of the old, core code. So this containerization option is now possible in most of the technologies. Even it is possible today, I can take an IBM mainframe [application] and containerize that, move it into the cloud and run it in x86. It is possible, we are running it for three clients.
Innovation studios
Being able to build the innovative new class of applications Ghosh describes requires some restructuring of the way Accenture has traditionally delivered solutions, Ghosh concedes. In March, the firm opened the first of a planned network of innovation centers in Redwood Shores, in the midst of Silicon Valley.
Where there are multiple clients — I have a cluster — there we’re opening these centers, Liquid Studio. It’s a small center with the right [kind] of rapid programming, microservices, prototyping type of skill.
The whole idea is the client can come and work from our center, we can go and work at the client’s office, but it has to be a much more close, collaborative way of working to make this liquid delivery successful.
You cannot do this kind of delivery from a remote location like China or India or Mexico, it will not work. This delivery has to be in front-end and Liquid Studios are the front-end for driving this new IT delivery.
Once the prototype has been delivered by the studio in collaboration with the client, then the work of large-scale development will go back to the more traditional delivery mechanism. So the Liquid Studio becomes a new front-end interaction layer for Accenture to work with its clients on new applications.
As CIO you are going to the business and you are collecting this requirement in an iterative fashion and you need that front-end in front of the business to create that link. Still there will be a lot of back-end work and that we’ll get done from our delivery centers. But this layer we are building very strong in front of the client.
It’s an absolutely top-end technology capability, they understand robotics, they understand artificial intelligence, they understand prototyping, we bring all the industrial knowledge, we enable them with all the tools and everything. They understand the industry so they can go and talk. Also we have a design thinking capability there in these Liquid Studios, because sometimes the solutions are built using design thinking.
It is all about working with the client. That is the reason we are building this thing next to the client. It has to be very close proximity to the client. That is how it will enable this model.
Automation and AI
Further back in Accenture’s organization, automation looms large, part of a long-term strategy to eliminate manual, repetitive work and to drive productivity. Cognitive technologies will play an increasingly important part in achieving those goals, and in April Accenture launched a new intelligent automation platform called MyWizard. This uses artificial intelligence to harness Accenture’s huge library of existing technology and industry assets, delivering the results through a series of virtual agents.
For example, there is an agent that can predict whether a project will complete on time, and what can be done to put it back on track if there’s a problem, as Ghosh explains.
It has got all the data related to your project, all the people’s metrics, plan, everything. It has got the knowledge for all of Accenture’s past project delivery experience. Based on that, it will do a probability calculation and then it will fast forward that and it will show me the dashboard, as of [the delivery date], how this project will look.
If we see that it is not going to deliver, it has also got a facility [whereby] it can tell me what are the things I should do differently. Maybe I need more capacity. Maybe defects are high, I need to fix the quality. So it can give some guidance to me how to bring that back to track.
In application management, the use of intelligent agents makes it possible to bring the whole of Accenture’s collective experience to bear, says Ghosh.
With this intelligent automation, whenever there is a ticket, it will check whether this ticket has come in the last twenty years in this application or not. If it has, how it has been resolved and who has resolved this. If it is not in this engagement, [it will check] whether in any other engagement in Accenture, a similar thing has come or not. Ultimately with SAP or Oracle there is a finite number of problems that can come.
It knows the skill set and the capability of all the people who are working in this engagement. It tells the project manager, [if] you assign this ticket to this person, then your chance of resolution will be fastest.
When you allocate, it also gives the past resolution details, how it was resolved, so you are not reinventing the wheel every time but you are using knowledge effectively to drive solutions.
Collecting that information together and making it available in this way is only possible with the scale of the cloud, he adds.
Look at our organization, it’s a very large organization, we operate multiple countries across the globe, we operate for so many clients. So with the power of this platform and power of this cloud, it is possible to make that previous knowledge available every time. That sounds very trivial, but it also is a difficult task out there if you are not a connected system.
Machines as co-workers
Rather than replacing human workers, these machine agents should be seen as co-workers, says Ghosh.
Whatever a machine can do, a human also can do. But the point is, it will take enormous time [for a human] because we are checking a very large amount of Accenture past data, and based on that we are creating the solution. So it’s not an easy thing to do. But with this technology, it is a much easier option.
It is not going to eliminate people, but it will act as a co-worker. It will significantly drive the productivity and quality for the delivery for our clients.
Having said that, a lot of work currently done by humans can be eliminated using these virtual agents. Ghosh gives testing as an example where a very large degree of automation is possible, eliminating “as much as 60-70%” of manual testing.
The whole principle is that if there is repetitive manual work, that will be eliminated …
As part of that automation strategy we are driving this elimination of repetitive manual work, and on the other side we are introducing the virtual co-worker which will significantly drive the productivity and quality of the delivery in the future.
All of these trends taken together add up to a big change in how Accenture delivers services to clients, he concludes.
That whole expectation is changing. The technology is changing, the landscape is changing, the way we are delivering is changing. It is all about new and we are driving the agenda rotation to new.
This is all driven by automation and innovation.

Image credit - headshot provided by AccentureDisclosure - Oracle and SAP are diginomica premier partners at the time of writing. Read more on: DevOps NoSQL and the open source stackDigital transformation - frictionless enterpriseMachine intelligence and AIOutsourcingProfessional services 