
According to a new report by consultancy firm Accenture, corporate profitability is in decline across most industries in the United States – and is also impacting investment and output in public services. After reaching their highest share of national income in the post-war era, the growth of profits dropped from 25 percent in 2010 to -3 percent in 2015, the report states.
It is not a rosy picture for the future if things carry on as they are.  According to Accenture:
Indeed, the current data do not suggest an environment conducive to growth. Business investment is already close to stalling. For instance, in manufacturing business investment growth has declined from 14.8 percent in 2012 to -5.2 percent in 2016 in the United States and from 5.9 percent in 2012 to -6.6 percent in 2016 in the United Kingdom . And growth in R&D spending, a key indicator for an industry’s capacity to innovate, has equally been sluggish.
However, the report argues that thanks to a mass increase in data,soaring computational power at decreasing costs and breakthroughs in technology, “AI is becoming a commercial reality”.
You only have to look at the amount of effort that the software vendors are putting into AI to realise that they believe it to play a critical role in the future. We are already seeing some really interesting examples of how AI can be used to not only automate, but rethink complex and manual processes.
Mark Purdy, Managing Director Accenture Research, said:
As the new factor of production, AI can drive growth in at least three important ways. First, it can create a new virtual workforce—what we call intelligent automation. Second, AI can complement and enhance the skills and ability of existing workforces and physical capital.
Third, like other previous technologies, AI can drive innovations in the economy. Over time, this becomes a catalyst for broad structural transformation as economies using AI not only do things differently, they will also do different things.
The report provides some useful estimates for how much Accenture believes that AI could impact industries. For example, Accenture found that AI has the potential to double growth rates in the countries it assessed, including the United States and the United Kingdom.
Equally, AI has the potential to increase economic growth rates by a weighted average of 1.7 percentage points by 2035 across 16 industries. For example, real annual GVA growth by 2035 could increase in manufacturing from 2.1% to 4.4% if AI was used effectively. In financial services the jump is 2.4% to 4.3%. And in public services it is 0.9% to 2.3%.
The bottom line is that AI could, and should, have a positive impact on all industries if used appropriately.
However, Accenture does recognise that this all depends on companies and governments fully anticipating the disruption that could occur and managing it in a way that lines up with society’s moral and ethical values. As a result, leaders need to adopt effective and thoughtful strategies for this new factor of production, as AI will interact with traditional capital and labor inputs to create fresh challenges. Accenture believes that leaders will need to evolve in new and unexpected ways as their roles become increasingly interdependent.
The report outlines some of the following strategies to consider:
Leadership
Accenture rightly highlights that often AI interest and use starts at the bottom to the middle of the organisation, where developers and technology types get excited about the opportunity and start to play around with how it can work.
However, for AI to be used properly, and have a broad reaching impact, organisations need to take it to the C-suite and the leaders right at the top need to get stuck in and spend time with AI machines. They need to understand the technology, what it can do, what it means for their company’s business models, and they need to design a roadmap.
Rethink HR
The role of the Chief HR Officer is about to change and organisation’s need to rethink the role of HR. Because AI is essentially a form of virtual labour, it will interact with the workforce, it needs to be managed by HR in the same way that HR manages its people. Accenture suggests redefining HR as HAIR – Human AI Resources.
The report states:
This will raise questions, such as: How do companies remodel performance metrics? How do they optimize workforce requirements between human and AI labor? As a result, the CHRO will play a much bigger role in business strategy and innovation, as well as accumulate a greater technical understanding of AI technologies and how these will shape the future of work.
The HR function itself will also need to incorporate AI technologies in all aspects of its work, from hiring to retirement.
Learning together
Because AI typically takes over mundane and low-value added tasks, the career path will no longer be linear in organisations and there will be a skills gap between young professionals and older workers. Equally, there will be a need for new skills in the workforce that “leapfrog” technical expertise, with humans focusing on what they do better than machines – judgement, communication, creative thinking.
As such, human and machine intelligence, and the path to understanding skill requirements in your organisation, need to be tightly woven. Accenture believes that business leaders should focus on the needs of their workforce, particularly in the area of agile skills development.
Appoint a Chief Data Supply Chain Officer
As we know, the results seen from using AI will be directly dependent on the quality and the amount of data that are available. However, Accenture research has found that the majority of executives are unsure about the business outcomes they see from there data analytics programs, leaving little confidence in and underuse of data.
And whilst many organisations have a chief data officer, they tend to focus on data security, regulations and governance, rather than “being stewards of treating data as a supply chain”. The Accenture report states:
A chief data supply chain officer will need to construct an integrated, end-to-end data supply chain, considering issues such as: What is the balance between internal and external data sources? What is the company’s data churn and cost per day? Where are the data silos? How can our company simplify data access?
An open AI culture
As humans and machines become more and more dependent on each other in the workplace, openness and transparency is crucial in the corporate culture, just as in any co-working relationship. Accenture warns that it may become tempting to blame machines for poor performance or faulty output, rather than openly discussing weaknesses – whether they be human or AI – and improving them.
There are also obvious concerns about the impact of AI on job security, wages and privacy – and leaders have a responsibility to explain the risks and opportunities that a hybrid workforce brings.
Measure your returns
As a new factor of production, AI will require new adapted measures – just as traditional factors of production include return on capital, as well as human performance metrics for employees. However, unlike traditional assets that depreciate over time, AI assets, given their ability to learn, gain value as time passes. The Accenture report states:
This compounding asset appreciation effect creates greater returns for companies that make early AI investments. In addition, although some of its applications have clear results, the learning nature of AI means that many of the benefits will stem from yet-to-be determined sources. Therefore, traditional measures for tracking capital investments will become outdated in an AI era.
CFOs will need a new set of financial metrics to properly assess the returns derived from AI. This could relate to the value generated from each algorithm or some combination of initial outlay and ongoing costs. However, this is complex given that the bulk of benefits and costs will appear in future time periods – which Accenture acknowledges, could deter investments. But there is also an opportunity for AI itself to be used to calculate more accurate predictions (employing AI to measure its own performance!).

Image credit - Images free for commercial use Read more on: Digital government and public servicesMachine intelligence and AI

