
Over the past couple of years, UK grocery chain Morrisons online strategy has been the subject of considerable opprobium, not least here on diginomica.
But yesterday’s trading update offered some positive hints that the company’s turnaround is at least heading in the right direction, with a 10% year-on-year uptick in digital business.
Now that’s got to be put in context, as CFO Trevor Strain was quick to do:
On dot com, if you like online, there is a combination of digital online through Amazon and Dordon through Ocado and then Store Pick which is the latest iteration of it for us. I think it’s just important to reflect that I think despite growing these last two, two and a half years, we still are sort of in the rounds of 5, 5.65 I think on market share in the UK. Obviously, the market leader is probably north of 40. So we feel there is plenty to go for us.
It remains the case that Morrisons is heavily dependent on partnerships to deliver on digital, most notably through its long-term relationship with online pureplay Ocado. That’s been subject to some turbulence, but things appear to have settled down there. Meanwhile the newer deal with Amazon is still something of an unknown quantity – and with Amazon now pushing into offline stores through the Whole Foods acquisition, what happens next is anyone’s guess.
But Strain was upbeat:
We’ve got our contractual arrangements with Ocado, which I think with improved over this last fall. [We] continue with those as we open out in the year ahead. And, I think as we said before, as Amazon grows, we should grow. So, I don’t really look at it as an either or, each of them of course has to drive to the line of profitable growth.
But I look at as a way of making this company a bit more accessible to more consumers as we work very hard on the popularity of the brand. And so in the years ahead, that combination of accessibility and popularity, I think does need more than one channel and I am happy with the progress we are making at this time.
Access and availability
That ‘customer acessibility’ angle is coming through, argued CEO David Potts:
This Christmas, customers in early research have told us that all aspects of our service and availability improved. They noticed the shorter queues and especially the friendliness of our colleagues even at their busiest times. These improvements were helped by our new automated ordering system which was live across all stores and most categories for the first time this Christmas and we learned a lot which will help us to improve again next year.
The new ordering system is an important driver to turnaround, he added, citing availability of items as complementary to accessibility when it comes to encouraging brnad loyalty:
On availability, it’s been an important part of our recovery. An important part of the customers shopping trip is two things, really – one, that you sell the breadth of choice that they require particularly at Christmas and secondl,y when they come in for that it’s actually on the shelf.
So, the machine learning that goes on each minute with our ordering system of course enrichds the ordering for Christmas of this year. We are now in 2018. We are looking forward…[the ordering system] will [feed] back into sort of compatible forecasting systems from depots through to suppliers and that whole sort of close circuits can then improve.
And there are plans in place to improve and enhance functionality with voice recognition being added to the machine learning capabilities, said Potts:
We intend to introduce voice pick into our fresh depots this next financial year, which will purify the stock accuracy going to our stores which is an integral part of any ordering system. So, probably, the big improvement for 2018 I’ve been looking for that Christmas would be [that]. The system has gone through its first year of managing Christmas for us and, albeit we were stronger year-on-year, in order to be better and better to customers I know that we can continue to improve that. I think it’s literally one of those systems that gets enriched by each scan that takes place.
My take
Some signs of improvement for Morrisons, but a small victory that takes place against the reality that the real success stories over Christmas 2017 in the UK grocery market were German discounters, Lidl and Aldi. Neither makes particular play of online in its go-to-market proposition, focusing instead on supply chain optimisation to drive down prices. That being the case, Morrisons automated ordering system may yet be a bigger deal than whatever dangerous liasons continue with Ocado and Amazon.
Image credit - Morrison'sRead more on: Analytics planning and data analysisCRM and customer experienceMachine intelligence and AIRetail e-commerce and the omni-channel 