
For many non-profits, a lack of in-house software development skills (and a lack of money to bring in outside expertise) presents a serious hurdle to digital transformation – but Action for Children, a UK-based charity, isn’t letting these challenges stand in its way.
The 145-year old organization, which today runs around 650 different services in local communities across the UK for vulnerable children, their families and their carers, has found a way to get staff who don’t come from a coding background building apps that their colleagues in the field can use to ensure that operations run efficiently and the bulk of their time is spent supporting children’s welfare.
At the heart of this approach is the rapid application development platform from Mendix. Because this is based on visual development capabilities that provide a level of abstraction between the user and the code they’re working on, as well as an app store offering pre-built widgets, templates and software components, it’s not necessary to have any particular software development skills to use it.
At Action for Children, for example, a team of three people has used Mendix to build a wide variety of apps, even though they haven’t previously been involved in software development. One is a business analyst by training, the other two were previously working in administrative roles at the charity. One was an IT apprentice in their first .full time role, the other much more experienced
But all three can demonstrate an understanding of the needs of their colleagues working in the field, an aptitude for process logic, and the ability to use Mendix to translate these into intuitive, flexible web apps, according to Action for Children’s business systems development manager, Daniel Roberts.
The team’s work to date includes an app for use by Action for Children staff working on an intensive support project in Shropshire, with families who need specialist care and help, and an app to monitor the progress and welfare of young carers in Swansea, who are responsible for supporting ill, elderly or disabled relatives.
Also underway is an app to be used by the staff of an Action for Children-run respite centre in Buckinghamshire, which cares for severely ill or disabled kids when their families need a break. This will soon include bed-booking functions, to allow parents and carers to reserve a child’s stay in advance. The app replaces more than a dozen spreadsheets that staff previously spent hours working on, recording their observations and details of the care provided.
But it wasn’t always this easy to build new apps at Action for Children, says Roberts:
Turning digital transformation into a working reality presented challenges. Processes in many areas here are unique, with no off-the-shelf applications available. Coding our own, we’d previously had low take-up from users, [and] then struggled to accomodate requests for changes of new ideas for process innovation.
Today, he continues, demand for new apps is outstripping supply:
At some point, I might need to go back to my bosses and ask them for another person to join the Mendix development team. The team I have today only came over to my group on secondment, but they’ve been so successful, that they’re now permanent members. I’d like to see that continue, because the work they do is incredibly good and they really enjoy it, too. It’s an opportunity to learn new skills that they’ve really embraced.
Demand for new apps, he stresses, is driven not by management, but by users in the field, working on the frontline of children’s support services. And because demand is so great, requests have to be carefully prioritised. This process is handled by a steering group made up of nominated senior managers from Action for Children’s operational (front-end, client-facing) and shared services (back-end support) teams. They meet once a month to discuss requests and organise priorities against current workloads and app maintenance needs.
But once an app is underway, its end-users are almost always involved in the build process, says Roberts.
It’s a very collaborative build process, with key users involved every step of the way. We try to get them on-site at our head office in Watford if we can, so they can sit side-by-side with our Mendix development team.
Constructing applications in Mendix is really fast, giving working prototypes that you can demonstrate to users in just days. While in our experience, traditional code-based approaches can fail to meet user expecations, Mendix facilitates step-by-step, the creation of user-friendly, fit-for-purpose applications that our staff are keen to use.
The benefits of this collaboration, he adds, doesn’t just result in apps that are a better fit with their needs when the app is rolled out:
It also gives my team the opportunity to understand better the work that Action for Children does across the UK. We’re not on the frontline, so we don’t always see the benefits that our organisation is providing to the families who need it most. This is a way of bringing that work into the heart of our own operations, so we can learn from it and channel those learnings into future work.
Read more on: CRM and customer experienceDevOps NoSQL and the open source stackFuture of work 