
Yesterday I tore into the logic of Stratechery’s declaration that ad-blocking is morally wrong. Today, it backtracks. Here’s what author Ben Thompson offered us today:
Specifically, I regret that I wasn’t more precise with my language when I said ad-blockers are “wrong in a moral sense.” To be perfectly clear, I was not meaning to make an absolute statement: I think one’s personal sense of right-and-wrong is, well, personal, and while we as a society may broadly agree on various mores, I don’t think this ought to be one of them. To put it another way, I wasn’t intending to personally judge any of you, and I’m disappointed that my carelessness may have caused it to come across that way.
Frankly, I found the massive forum thread (81 posts so far) really educational. In particular, I find the argument that while it may be true ad-blocking users are not fulfilling their end of the deal with publishers, the deal is so murky and dishonest (given the tracking) that you can’t blame them to be very fair. Moreover, the requirement to not visit sites that track you may be untenable — what sites don’t?
That is some retraction from a point of view that was very explicit and clear at the time:
Let’s get one thing straight up front: I believe that Carthy and his company [adblockers Shine], and the mobile operators that use Shine’s software, are wrong in a moral sense.
I’m not sure he could have been any more explicit, hence my characterization of the statement as fundamentally flawed to the point of being delusional. I certainly didn’t feel a sense of personal outrage but I worry when people ascribe human characteristics to competitive business practices.
Nonetheless, let’s give credit where due and recognize that while not exactly saying he’s wrong, Thompson certainly recognizes the confusion in the original argument.
I still think that Thompson is missing an important part of the argument in assuming that content consumers understand the nature of the Faustian deal that some media sites make with the advertising networks. There is a reason many of us hate advertising which he fails to acknowledge and for which I have yet to hear a sensible cure.
The continuing race to the bottom in advertising rates forces those media which insist on advertising as their preferred income stream to become ever more intrusive. Some sites are almost unusable these days with adverts overwhelming the reader from the moment they land on the site. Ad-blockers are a blunt instrument but reflect the measures some consider necessary to stop the incessant intrusion.
I will say it again – digital advertising is a zombie economy that refuses to lay down but from what I hear anecdotally, readers (and viewers of video) are drifting away. This has important consequences for brands of all kinds who can make use of increasingly sophisticated algorithms with which to interrupt content consumption but with little enough thought to true personalization.
Facebook is endeavoring to take advantage of this through ever more inventive ways to serve inline ads but even there I am far from convinced that they have it worked out.
Right now, some of my colleagues believe that Facebook is pretty much the only go to destination for content discovery. That’s a dangerous mindset because it plays directly to Facebook’s declared goal of aggregating all manner of content. Convenient? Possibly. Danger0us? Almost certainly. As Derek duPreez recently pointed out, in some scenarios Facebook becomes the internet, a notion that is already facing a backlash.
Those who support the notion of advertising in its current form need to rethink what they’re advocating in digital media. Do they really want to promote a race to the bottom? Who wins? Facebook? Maybe, but only if regulators fail to recognize the inherent dangers. Does everyone else lose? Not if there is a reset. Not if there are inventive media prepared to find new models.
As I argued yesterday, there is plenty of opportunity for creative and imaginative media across multiple segments. Rather than capitulate to a perceived eventuality, should we not ask the fundamental question: why do ad-blockers exist and what can we do better so that they are not needed? Better still, if we must have advertising, how about making it genuinely creative and attractive?
In the meantime, I sense that Stratechery, for all its insight, has backed itself into something of a corner from which it is very difficult to emerge without a re-assessment of its ‘winner takes all’ position on the advertising model. That’s all about strong opinions, weakly held. An admirable and vital quality when exercised appropriately. Let’s see how this unfolds over time.
Images via @gapingvoid

Read more on: Digital and content marketing 