
Shantanu Narayam
License sales down 45% year-on-year! That’s got to be bad news, yes? Not if you’re Adobe in which case that decline is part of what’s being touted as vindication of the corporate strategy to move to a subscription-only business model.
With that in mind, reporting that license-based revenue was down 45% to $274.5 million in Q2 is good news when it’s placed in the context of subscription-based revenue in the same period rising 60% to $774 million.
On the a call with analysts yesterday, Shantanu Narayen was keen to play up what he sees as Adobe’s particular strengths:
Everybody recognizes that addressing the Chief Revenue officer, the Chief Digital Officer or Chief Marketing Officer is the most explosive software category that exist. I think our sweet spot has always been how do we target this marketer/publisher with the customer experience solutions that we have.
It is the combination of content plus data that represents the unique advantage that Adobe has. That’s the combination of the Adobe Experience Manager as well as Adobe Analytics. But the product that’s doing really very well right now is Audience Manager. What Audience Manager allows people to do is have absolutely the same segmentation across their marketing spend if they are trying to attract customers across any personalized offers that they want to make as well as conversion.
He added:
It is also the tieback with the creative products, that content velocity in terms of people trying to run campaigns. The fact that Creative Cloud works with the Adobe Experience Manager asset management solution enables us whether you are a retailer, whether you are financial services, whether you are government, whether you are a publisher, that content velocity that we can provide is just so much faster than anybody else.
As digital continues to disrupt industries, Adobe is uniquely positioned to help brands, media companies, government agencies and educational institutions create digital experiences that are unique, relevant, and effective across every touch point. We are the only company with the vision and assets to address the entire content lifecycle – from creation and delivery to optimization and monetization. We are accelerating the pace of innovation in each of our Cloud offerings and customers are looking to us to provide a complete, integrated platform for their digital transformation.
OK, so that’s the sales pitch. Here are the numbers to back it up:

Overall Q2 revenue up 9% year-on-year to $1.16 billion with profits running at $147.5 million.
Adobe Marketing Cloud reported revenue of $327 million, 5% year-on-year growth.
New Marketing Cloud customers include Saks & Co, The Gap, DirecTV, Fox Entertainment and Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce.
Document Cloud, launched in March, produced revenue of $197 million in Q2
Net new Creative Cloud subscriptions grew by 639,000 in the quarter to over 4.6 million, 38% year-on-year growth.
Creative Cloud Annual Recurring Revenue has now topped the $2 billion mark.

David Wahwani, Adobe’s General Manager for Digital Media, argued these numbers are vindication of what had been seen by some at the time as a risky move to a subscription-only business model:
Our strategy to migrate Creative Suite customers to Creative Cloud is working. We are delivering constant innovation in our Creative Cloud desktop apps, we are expanding our family of connected mobile apps, and we are delivering powerful, integrated asset management capabilities that connect our mobile and desktop app workflows. These cross device workflows are resonating with our customers and have been improving both trial conversion and customer retention.
He added:
In just a few short years, we have successfully re-imagined the entire creative process driving over $2 billion of ARR.
Upgrades adn
Creative Cloud itself got an update this week with several new features. The firm also introduced Adobe Stock, based on its acquisition of Fotolia. Wahwani’s pitch on this was:
We estimate that 85% of Creatives who buy stock content use Adobe tools, and more than 90% of stock content sellers use Adobe software in the preparation of their photos and images. Adobe Stock is the first stock marketplace embedded into the way creatives work. Deep integration with our Creative Cloud desktop apps including Photoshop, Illustrator and InDesign makes buying and using stock photos, images and illustrations incredibly easy.
The global launch of Adobe Stock shakes up the multi-billion dollar stock content market. Customers can buy images on demand or as part of a subscription plan. Most importantly, existing and new Creative Cloud members are also able to add Adobe Stock to their subscription plan at a special rate driving increased ARPU over time. Adobe Stock extends the value of Creative Cloud to subscribers who want to monetize their assets and participate in a large, global creative marketplace.
All that said, there are still some laggards in the Adobe user base that remain stuck on the Creative Suite. Narayan admits there is work still to be done:
Creative Cloud
The whole strategy around the Creative Cloud was to reimagine the creative process, make it far more predictable and we definitely thought to increase significantly the size of the market opportunity. I think one measure that you can see even today of how successful we’ve already been, is the fact that we’ve talked about how we used to sell approximately 3 million units in the past. Now if you look at what we are doing with [Creative Cloud] – 4.6 million subscribers. In addition to that all of the enterprise deals that we have, we’ve already dramatically I think increased the size of the available opportunity.
But he added:
We still have a fairly large CS6 base which clearly represents upside opportunity for us to convert to the Creative Cloud. As you are aware in Japan that was the market where we were selling CS6 till even late last year. And so we continue to target CS5 and CS6 as the most likely installed base to convert to CC. They are converting; the innovation is definitely resonating with them.
We’ll certainly continue to help drive new, migrate the existing CS customers into the Creative Cloud option. The addition of the new services are certainly continuing to attract a brand new set of customers that’s expanding the overall installed base as we continue to target creatives both in the imaging space and with a number of the mobile applications, what we are doing to increase the size of the funnel which again is adding to the available opportunity that we have in that particular market.
My take
I’m inclined to agree with Narayen that all the signs are that the move to a subs-only model was the right thing to do. That said, Wall Street didn’t seem so convinced with the stock price taking a bit of a dip in post-results trading.
This is a long game for Adobe to play. It needs to keep demonstrating demand for its online offerings to calm investor nerves. Tying up with the likes of Microsoft for CRM integration as it last month may also reassure the more skittish that there’s a sound business strategy in play here.

Read more on: Cloud platforms - infrastructure and architectureCRM and customer experienceDigital and content marketingMobile 