
Ben Thompson’s Stratechery is a great read I gladly fork over $100 pa to get access to the forum and behind the paywall curtain. It serves as a lightning rod on certain topics and provides the kind of deep insight I crave. So when he declared that (subscription required for full text):
Let’s get one thing straight up front: I believe that Carthy and his company [adblockers Shine], and the mobile operators that use Shine’s software, are wrong in a moral sense. And, frankly — and I know this will upset many of you — I believe that those using ad-blockers are wrong as well. The appropriate way to avoid advertisements is to not visit the sites that host them. True, the effect on the publisher is the same — one less ad impression — but the only way to properly evaluate business is to consider not only losses but also money not made, and I simply cannot understand any sort of justification for taking something while depriving publishers of that income: if you don’t want to pay, then don’t play.
I thought WOW! OK – let’s deconstruct this quickly. Thompson was responding to an FT report that says some un-named EU carriers plan to initiate ad-blocking by the end of the year. The FT goes on to say:
The idea is to specifically target Google, blocking advertising on its websites in an attempt to force the company into giving up a cut of its revenues.
Let’s set aside the likely Quixotic and less-than-subtle blackmail stance that carriers are taking. Google could just as easily acquire carriers for itself if the pain got – well…painful enough.
Instead, I want to concentrate on Thompson’s implied assertion of advertising as a moral right. He acknowledges the current ad model is broken – heck, his own site eschews advertising as we do but since when was advertising elevated to a status that invokes morality? Not in my lifetime.
It gets worse:
Unfortunately for the millions of sites and apps that monetize through advertising, being morally wronged doesn’t get you very far, and as much as I detest ad-blockers and the entitlement they stand for, the fact remains there are far more noxious businesses in the world making far more money than Shine ever will.
Entitlement? WTF? Thompson goes on to make the fundamentally flawed observation that:
Ultimately, though, it’s publishers who would (continue to) be hurt the most. Ad networks can put ads elsewhere — the entire reason they exist is because they benefit from scale — but a publisher can only write so many articles and earn so many page views. Yes, the display advertising business model is in secular decline — and given the poisonous effect it has had on both the user experience and personal privacy, probably deservedly so — but the truth is there were really good reasons for it to exist: the zero marginal cost nature of content is in natural alignment with a business model based on monetizing attention.
The notion that content is produced at zero marginal cost will come as a great surprise to my business partners, colleagues and contributors, all of whom are keen to escape the tyranny of page view whoring hell in favor of supported, quality content that reaches the right audience. Thompson also offers the deluded statement:
…the truth is there is a certain tension and tradeoff in my model: I have less reach and influence than I would otherwise
Really? Does Thompson truly believe that? If so then I feel genuinely sorry for the fellow. What he has utterly failed to grasp is that page view whoring – because that is where this goes – is directly contributing to a decline in content quality. Check the content on listicle sites, check the crappy stuff on many of the tech media where reiterating the last press release is the order of the day. Does Thompson really want to give up the ability to reach an engaged audience in favor of the drive by crowd in a race to the bottom? It doesn’t make sense.
On the other hand, I wholeheartedly agree that broad based news is running out of options. And, to be frank, I welcome that. There needs to be pain in order that there is a reset in the ad-supported publishing model.
Regular readers will know that we believe we have found one answer and again, to be frank, it may not stand the test of longevity though two years in and still growing on all metrics that matter is pretty darned encouraging. But then as Thompson would argue, we operate in a niche and that’s OK. The point is that there are hundreds, thousands of niches  that can be profitably monetized without the scourge of page view whoring and in favor of quality. If we didn’t fiercely believe that then we might as well pack up shop right now.
None of this is a done deal with both glittering prizes and dire outcomes at each end of the spectrum with very little obvious middle ground. Each of us who choose to walk in the publisher’s shoes runs into innumerable dilemmas as Thompson notes but those of us who believe in a better media and who stick to our guns will prevail. We have to.
Oh – and by the way, I think I have a model for encouraging drive by readers to engage. We will see if it works. It is risky for sure and bloody expensive to make work but if it does then we will have cracked an important nut. More on that later.
But advertising as a moral right? No. Never. In. My. Lifetime.
Image credit: bime

Read more on: Digital and content marketing 