
A weekly phone call from a volunteer can make a huge difference in the life of an older person who is struggling with loneliness, according to Age UK, the UK’s largest charity working with older people.
There are plenty of these people around us, even if they are somewhat hidden from view. In fact, loneliness is an epidemic among older people in the UK, says the charity: around 1.2 million are chronically lonely. Some 200,000 say they have not had a conversation with friends or family for over a month and 3.9 million agree that the television is their main form of company.
So in line with its mission to help people to enjoy later life, Age UK launched its telephone befriending service, Call in Time, over ten years ago. Volunteers commit to a weekly 30-minute phone call with a lonely older person but, until recently, the volunteering effort was limited to employees working at Age UK’s corporate partners, such as private healthcare provider BUPA.
In 2016, however, the charity decided it was time to step up the effort and open up Call in Time volunteering to the general public, as part of its Christmas 2016 campaign, ‘No one should have no one’. Online registration was set up and received a big boost from being showcased on the ITV programme, ‘Good Morning Britain’.
In the background, meanwhile, Age UK’s digital solutions architect Richard Holland was scrambling to get the technology needed to support the service in place, with help from the team at Reason Digital, a social enterprise that works on digital projects that make a difference.
Automation and safeguarding
Automation, Holland realized, would be crucial to making Call in Time scalable. A huge degree of safeguarding needed to be taken into consideration, too, to protect the vulnerable older people who sign up for the service as members. For example, volunteers cannot be given members’ numbers to call them directly, in case that information is abused, and they cannot live within 50 miles of the member that they’re allocated, in order to avoid them from bumping into each other locally.
Age UK chose Twilio’s cloud communications platform to form the centrepiece of its new, extended service, linked via APIs [application programming interfaces] to the Call in Time platform built by Reason on Amazon Web Service (AWS). Holland explains how that weekly call between a volunteer and a Call in Time member is handled today:
Our main platform handles the scheduling of calls, checks when calls are meant to happen and fires out events and triggers. These go out to Twilio to say ‘initiate this call’. First, the volunteer is called; they pick up, receive a recorded message, press 1 and are placed in a conference call. The process is repeated with the Call in Time member. The call is recorded by Twilio for safeguarding and once the call is over, it is marked as complete in our system.
Twilio, he says, was originally recommended to him by a contact working at another charity. Once he investigated, he was impressed that Twilio was cloud-based, offered a strong set of APIs and was available on an on-demand basis, so that Age UK would only pay for what it used. Plus, there was Twilio’s philanthropic efforts, through its Twilio.org initiative, whereby Age UK got $500 towards Twilio services upfront and then an ongoing discount.
From volunteers to friends
But now that Twilio is up and running, it’s usability that is really making the difference to the service, says Holland.
What was really important for us is that Call in Time would be very easy for an older person to join. It’s all done over a landline – they don’t need an internet connection, they don’t need to use a smartphone. As long as they’ve got a landline, we can reach them, which works really well.
We regularly see the difference this makes to members and, in many cases, it’s the start of a very genuine friendship between members and volunteers.
Today, the Call in Time service sees around 300 calls made each week – but by 2021, Holland says that he’s hoping the weekly total will be in the tens of thousands. And it looks likely the demand will be there, because in the next 20 years, the over-85 demographic in England alone is set to double from nearly 1.3 million people today, to just under 2.8 million.
 
 
 
Image credit - Age UKRead more on: Digital enterprise in the real world 