
The recent London Tech Week delivered some serious pointers as to how technology may well completely restructure the economic and political landscape. And in two words, the direction we need to be thinking is City States.
There is certainly a strong possibility that this will be the way that economic and political activity gravitates as AI starts to take a hold on the smart city/lifestyle that was the topic of  a keynote panel session speculating on what the future held for London in the year 2030.
Chaired by the Greater London Authority’s Smart London Strategy and Delivery Officer, Steve Lorimer, the panel featured Juliet Bauer, Chief Digital Officer of the NHS, Paul Copping, the CIO of Digital Greenwich, and Colin Rhys, the VP of Virgin Hyperloop One in the Middle East.
Two intertwining themes developed during their deliberations: the need for cross city collaboration – the notion of the need for ‘One London’ – and the observation that it is now the city qua city which is becoming a driving force for the application of AI.
Collaborate for One London
The ‘One London’ theme was at its most evident, and obvious, in the area of healthcare, as Bauer pointed out:
Issues such as citizen identity and universal health records are moving us towards the idea of One London. The move now is towards prevention rather than reactive treatment. This gives people more choices in the type of intervention and can lead to a shift away from hospitalisation and towards online treatment, a shift towards people taking more responsibility for their own healthcare. This will also need a move towards more sharing of health data.
This view was supported by Copping, who sees the need for collaboration that exists in healthcare spreading across most areas of city operations. There is now a need to avoid building the next generation of information siloes, but there is also a need to get the integration platform right, particularly as the city moves from using a predefined architecture and towards an on-going procurement process:
At the moment London has a collaboration deficit, and collaboration is essential.
One issue that then follows is the fact that new AI tools, together with other applications and developments find a role in the smart city environment, different cities are starting to adopt different architectural approaches, as Copping observed:
Different cities have different ideas of the type of platform they required, with some going for a distributed approach, while others prefer a centralised model. So we are looking at using Blockchain for pushing out information. But we see cities taking charge of this rather than countries, because cities understand it much better.
It is not too difficult a step to see this becoming a focus of aggregation in several areas. Citizens  within a city have a vested healthcare interest in ensuring their local healthcare authorities have the best information to work with, and therefore have an implicit responsibility to play their part in contributing to the overall information pool. But this ability to collect and exploit data now extends much further, according to Copping:
We see the possibility of more service provision within the city coming from private companies. This is because they are proving to be far better at aggregating data and targeting services that are based on analysis of that data. They are far better at it than Local Government.
National Government…superfluous?
While local political structures would still be required, it is possible to see that in such an environment, national government could fade away into insignificance.
Cities like London, Manchester or Glasgow will be able to manage so much of the own affairs and organise their economic and political relationships with each other. They would also end up best-equipped to organise their own relationships with other cities around the world.
It is reasonable to suppose here that some of the larger enterprises specialising in public service provision, such as Atos and Capita, might well be seriously interested in such possibilities, especially as they would then be well-placed to offer targeted services to a number of different cities while utilising analyses based on the accumulated data of all of them.
It could prove a good selling point if such companies could then utilise large datasets of real data, coupled with personal health records, to provide proper, non-politicised assessments of individual disability requirements and needs.
Such capabilities would almost certainly be a major driver in more people wanting to move into such conurbations, rather than out of them, and such centralisation would have obvious benefits in terms of city management and service provision.
For example this, coupled with the coming of 5G mobile comms systems, would certainly make it easier to deliver real `fat pipe’ internet services to the vast majority of the population.
It would also serve the aspirations of the Virgin Hyperloop One operation, the Elon Musk-backed ‘vacuum tube’ rapid mass transit operation that offers the potential of getting from London to Manchester in around 20 minutes. As such it is easy to see that it will have the most benefit, both in terms of operations management and user flexibility, if it was essentially quite inflexible and concentrated on point-to-point network between the major conurbations.
Rhys sees it as the natural successor to the railway network of today, a point he happily made vociferously to the keynote audience:
We see it having the potential to kill off HS2. Who needs a 200 year-old technology to gain 26 minutes over the current journey time, when we could get people from Manchester to Edinburgh in 20 minutes? We see this opening up the whole of the country, and it makes it possible to have, say, a single cancer treatment unit for the whole country.
Rhys sees scope for close relationships between Hyperloop and online services such as Uber. Here, users would be able to order a Pod for a complete, point-to-point journey, picking up the user at their location, driving to the Hyperloop, and then onward from the destination Hyperloop Hub and the drive to their final destination, all in that same Pod.
My take
It is still far too early to say that City States will happen, but the technologies and thinking are certainly slipping into place to make them possible and, given the way that national politics is going (not just in the UK, but universally) it is already possible to see them as an attractive alternative for many people, both in terms of lifestyle and political differentiation.
Image credit - Free for commercial useRead more on: Collaboration sharing and digital productivityIoT robotics and AIMachine intelligence and AIUse cases 