
As someone who has lived something of a nomadic life the last 17 years, I’m not unfamiliar with the nuances of adjusting to different cultures. You’d think that with that experience, dropping anchor in the US would present less of a challenge than past adventures where the barriers of language loomed large. Yet, and as has been noted many times, the US and UK (since I am a native Brit) may share something of a common use of language but that’s about it.
The UK for example, while appearing to work hard at mimicking many American ways of working has nothing like the bureaucracy and paperwork that seems to weigh heavily on so many endeavors. Everything that involves an ongoing service requires a credit check. If you have no US based credit then each of the major services require some sort of deposit. The fact you may have an unblemished credit history in another land is of no consequence. But this is where it gets weird.
Nobody (other than the landlord) has asked for signed paperwork to secure a deposit up front before providing services. In one case I walked out the store with a modem/router without being asked to pay for the device. When I questioned this, the sales assistant smiled knowingly and saying that it would be added to the bill. It seems there is an assumption that when bills are presented that I’d naturally fork over whatever is required.
Opening a bank account is subject to many of the same anti money laundering and other regulations we see in the UK (but less so in parts of Europe) yet opening an account was an extraordinarily relaxed affair with none of the detailed quizzing I’d expect when moving a bank account in the UK, let alone walking in as an alien.
I suppose the biggest surprise comes when shopping. Despite the much vaunted efficiencies of US supply chains, I find them to be little better than those in Europe. Wait times for furniture are similar although communication of stock outs and delivery scheduling is much slicker. Even delivery of in stock items can be haphazard. Outside of Amazon, there is little concept of ‘next day delivery’ as a truism far as I can tell.
Food labeling is a nightmare. Inconsistent and haphazard while burdened with a bureaucracy that is at once mind numbing yet hopelessly ineffective. Check this about the removal of titanium dioxide in Dunkin’ Donuts products.
And as for so-called retail competition? Apart from Wal-Mart which appears to work hard at competitive pricing on many but not all products, the concept is laughable in many cases. Only at Best Buy did I hear a salesperson talk about price matching with Costco or Amazon.
Even FedEx behaves differently to the experience I’ve had in Europe. In the US, it seems they are accustomed to simply dumping stuff at the door without requiring a signature nor knocking on the door to let you know that a delivery has taken place. That can be a tad disconcerting.
Why should any of this matter?
I’ve long held the view that non-US businesses seeking to break into the US market face a massive uphill struggle. The cost of establishing a business alone in paperwork and bureaucracy at local, state and Federal levels is enough to sap the will to live. Local business people find it hard enough. A Kickstarter project I came across via an old colleague is a case in point. Heart and Trotter got funded in October 2013, but it took until this weekend for them to open a physical presence.
Retailers with long memories will recall the spectacular failure of Marks and Spencer, not just in the US but also in many other markets. There, a range of problems beset the company in its overseas expansion ambitions ranging from the strategic to the downright incompetent. More recently, Tesco announced its exit from the US. I recall several European software companies making a mess of attempting to build up a credible US presence.
Of course there are always exceptions but it seems anything requiring a local ‘flavor’ that demands a clear understanding of local customs and practice will likely prove troubling. The natural inclination to question why something has to be done a certain way is always a challenge. As a consumer, I can usually roll with the punches, even if some things leave me bemused – like the foot long receipts for ‘stuff’ or yard long if they have to go on order.
If you’re in business, such seeming trifles are much more problematic. I recently recall the CEO of a company almost, but not quite, spitting feathers at the thought of having to develop for three part checks. The last time I filled in a cheque – or is it check these days? – I had to get the landlord to do it. I’ve not filled one, let alone signed one in at least 15 years.
At diginomica, we know a number of US based companies wish to establish presences in Europe beyond the lighthouse or opportunistic customers who came on board early. It will not be easy. Just as going the other way is not easy.
My hope is that those same companies will be wise enough to ask a lot of questions and listen to the answers even if it leaves them quizzical. Rather that than try force fit past success ion one geography onto another and then wonder why it all went so horribly wrong.
Image credit: Culture sign for travel, the arts, tourism & tradition © EdwardSamuel – Fotolia

Read more on: CRM and customer experienceProfessional servicesRetail e-commerce and the omni-channel 