
Sundar Pichai
The good news for Alphabet yesterday was that the firm – still better known as Google to most of us – saw a 21% year-on-year increase in revenues to $26 billion in Q217.
The bad news for Alphabet yesterday is that the European Commission’s (EC) recent $2.7 billion fine for anti-competitive behaviour in the online shopping space slashed the firm’s operating margins to 16%, down from 28% for the comparable period last year. Alphabet’s net income fell 28% year-on-year to $3.52 billion. Take out the EC fine and net income rose 28%.
With the prospect of the Commission having tasted blood and wanting more, investors were skittish on Wall Street despite the firm comfortably beating expectations.
Part of this must be down to uncertainty about Alphabet’s next move here. The firm is still considering an appeal, while the Commission has threatened a larger fine if the issue is not resolved within 90 days. It faces a penalty of up to 5% of average daily turnover if it doesn’t give equal treatment to rival comparison shopping services in Europe by late September.
Meanwhile two other European anti-trust cases are still looming large, so the problem of European regulators is not going to go away any time soon. There were no answers or reassuring words for investors yesterday on the subject. Google Chief Financial Officer Ruth Porat stated:
There’s not really much of an update there as we’re still early in our analysis of the decision of the right next steps. We do have time to notify the Commission for proposed remedies as well as to implement changes.
But there are other reasons for Wall Street’s nervousness, not least the soaring cost of traffic acquisition which was up to $5.091 billion, 22% of Google’s advertising revenue. That said, Google advertising business grew 18% year-on-year to $22.6 billion, with a 52% year-on-year increase in aggregate paid clicks and a 23% year-on-year decline in aggregate cost-per-click.
Betting
But it’s the ‘Other Bets’ revenue category that is of most interest in terms of Alphabet’s enterprise ambitions. Other Bets revenue was up 34% year-on-year, although it’s most likely that much of that growth is coming from sales in the Play store. (Some 82 billion apps were downloaded from Google Play over the past 12 months.)
It’s also the case that Other Bets revenue still only accounted for $288 million out of the total $26 billion.
But it was to Other Bets that CEO Sundar Pichai wanted to focus attention in the post results announcement analyst call.
Inevitably, as is now seemingly compulsary among enterprise and would-be enterprise providers, the first port of call was Artificial Intelligence (AI), with the (very) bold claim:
Google continues to lead the shift to AI driven computing. We are working to make this incredible technology available to everyone around the world. It’s our focus on infusing our products and platforms with power of machine learning and AI that’s driving our success…Google has always been about using deep computer science and insights to solve some of the world’s most complex problems.
But there is still a lot to be done, Pichai conceded, citing the example of machine learning as a case in point:
Many of [the] products that make people’s lives easier are being powered by machine learning. One focus area for us this quarter has been enabling our machine learning algorithms to learn and improve our products much faster. One such research initiative auto ML enables us to pursue approaches to automate the design of machine learning models.
Our ability to rapidly deploy the best machine learning in all of our products enabled us this quarter to launch all sorts of new smart features, to help moderate comments, suggest smart replies in Gmail and improved translations. We rolled out new machine learning features in Google Maps, YouTube, Gmail and Google Photos, which now has more than 500 million monthly users who backup 1.2 billion photos and videos every day.
Alongside AI, the next big bet for Alphabet has been its enterprise cloud platform play, Google Cloud. Recent developments here have seen the opening of new Google Cloud regions in London, Sydney and Singapore to encourage international adoption.
But while Pichai claims “impressive growth” for Google Cloud, he was lacking in much granular detail. For example, when he set out to be “more specific about our momentum”, that amounted to the rather meaningless revelation that:
In Q2, the number of new deals we closed worth more than $0.5 million is three times what it was last year.
There’s a definite ‘jam tomorrow’ vibe around Google Cloud, as Pichai added:
The combination of not just [Google Cloud Platform], [but] G Suite working together with [Google Cloud Platform], we are seeing increasing win rates and option across enterprise customers. I also think all the investments we are doing in terms of broadening our ecosystem, including the newer partnerships with [Nutanix and SAP] should begin to pay off…I think we are set-up incredibly well and look forward to the momentum ahead.
My take
Despite the painful impact the EC’s fine had on the operating margins, it was barely referenced in the Alphabet conference call yesterday and Wall Street’s finest chose not to pursue the point. But what the company does next in relation to the Commission’s ‘Googlephobia’ is clearly something to monitor closely over the next 60 days. Elsewhere, there’s a need for greater clarity around the traction surrounding Google Cloud if we’re to take seriously claims that it is a valid enterprise challenger to Amazon Web Services and Microsoft Azure.
Image credit - YouTube/Microsoft Read more on: Cloud platforms - infrastructure and architectureDigital and content marketingMachine intelligence and AI 