
YouTube and the US Election – drivers of growth
A 20.2% rise in quarterly revenue driven by sales of advertising on mobile devices and YouTube – that’s the kind of good news that Wall Street was waiting for from Google parent Alphabet yesterday and they weren’t disappointed. 
Revenue in the third quarter rose to $22.5 billion from $18.7 billion a year earlier, while net income was $5 billion, up from $4 billion a year ago.   Total ad revenue rose 18.1% to $19.82 billon in the third quarter, accounting for more of its revenues.
The uptick in Cost per Click (CPC) had been on the decline for the past two years, but the firm has taken some successful corrective actions, as Jack Narcotta, senior analyst at Technology Business Research, notes: 

In the past, CPC was utilized as a measure of Google’s success driving traffic to its network: Higher CPC typically indicated Google’s search placement and results algorithms were providing high value to advertisers aiming to get their services or products in front of an eager customer base.
Over the last two years, Google set several initiatives into play in efforts to the decline in CPC, primarily by crafting ways to increase its ad network traffic by boosting its total paid clicks, especially from mobile devices. Mobile devices, nearly 85% of which are powered by Google’s Android operating system, will support Google’s efforts to tinker with its cross-platform advertising services, particularly those that power Search, YouTube, Gmail and Maps, which are typically among the highest-trafficked sites by mobile devices.

Google CEO Sundar Pichai reiterated that one of the corporate goals is to get more content to more places: 

Key to making information accessible is helping people find more great content across platforms like the web, YouTube, and Google Play. Just recently, one of our key efforts to make the mobile web faster, the open-source Project AMP [Accelerated Mobile Pages] celebrated its first birthday. It’s being embraced by a very broad range of publishers and sites around the world, covering more than 700,000 domains. One example, tens of millions of WordPress sites now have AMP pages with page load speeds up to 90% faster than normal in some cases. We are also working on an initiative called AMP for Ads, a new approach to creating and selling ads with speed at the heart of the experience.

Pichai argued that Google brings a simple but compelling proposition to marketers and advertisers:

Our mobile properties like Search, YouTube, Maps, and Google Play are where people turn when they are actively interested in something. They are using our services because they want to actively watch something they are passionate about or because they want to know, go, do, or buy something. They are super-attentive and engaged. It’s just like people used to be glued to their TV screen during prime time.
Our services are prime time for the mobile world. This matters for marketers because those prime time moments when people are actively interested and attentive are the perfect time for a brand to place their ads. For instance, hotel chain La Quinta now sees a third of their website traffic coming from mobile, and they use our hotel ads to help them reach travelers right when they are looking for hotel stays. They have found conversion rates to be twice as high with hotel ads compared to regular mobile traffic, which is helping them capitalize on those prime time moments when travelers are on their phones and ready to book.

Riding the tube
At the heart of this sits YouTube: 

More than 1 billion monthly users are watching hundreds of millions of hours every single day. YouTube has become the platform of choice for major brands, with a highly engaged audience, the best formats, and industry-leading measurement tools. Recent research found that nearly half of U.S. adults between the ages of 18 and 54 say that at least once a month, YouTube helps them in making a decision about buying something.
One format that’s been working really well for ad prices are bumper ads, which are snackable, 6-second videos that help brands drive incremental reach and frequency. Brands like Universal Pictures have been pairing these shorter videos with their standard length ads on YouTube, and they’re seeing great results, especially on mobile.
We also recently announced expanded capabilities to show marketers how TV and YouTube campaigns increase Google and YouTube searches for their brand. From early tests, we have seen that YouTube generates almost twice as many searches per impression than TV generates.

He added that the US Election has given YouTube traffic a boost:

We worked with many news organizations to livestream all three U.S. presidential debates, and we saw record-breaking interest from the YouTube community. In fact, the three debates ranked as the three most viewed political live streams of all time on YouTube, with over 8.5 million hours watched live, a 5X increase from the 2012 debates. Elections-related searches on YouTube are also at an all-time high, with searches for U.S. election content up almost 550% compared to this time in the last election.

Essential to all Google’s online ad propositions is the ability to metricise investment and return, added Pichai: 

We want to give marketers the best tools out there to close the loop between television and digital, online and offline. For example, global retailer IKEA, with their agency iProspect UK, used our store visits measurement tools to see how effective their digital marketing campaigns were at bringing shoppers into their stores. By incorporating store visit data, they realized that more than 10% of the people who clicked on their search ads went on to visit a physical store, and that their ROI from online ads was actually five times higher than they had previously estimated.
We introduced even more measurement solutions at this year’s Advertising Week in New York, helping marketers close the loop with newer tools like location extensions and store visits measurements for the Google Display Network.

Away from advertising, Pichai points to successes in Google’s Cloud play, which comprises the Google Cloud platform, the G Suite collaboration and productivity applications, data analytics and machine learning tools and APIs, and enterprise-ready Android phones, tablets, and Chromebooks that access the cloud. 
He pointed to plans to add 8 further cloud regions around the world in 2017 as being among a series of plans, including an increased focus on machine learning: 

We significantly upgraded Google BigQuery, our fully managed data analytics warehouse, and made Google Cloud Machine Learning available in beta to help businesses easily train quality machine learning models.
Our investments in machine learning continue to be a very clear advantage for Google Cloud, and we are helping customers apply machine learning in very concrete ways. For example, Ocado, the world’s largest online-only grocery retailer, is using machine learning to categorize and prioritize customer emails, which will help their support center respond to customers faster.
As we officially move into the Google Cloud era, our goal remains the same. We want to build the most open cloud for all businesses and make it easy for them to build and run great software. The team is firing on all cylinders to create the best cloud products in the industry for our customers.

Google is also looking to partner with more third parties in the cloud, with Pichai citing recent tie-ups with Okta, Box and Accenture as examples: 

We have stepped up our partnering considerably so that we can offer our customers everything they want, and we have more vehicles for going to market. Scaling up through partnerships is a big area of focus and investment for us…As we head into 2017, I expect cloud to be one of our largest areas of investment and head count growth.

My take
A lot of media attention went on the stalling of the Google Fiber initiative, but in reality the advertising numbers are what stand out. Next week Facebook reports its own numbers and we can expect similar stellar performace. With Yahoo! out of the game in all but name and Twitter still trying to work out a survival strategy, digital and mobile advertising is increasingly consolidated as a two horse race. 
Image credit - YouTubeRead more on: Cloud platforms - infrastructure and architectureCollaboration sharing and digital productivityDigital and content marketingIoT robotics and AIMobileUX and application design 