
Yesterday Amazon finally split out its Amazon Web Services (AWS) operating numbers. They reveal an operating division that’s profitable – sort of – if you ignore the fact that Amazon, in common with many other technology companies is in the atrociously bad habit of ignoring a large chunk of employee costs under the moniker ‘stock based compensation’ and other creative accounting measures.
Here’s what I mean:
Amazon consolidated profit statement
Notice how profit evaporates as Amazon accounts for expenses it chooses not to allocate across its lines of business? Heck, using those methods I can make any business look profitable. The other thing that concerns me is the manner in which Amazon has chosen to report. It mixes geographies and a line of business in one reporting structure. That’s bizarre. Sure, it reports separately on revenue for media, electronic and other products. It doesn’t offer full line of business transparency.
As far as I am concerned that is Mickey Mouse accounting. It’s not real world and serves to disguise where Amazon is making – or losing – money.
But that doesn’t catch the market’s eye as much as the breakout of AWS revenue and operating income which is reported as much better than anyone expected. The markets were expecting a loss but it turns out AWS has been profitable every quarter for the last 15 months. Check out the graph below:
Amazon Opex and Margin – Q1-4, 2014, Q1 2015
If you look carefully, you can see that AWS margin has been improving over time and is the most operationally efficient of Amazon’s businesses, contributing $265 million out of a total $706 million or 37%. AWS represents a mere 6.9% of total revenue. It’s fair to say that without AWS, Amazon would be in deep loss territory.
Some think this separation will mean a call for AWS to be split off. I can’t see CEO Jeff Bezos bowing to that pressure any time soon because it would expose the remainder of the company to unwelcome scrutiny. Without detail, it is very difficult to determine where the losses are being incurred. My best guess is that it is in the warehoused white goods and non-digital products.
Even though I tend to find that Amazon isn’t always price competitive it is unlikely they are able to garner more of an advantage in margin than the CostCo’s and Wal-Mart’s of the world. Taking CostCo as an example, its net profit shades 2% – after including all costs. Amazon? Who knows. Whatever the reality, I sense that Amazon’s claims to efficiency are likely over-emphasized.
So while Amazon’s shares popped a crazy ass 15% in early trading today, investors are looking at the wrong end of the income statement and asking the wrong questions. Let’s hope sanity prevails although past history suggests something else from the casino otherwise known as Wall Street.
Endnote:  A colleague asked me if AWS includes for the cost of it running Amazon Retail systems. The honest answer is we don’t know because we don’t have that level of granularity in the results and I’ve not seen anything to say one way or the other. It is feasible therefore that AWS is stated at numbers that are artificially high, or low, depending on the accounting treatment and how they chose to post costs internally.

Read more on: Infrastructure 