
Global domination doesn’t come cheap, as Amazon just demonstrated with a 77% year-on-year drop in profits as expenses shot up by more than a third.
Consumer retail sales in the three months to the end of June hit $33.9 billion, while Amazon Web Services (AWS) revenue was up 42% to $4.1 billion.
Amazon Chief Financial Officer Brian Olsavsky pointed to the need for continued investment in order to fuel expansion, but admitted that this was taking its toll on expenses:
The year-over-year difference is primarily driven by investments…we continue to invest in fulfillment capacity and logistics services, digital video, our Echo and Alexa, Echo devices and Alexa platform India, the buildup at the AWS infrastructure, not to mention Prime Now and Amazon Fresh and Prime benefits.
Strong usage growth in AWS has led us to a step up in infrastructure in capital leases to build the capital leases in the trailing 12 months. They’ve increased 71% through the end of Q2 versus last year. That is servicing [and] accelerating usage in our largest AWS services as well as geographic expansion.
With Microsoft ramping up Azure investment and Oracle declaring its bullish goal of overtaking Amazon, pricing has become an increasingly focused upon factor, with Amazon playing a very competitive game. This has created some uncertainties, admitted Olsavsky:
We’ve had numerous price decreases, and we continue to have that in the AWS business, both absolute decreases in service costs and also rolling out new services that may be cannibalizing more expensive other services that we provide… Stepping back, I would say that while pricing is important, we’re generally being selected because of our functionality and pace of innovation, the innovation keeps accelerating. It did in the first half of this year, the pace of new services and features.
The overall AWS story is positive, he insisted, citing strong customer adoption stories:
Our usage in all of our large services are actually accelerating and they’re growing at a rate higher than our revenue growth. So, you’re seeing great adoption. We are seeing AWS customers migrate more than 30 databases over the last year-and-a-half. We signed some very big customer wins, like Ancestry, High Tail, California Polytechnic State University and others, that we’re very proud to have. So, yes, the momentum in the business is very strong.
We continue to open new regions. We’ll be opening five regions in the near future in France, China, Sweden, Hong Kong and a second government cloud region in the East. So, yes, we like the momentum in that business.
Grocery list
Inevitably the proposed $13.7 billion takeover of Whole Foods came under the spotlight on the analyst conference call following the results announcement. Olsavsky said that, assuming the deal closes, there will be a mixture of potential grocery formats under the Amazon umbrella:
On [the] larger question about what the place of Amazon Fresh, likely Prime Now and some of our other efforts, I would say we believe there’ll be no one solution, so we’re experimenting with a number of the formats from physical pickup points in Amazon Go to online ordering and delivery to your door through Prime Now and Amazon Fresh.
We’ll see how customers respond. We like the response that we’ve seen so far. We think it’s a valuable – all those are valuable services, Amazon Go is not out of beta, but the other ones are.
It’s certainly clear that physical retail outlets are something that is firnly on Amazon’s agenda, with Olsavksy stating:
We are experimenting with a number of formats. You’ve seen the physical bookstores and I would say that the benefit there is again. We have a curated selection of titles and it’s also a great opportunity for people to touch and feel our devices and see them, especially the new Echo devices. I went into the store in Seattle last week and I saw about a third of the people were standing around the device table learning how they work, how they interact with devices. So, I saw first hand the customer experience. That’s what we’re seeing as a benefit to the physical stores right now.
He added:
I personally think the ability to see new devices is a great asset, but I don’t want to shortchange the rest of the bookstore and the ability to have curated selection and the creativity we’ve had in taking new look at the bookstores. So we are experimenting with different formats, and we look at different sizes and we look at revenue cost per square foot just like any other physical retailer. So, we haven’t essentially nailed the model yet, and we continue to experiment to see what works and how it differs by city or more suburban locations.

My Take
A turbulent day for CEO Jeff Bezos, who became the world’s richest man for a short period of time during Thursday, but lost the title back to Bill Gates as Wall Street took the news of the Amazon numbers badly. But the focus on investing for growth is set in stone, so investors need to be ready to play the long game here.
Image credit - AmazonRead more on: Cloud platforms - infrastructure and architectureDigital government and public servicesRetail e-commerce and the omni-channel

