
 
Amazon appears to be bowing to the pressure from European Union regulators over its tax practices in the region, after reports claim that the online giant will now begin booking sales in some individual countries instead of funnelling them all through its low-tax setup in Luxembourg.
As of the 1st May of this year, Amazon introduced a new structure that sees local branches in the UK, Germany, Italy and Spain booking revenue and filing tax returns in each country. For example, whilst Amazon makes billions of pounds of sales in the UK every year, its location in Luxembourg has meant that it has previously been been able to record sales there and take advantage of a significantly lower corporate tax rate compared to the UK’s 20%.
As first reported by the Guardian, an Amazon spokesperson said:

[Amazon] is now recording retail sales made to customers in the UK through the UK branch. Previously, these sales were recorded in Luxembourg
We regularly review our business structure to ensure that we are able to best serve our customers and provide additional product and services. More than two years ago we began the process of establishing local country branches of Amazon EU Sarl, our primary retail operating company in Europe.

And whilst the measurable impact of the changes on each individual country’s books remains to be seen, it can’t be denied the Amazon appears to be buckling under the pressure of EU regulatory pressures and threats from countries planning what is often referred to as a ‘Google tax’.
Amazon has strongly denied in the past that its operating structures in Europe are tax-motivated and although the company will deliver the changes under the guise of a ‘this is best for the customer’ message, it’s quite a significant U-turn.
However, that isn’t to say that this is a cut and dry result for EU regulators and the chancellors in their respective countries. The details remain murky – Amazon hasn’t specifically said what taxes it will be paying, how it will be allocating expenses or whether or not this will impact its tax-exempt payments to its European parent company (which is how it has been legally able to pay very low taxes in the region).

Not only this, but Amazon has barely reported any profits in recent quarters. And as we know, even though sales might be being booked in countries like the UK, it isn’t sales that are taxed, it’s profits. If Amazon doesn’t start reporting some significant profits in the UK, Germany, Italy and Spain, these changes will have little impact in the short term.
Take a look at Dennis’ analysis of Amazon’s latest results, where he questions the impact of its approach to reporting and allocation of expenses. The report also highlights that whilst Amazon as a retailer is not making any significant profits, its hosting business AWS is – what does this mean for the changes being made in Europe?
Most reports refer to the sales in Europe as part of Amazon as a retailer, but given that its hosting locations in Europe are Dublin and Frankfurt, it isn’t entirely clear what that means for tax purposes. Will AWS sales be booked through each individual country too, or will it be based on the location of the data centres?
Some nice headlines for the Tories
The Guardian states that the latest Amazon.co.uk Ltd accounts show sales of just £449 million for 2013 and a tax charge of £4.2 million – but elsewhere in its corporate filings Amazon attributes £4.71 billion of worldwide sales to the UK for the same year. Either way, these are the sorts of figures that are getting people riled up.
Even though Amazon is hardly reporting any profits, the idea that it can be paying so little tax when it is bringing in so many revenues from the UK just doesn’t sit well with the general public, politicians and the media. And it’s not just Amazon, there has been growing pressure and investigations against many of the US-based internet giants, including Google, Facebook and Apple.
For example, Margaret Hodge MP, the outgoing chair of the influential Public Accounts Committee, recently told Google’s northern Europe boss that the company’s tax operations were “devious, calculated and, in my view, unethical”.
Meaning Amazon’s announcement will be hailed as a victory for Chancellor George Osborne, who last year also announced a ‘Google tax’, which came into effect in April, and imposes a hiked 25% tax on groups that are thought to be artificially routing profits abroad. And whilst its yet to be used, or proven to be a practically useful, it will no doubt be argued that it weighed on Amazon’s decision to change its tax structures.
Europe
When the Google tax was announced, Osborne said:

You are welcome here in Britain with open arms.
While we offer some of the lowest business taxes in the world, we expect those taxes to be paid.

And although the tangible impact to Amazon’s EU tax bill, and the resulting ‘boost’ to the UK’s balance, remains to be seen – HMRC’s attentions on Amazon are likely to be diluted and shift towards other internet giants that are yet to make any promises.
All eyes will be on Google, Apple and Facebook.
The EU problem
Where to begin? Whilst the EU does a fantastic job at providing countries like the US with a large, somewhat integrated market to sell to, it also allows for a huge amount of complexity and disparity between member states. And it is this complexity which means that the European Commission is still figuring out a lot of what is deemed to be ‘okay’ and ‘acceptable’ in this digital world.
For example, Amazon hasn’t just chosen Luxembourg because it has a low rate of corporation tax. By locating itself in Luxembourg, it has also been allowed to make tax-free payments to a parent company, which have totalled billions of pounds, for the use of intellectual property (IP is historically a very tricky subject for EU governments).
Is this okay? The Commission isn’t so sure. It has been investigating the 2003 deal that underpins this relationship between Amazon and Luxembourg, hinting that it is likely to rule that this effectively amounts to state aid. Which would be very bad news for Amazon.
In a lengthy document detailing its investigation, the EC said Amazon and Luxembourg most likely violated competition laws. It states:

The Commission takes the view, at this stage, that it constitutes state aid within the meaning of that provision.

Amazon potentially faces a huge bill if the final ruling reflects this sentiment. Similar investigations are taking place for Apple’s operations in Ireland, which have come under tough scrutiny, and Starbucks in the Netherlands.
However, these investigations take time and arguably results to date are somewhat piecemeal. Even Amazon’s announcement today can’t be viewed as a ‘win’ for the whole of the EU – given that it is only making concessions for four member states. France has been particularly tough on internet companies and tax, but it seems it has been missed off the list.
As a result, it is the European Commission’s EU-wide investigation into e-commerce practices that is of strong interest, as this could result in some broader change for everybody. The EC announced in March that it would start a year-long investigation into the likes of Amazon and other internet giants, looking at whether they create barriers to online trading in the region.

EU competition commissioner Margrethe Vestager said that EU cross-border online sales are growing very slowly and the investigation would look at whether “some companies may be taking measures to restrict cross-border e-commerce”. She said:

It is high time to remove remaining barriers to e-commerce, which is a vital part of a true Digital Single Market in Europe. The envisaged sector inquiry will help the Commission to understand and tackle barriers to e-commerce to the benefit of European citizens and business.

My take
A hugely complicated area and an announcement that on the face of it has potential to be good news for countries like the UK – but in reality provides little detail to how it will impact the bottom line. If Amazon continues to make payments to its parent company in Luxembourg, or if it continues to have high expenses, or if it continues to make low profits, the result could be nothing more than a nice headline for Chancellor George Osborne.
We will just have to wait for the results to come in…

Read more on: Regulation 