
Should the signage say Amazon Labs?
Thomas Edison has an amazing 1093 patents to his name. He and his lab are famous for inventions like sound recording, motion picture recording, and of course the long lasting electric light bulb developed at what would become General Electric. But all of these inventions pale in comparison to two that he rarely receives credit for today—the electric grid and inventing the corporate research and development lab.
To my mind the corporate research lab is Edison’s greatest invention because it regularized and systematized research and set an expectation that discoveries could drive business and even lead to a better world. It is the crowning achievement of a furiously busy 19th century and set the stage for all of the disruptive innovations we look gob smacked at today.
Edison wasn’t exactly alone, Alexander Graham Bell founded what would become Bell Labs which effectively competed with Edison for bragging rights to discovery. Lest we forget, it was a couple of Bell engineers Arno Penzias and Robert Wilson who discovered cosmic background radiation, the remnants of the Big Bang. They shared a Nobel Prize in Physics in 1978 with Pytor Kapitsa of the Soviet Union for that discovery and they were far from the only laureates from those labs.
Someday, perhaps soon, we might regard Jeff Bezos in the same league, though it’s hard to see how an online retailer could win a Nobel Prize. But an article in Harvard Business Review’s website Whole Foods Is Becoming Amazon’s Brick-and-Mortar Pricing Lab  makes the unbelievable at least plausible and tells us to pay attention.
As HBR puts it, in buying Whole Foods, Amazon,
… bought a network of 456 customer-friendly testing facilities which welcome roughly eight million “volunteers” each week. Amazon’s relentless price testing in the online world anchors its competitive advantage. Its unrivaled base of knowledge allows it to use price as a communications tool, a recruiting tool, a psychological weapon, and a value driver in ways that transcend the basic mechanics of supply and demand and profit and loss. Now Amazon can supplement that knowledge with direct, proprietary insights about the offline retail world.
Yes, it can. This means at minimum, that Amazon might rely on analytics and machine learning for a lot of its customer research, but now it also has the ability to do something more like real-life testing with real customers. As Simon puts it,
Amazon gets virtually limitless possibilities to test products and services, test price points and assortment interactions, redefine the price perception for organic and healthier foods, merge offline and online shopping experiences, and perhaps test home delivery or store pickup with ideal early adopters.
The key to all of this is low pricing. For a long time, retailers have set prices based on not much more than an understanding of overall costs for things like an item itself, shelf space, and labor—in other words, the basics. But it can be successfully argued that what customers seek in low prices is really high value. In other words, it’s not the price itself that draws customer ire it’s more the perception of what they get for what they pay. This is more than tricky. The price of a tomato, just to pick something, at the height of the summer harvest has to be lower in a customer’s eyes than it might be in winter when its cost has to reflect long distance transport.
People get this because it’s an obvious example to anyone with even a casual understanding of economics. But what of the price of pasta made from organic wheat? Or tuna that’s dolphin free? Would these products be worth 2x? 3X? In all of these examples the question of value goes well beyond what a customer is willing to pay and Simon sees Whole Foods as a lab where ideas can be tested.
In purchasing Whole Foods Amazon has given itself the necessary tools for finding out including the time to work through multiple scenarios using an iterative approach. If Amazon is successful this will be very important because as Simon says figuring out the value and pricing for Whole Food’s organic products is a “complex, time-consuming experiment.”
My take
We don’t know what the “Amazon Lab” is likely to find out from its work just as Bell couldn’t know his lab would someday figure out cosmic background radiation’s place in the scheme of things. That’s the point of a lab and the point of research—asking open ended questions just to see where they go.
At the very least we should expect Amazon to come up with new insights into demand and acceptance for organic food and its price premiums. With that they may likely discover the limits of the appeal for high-end groceries at high-end prices, which they could use to give feedback to primary producers.
In ten years, we’ll know a lot more than we do today, just as we know a great deal more about personal communications today, ten years after Apple introduced the iPhone.
Image credit - via AmazonRead more on: Analytics planning and data analysisMachine intelligence and AI 