

You will find more statistics at Statista
If you believe that Wall Street picks winners and losers then the above chart tells you all you need to know about the way the stock pickers are looking at the world of retail. Amazon is crushing it at the expense of the traditional retailers.
You might recall that I bemoaned the proliferation and relentless advertising that ended up spamming my inbox. Curiously, the one company that restrained itself was Amazon. Only two wee nudges from them. Macy’s was especially egregious in its relentless pursuit of revenue but looking at this chart I am starting to wonder whether there is a relationship between the quantity of email ads and the negative impact on stock prices. Fun stuff aside, is Amazon really winning out?
Many commentators believe that a multi-faceted approach to retailing is now the order of the day. That includes mobile, online and in-store. It also means that retail experiences need to be seamless and consistent across all media. Where does that leave Amazon, given that it is almost 100% online only? This from Motley Fool provides some indication:
Sales on Black Friday reportedly increased 14% this year to $2.72 billion, according to estimates from Adobe. E-commerce giant Amazon took home the lion’s share of that windfall — particularly in regards to online sales. Amazon captured nearly 36% of all online Black Friday sales this year, according to shipment tracking data from Slice Intelligence. However, the e-tailer’s biggest achievement that day was the millions of Amazon devices it sold.
Amazon sold three times as many Amazon-branded devices this year as it did the same period a year ago. Sales of Amazon’s Fire TV were up more than six times year-over-year, whereas the new Fire tablet became Amazon’s fastest selling tablet ever during the holiday shopping weekend.
This is incredibly valuable for the company going forward, because millions of device sales mean that millions of people will be using these devices to tap into the Amazon ecosystem. That competitive advantage will stick with Amazon well after the holidays are over.
It’s that last sentence which captures the imagination. It implies that Amazon will benefit from the ripple effect of selling online media as well as capturing more share of wallet for more traditional goods to what is an increasingly captive market. However it’s not game over quite yet. There are still another two weeks to go before Christmas and while there may be a lull in sales, we expect to see yet another concerted effort by the bricks and mortar based retailers to get us to part with what’s left of our cash.
Check back in with us in the early New Year when we will dissect what happened over the whole retail bonanza period.
Read more on: Retail e-commerce and the omni-channel 