
Recently, I was given the scenario of looking at two large companies and determine what needs to happen to enable those organizations to merge their IT effectively. This is a common occurrence, as seen constant shift in the Fortune 500. Granted there can be a number of reasons companies are no longer around, but mergers is definitely a significant contributor. Thoughts about what needs to happen in a merger situation are well documented.
There are a number of causes of mergers and acquisitions. (Sub-set from DePamphilis 2010)



Theory
Motivation


Diversification
Diversifying or positioning the company into new products and new markets.


Strategic Realignment
Acquiring capabilities through adoption of technological advances.


Operating synergy
Economies of scale and scope can help improve operating efficiency.


Buying undervalued assets
Buying assets cheaply based on Q-ratio.


Tax Benefits
Tax gains through lower performing companies


Market Power
Increase market share to improve ability to set prices above competitive rates



Examples that come to mind are:

Oracle purchase of Sun to enable a strategic realignment into the hardware market
HP purchase of EDS to increase their market power in the services space.
American Airlines purchase of US Air to increase operating synergy.

The major focus of the scenario in hand was convincing both business and IT organizations that I could help them with their merger concerns, along with technical project and development support to resolve their problems.
I divided the effort into three major components: Planning, Execution and Operations. When a merger occurs, the organization has at least two of each of these elements in operation, combining them into a single, efficient approach will reap significant benefits. The rest of this post will focus on the planning phase, since ‘good enough’ planning should lead to more effective execution and operations.
Before getting started, a validation of why the merger is taking place needs to be the first order of business – what was the motivation and how will the leadership measure the impact. Also identifying who from the IT space was involved in the due diligence and talking with them will ensure that you don’t go down rat holes that were already traversed.
Process outline
From a high level I’d outline the process to get started as:

Goals/Vision

Validate the goals of the merger
Ask for a high-level set of business objectives/measures
Is this a friendly merger or a hostile takeover?
Who provides executive support?


Current situation analysis (Iterative – starting out at a very high level and over the engagement fleshed out into a real Enterprise Architecture framework/plan)

Processes (systems are put in place to support processes – what are they?)

What are the underlying processes that drive this business?
How do those align to the business objectives?
How is governance performed? And by whom??
How is testing performed?


Systems

What are the systems in production today?
Who is the business owner of the various systems?
What are the business processes/value streams these programs are aligned with?
Who are the stakeholders/affected parties?
How much is being spent to maintain the systems? Structure vs. complexity…
What is the underlying infrastructure Bill-of-Materials (BoM) being used, including the network needs?
What is the underlying software BoM?
How is the value generated by these systems being assessed?
How are the security keys handled and when do they expire?
What are the known security concerns?
What’s the enhancement backlog?
What is normal for the system (uptime, performance envelope…)? I’m not talking about the hardware here, but the ability of the system to deliver business value.


Data/Context

Does the organization have a Master Data Management approach in place?
How does the data flow between the various systems and processes in production today?


Services

What agreements are already in place that need to be complied with?
Who are the service providers??
What was the underlying rational for the service?




Analyze the applications portfolio against the goals and market trends

Look for winners among the existing environment
If a clear winner can’t be chosen, assess the alternatives


Define a prioritized plan of attack

Strategic

Key players/partners going forward


Tactical

What are the key times when system changes need to be locked down (e.g., holidays)


Governance

Approach to keep the plans and deliverables live
Define method to share visibility and transparency of impact and progress


Communications plan – how can we inform and empower others


Execution – where the real work takes place

This seems like a daunting list of items to track down and understand. In reality, it needs to be done through iterations, since along the way new goals and applications will be found changing the perspective on the work done so far – but that is true about any kind of enterprise architecture effort. The following illustration provides a summary:
Iterative outline
I am sure I missed a number of elements, but it should be a good starting point for those tackling the IT side of a merger. Feel free to let me know what I’ve missed.
Once the plan is in place, new items will be discovered during execution and even operations (where all the long-term costs will be spent) those should be fed back in to keep the environment alive.
Don’t forget
Like most projects the critical success factors remain:


Executive support – it needs to be visible and consistent
Clear and commonly understood goals – everyone needs to row in the same direction
Constant and clear communications – if anyone doesn’t like what they’re seeing we need to raise our hand and not let issues fester.
Scope management – don’t let the money or the time run out before you can declare ‘success’


Image credits: all images via Charlie Bess

Read more on: Digital transformation - frictionless enterprise 