
In a hugely significant move, Europe’s highest court has dealt a blow to Uber by declaring that the firm is indeed a taxi company, not a technology firm, and has to abide by transportation industry rules.
While Uber has maintained a party line that it’s an online platform company, the European Court of Justice (ECJ) has taken a different view after examining a complaint lodged by a Spanish taxi group, Elite Taxi, based in Barcelona. The complaint said it was unfair that Uber did not have to adhere to the same rules it did while running a now-disbanded peer-to-peer service called UberPop, which linked non-professional drivers with riders.
The court decided that Uber “must be regarded as being inherently linked to a transport service” and that the 28 member countries in the European Union (EU) will have to regulate “the conditions under which such services are to be provided”. In a statement, the ECJ said:
In today’s judgment, the Court declares that an intermediation service such as that at issue in the main proceedings, the purpose of which is to connect, by means of a smartphone application and for remuneration, non-professional drivers using their own vehicle with persons who wish to make urban journeys, must be regarded as being inherently linked to a transport service and, accordingly, must be classified as ‘a service in the field of transport’ within the meaning of EU law. Consequently, such a service must be excluded from the scope of the freedom to provide services in general as well as the directive on services in the internal market and the directive on electronic commerce.
It added:
The Court takes the view, first of all, that the service provided by Uber is more than an intermediation service consisting of connecting, by means of a smartphone application, a non- professional driver using his or her own vehicle with a person who wishes to make an urban journey…Therefore, the Court finds that that intermediation service must be regarded as forming an integral part of an overall service whose main component is a transport service and, accordingly, must be classified not as ‘an information society service’ but as ‘a service in the field of transport’.
The Court passes the next stage of action back to the politicos in Europe:
It follows that, as EU law currently stands, it is for the Member States to regulate the conditions under which such services are to be provided in conformity with the general rules of the Treaty on the Functioning of the EU.
While individual countries and cities have made their own rulings around Uber to date, the significance of this decision is that it is the first one to apply right across the EU and as such throws down a major challenge to Uber’s international ambitions.
Today, Uber was putting a brave face on the outcome of the court hearing, insisting:
This ruling will not change things in most EU countries where we already operate under transportation law. As our new CEO has said, it is appropriate to regulate services such as Uber and so we will continue the dialogue with cities across Europe. This is the approach we’ll take to ensure everyone can get a reliable ride at the tap of a button.
The statement also added a snark of:
However, millions of Europeans are still prevented from using apps like ours.
The reality is that the ECJ’s decision will provide considerable succour to Uber’s critics and enemies and embolden calls for tougher leglisative and regulatory action to be taken. Elite’s lawyers, SBC Abogados, said on Twitter:
The Court of Justice of the European Union has just ruled in our favor that Uber is a transport company, therefore its activity must be regulated. The unfair competition that we denounce is over.
Uber does have some allies behind it, including the The Computer & Communications Industry Association (CCIA), which warned of wider negative impact stemming from the decision:
After today’s judgment innovators will increasingly be subject to divergent national and sectoral rules. This is a blow to the EU’s ambition of building an integrated Digital Single Market.
My take
Happy Christmas Uber!
Image credit - UberRead more on: e-commerceFuture of workRegulation 