
When I left off in Email marketing, Watsi style, I shared some interesting tips I picked up from First Round’s deep dive into Watsi’s creative tactics. But I had to wrap up before I got to some of the most provocative ideas. So let’s pick right up in part two – I’ll share a few standouts and then offer my analysis of First Round’s recommendations, mixing in thoughts on diginomica’s own results.
Email pitfalls and provocations
Some of the tactics used by Watsi challenge the enterprise marketers’ assumptions.
1. Text over HTML, email over web site?
One of Watsi’s experiments was an eye-opening text-versus-HTML A/B test. One half of the recipients got a short, intentionally casual text email from Watsi’s Grace Garey, and by short, I mean this was the entire email:
Hey, thanks so much for supporting patients on Watsi. We wanted to let you know that we just launched the Universal Fund and donations will be matched for the first 1,000 people. We would love for you to check it out. Let us know if you have any feedback.
In contrast to this “purposely casual” text email, the other half of Watsi’s recepient list received a carefully crafted and branded HTML email – the kind enterprisey folks are all-too-familiar with – which contained a patient story. as well as a Universal Fund donation request. As per First Round:
“The personalized plain text note just blew the HTML out of the water,” says Garey. “The numbers were crazy.” The verdict was in: That ultra personalization was worth the time and attention.
For Garey, it wasn’t just the simple text that made this campaign so successful:
It was really a full combination of what we knew worked, giving them early access, rewarding them for their participation, thanking them for their earlier support, all of it.
2. Wait – don’t drive traffic back to your web site?
Another unorthodox – but successful – Watsi experiment: don’t (necessarily) drive folks back to your web site.  From the get-go, Universal Fund members were sent a monthly update, with the typical “click to the web site” for the full content on their sponsored patient’s story. But when Watsi got pushback, they changed it up:
A lot of these early donors gave the team feedback that they wanted an email where they could get all this information at a glance without having to click through. The team delivered on this ask and actually saw an uptick in engagement, even though they weren’t purposely driving traffic back to the site. It was great confirmation that ultimate clarity, brevity and transparency in emails was the right move.
Which leads to this analysis from First Round:
Most marketers, especially at for-profit companies, always ask, “How do we get people back to our site from email?” But this might not be the best motive for your brand overall. You need to take into account what you’ve just asked people to do. Did they just make a large purchase? A big commitment of some sort? Most likely, the immediate response shouldn’t be to ask them to do more. The best move is probably to make them feel really good about the action they just took — that’s what will solidify brand affinity. “No one wants to feel cheated or tricked back to your website.”
My take – the problems of personalization
This article could have been more precise on how it defines personalization. I see hyper-personalization as a truly personal message to one recipient. Watsi’s text-versus-HTML campaign, at least the way it was described, was not a truly one-to-one message, and therefore not what I’d call “ultra personalization.” That doesn’t mean it wasn’t effective. The text-based email campaign clearly worked –  thanks to its directness and transparency, and because it was sent to members of the same tribe if you will (Watsi monthly donors).
It’s a myth that every message we receive should be ultra-personalized. We usually don’t mind receiving messages that are sent to an entire tribe we self-identify with. My hunch is that Watsi uses those distinctions to its advantage, but that’s something I’d like to learn more about.
Later, the article notes a truly hyper-personal example – though not a very good one – about signing up for the Mailbox app and getting a message saying “you’re number 700,024 in line.” A far better example of hyper-personalization comes by way of the Israeli-based started Idomoo, which showed me an example of truly personalized video messages at the Mobile World Congress, where, for example, an investor’s actual numbers might be inserted into the customer video.
Most email campaigns are not setup to serve this level of personalization, nor is it always necessary – as long as your email hits the right affinity group or interest. We romanticize personalization, but it should not be tossed around lightly. In a recent rant on poor email practices, Gartner’s Hank Barnes took issue with faux personalization:
I know there are times when you are sending e-mails to a lot of people at once (e-mail marketing can still be effective).  But if you do it, don’t put words in that imply a level of personalization or preparation that does not exist.  Don’t say, “I looked at your Website and can see you need localization services” (I don’t have a Web site).   Don’t say “I’m here to help you with outsourcing” (I don’t do it).
As for driving traffic to your own web site versus a self-contained email, an essential component of most email campaigns is driving/enticing some traffic back to your web site (or, alternatively, driving them to an action step landing page). But the exception may prove the rule, IF the email in question is going out to a recipient who just completed a big engagement step or transaction, which does seem to be the case in the example First Round cited.
When Garey says, “No one wants to feel cheated or tricked back to your website,” I agree, but that speaks to a larger problem. If it’s a matter of feeling tricked by clicks, then there is something wrong with the email, the content, or the user experience. But emails as an end-unto-themselves is a discussion point to ponder.
At diginomica, we continue to experiment with these types of tactics – check Den’s recent writeup for a peek under our social kimono. We’ve also found, like Watsi, that our most engaged readers have plenty of input left to give us, as long as we give them an easy way to provide it.
The wrap – can enterprises create brand advocates?
Some enterprise readers will rightly question whether they can ever boast the kind of passionate brand advocates a non-profit like Watsi is so good at cultivating. It’s a fair question. Expecting customers to be answering questions on LinkedIn or Quora on your behalf may be a stretch goal for some, an unrealistic fantasy for others. I don’t see how most companies can compete with the emotion Watsi evokes via, for example, a good news email on the patient you sponsored.
But when I read, “You want to have at least one email that’s designed solely to make people’s day.” that’s a far better starting point for an email campaign than the typical “Let’s round up a few promotional pieces, package it as a ‘newsletter’”.
Thinking in terms of “shock and awe,” rather than “how many clicks did we get?” would be an overdue change, at least for my inbox:
“Some brands use a tactic they call “surprise and delay.” Watsi calls it “shock and awe.” Regardless, the point is to make your customers or users feel appreciated when they least suspect it — that’s what creates the most impact. Garey and the founding team wanted to brainstorm the ultimate shock and awe offering. So they delivered a beautiful printed book containing original photography and behind-the-scenes storytelling from its regions of operation to its most faithful donors. “ That type of surprise/delight leads to happy tweets like this one.
Not everything Watsi does will translate to your team. But giving customers a bigger vision they can buy into, and sharing real world stories that reinforce it are great starting points. That advice might sound like a total cliche, but think of it this way: it beats the heck out of the shopworn rewards program that focuses only on “What’s in it for me?”
Or to put it another way, it’s still about “What’s in it for me,” but now it’s about viewing the customer in a bolder way, rather than as a transaction target. People just don’t want to buy, they want to buy in; they want to belong. Even Amazon, the ultimate in “people as transactions,” has some very nice white label overlays that provide a non-profit with revenues for every Amazon purchase.
Garey puts it well:
We realized the closer we can bring people to the work we’re doing on the ground — to the patient, to the hospital providing the care, to the person’s family — the more they will feel like they are having a significant interaction, and that’s the product we deliver for every donation.
Update: Prior to presstime, I heard from Grace Garey. I haven’t spoken to her yet, but I plan to do a follow-up feature on Watsi and get her firsthand take on these issues and more.
Read more on: Analytics planning and data analysisDigital and content marketingSocial 