
Productive?
In much of the first world, economies may be picking up but productivity is either static, or in decline. According to Allan S Blinder, a professor of economics and public affairs at Princeton University in the USA, it has only grown in that country by 0.4% since 2010. The UK figures show similar tendencies.
Writing in the Wall Street Journal on May 15th, he posed an interesting question: has productivity slowed down, as evidence suggests, in relation to the advances in technology?
That question raises others, such as whether this is evidence that the Steel Intensity Curve is in play here, and whether the cloud is starting to play an important role in this, changing the emphasis of what constitutes ‘productivity’?
The latter in particular has not only brought improvements in technology, but also a significant change in its utilisation. And that factor alone may be skewing productivity measurements to the point where they become invalid.
What seems increasingly clear is that traditional measurements of productivity have an increasing mismatch with what IT can deliver and where that delivery is made.
For example, much is made by the IT industry of the beneficial effects of its products and services, but there are signs some developments can be the reverse. Blinder makes some interesting observations on the impact of Twitter and Facebook on productivity – suggesting that they are in fact counter-productive. They certainly can be for many company staff sitting at their desks keeping up with friends and families rather than working.
The corollary, however, is that there is a school of thought which says that allowing staff rest periods, where they can push back and take 10 minutes doing something like Facebook is like letting them have a ‘mental wash’ so that they come back renewed and with clearer thinking. That can be beneficial to productivity and that without it productivity could be even lower as staff sink into a work-induced befuddlement.
In addition, there is a strong argument that, in businesses with a more direct connection to consumers, Facebook and Twitter are very beneficial to productivity by connecting companies more directly to their customers’ thoughts and feelings. Coupled with Big Data and semantic analysis tools, significant improvements in productivity are at least theoretically possible.
The same is true with the use of the intra- and inter-company analogs of Facebook and Twitter that can enrich staff communication and collaboration, especially vertically between the lines of staff and management hierarchy. That too can have a positive impact on productivity.
But this raises an interesting point in the discussion, because what these technologies are adding is foresight on new market opportunities and new/modified/adapted product or technology requirements. That is ‘marketing’ more than productivity, and is therefore hard to measure as a productivity gain or loss when it is not being compared against the numbers associated with an existing, known production or business process.
In other words, is it actually possible to assess productivity gains and losses where the tools being used in the `production’ processes are not only in constant development but also creating new business opportunities that do not map onto past statistics and measurements?
Take the cloud for example. This is going to play a vital role in the development of the notion of productivity, for good or ill (and the jury is out on which it might be). The issue here is that the important cloud developments are unlikely to come from improvements or new developments in technology, where it is possible to say that the application of development X led to productivity gain Y.
Instead it will be the application of the technology (apptech?) by end users that will drive market growth, the growth in output and the reduction in inputs needed. What is more important is likely to be a growing disconnection between the inputs and the outputs. It will not always be possible to tell which output came from what input for it will be hard to enumerate cause and effect across increasingly complex value chains.
For example, productivity in the IT industry is liable to go down over the coming years as markets decline and change.
Steeling ourselves
The Steel Intensity Curve applies here. But there are other changes that inevitably skew the traditional methods of managing productivity.
For example, SaaS – with the likes of Netsuite and Salesforce leading the charge – uses an annuity business model that is bound to change the rules of how productivity is measured. When nothing is being sold and only a service being paid for on subscription, at what point does a SaaS vendor measure output? I guess the only sensible option is on payment of the regular subscription and setting against it inputs measured over the same time period.
But then how do you measure inputs? Would a major development effort made `now’ then have to be amortised over a period? The traditional ways of measuring inputs will be skewed relative to the measurement of outputs, even if taken over a year – unless the contract term was a year or less. It would only be possible to assess the productivity at the end of a contracted term of service provision.
Productivity pulling
And as users get updates and improvements as part of the contract – often at no extra cost – the inputs are likely to skew upwards against constant outputs, pushing `productivity’ down.
So productivity in the IT industry itself may end up looking increasingly sad. But does that matter? The output of the industry is shifting and will increasingly appear as the output of the user industries and businesses. Retailing and financial services are obvious examples of this in practice, and maybe that is the new assessment of productivity which is required.
Blinder refers to observations made by John Fernald of the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco and Robert Gordon of Northwestern University in the USA, that the greatest IT productivity gains came years ago and that recent inventions have `looked puny’ by comparison. This is certainly an example of the Steel Intensity Curve in action, where the gains that ongoing developments bring are increasingly marginal advances.
But it also points to that major change the cloud is bringing with it, where the real `productivity’ will be found in the outputs of the users, not the IT industry. It will be found in how the technology is applied by users, and not the IT vendors themselves. And it may not be easy to tie the two together in any meaningful way.
For example, take the area of Domestic Information Technology (to call it something). This stretches from intelligent light bulbs through to intelligent cities, and is something where it seems fair to offer up the dare – measure the productivity of that.
It may seem a bit more straight forward to measure the productivity of the Industrial Internet and IoT applications, but probably only in a piecemeal fashion. Many of those applications of technology are going to be so complex and inter-locking as to make the task near-impossible.
One technology development that is arguably rather puny in one way, SaaS, may end up being not only a low productivity operation in itself, but also a difficult to measure and possibly low input to a user marketplace that then produces highly profitable outputs in another industry entirely……which raises the question: how do you measure that?
All of this raises the important question of how the application of IT is measured in ways that are meaningful, for traditional productivity measurements are no longer appropriate. Yet ways of measuring its overall value are increasing important, otherwise the only alternative tool with which users can get a feel for the effectiveness of IT is being swayed by marketeers about the `super cool’ nature of the technologies they wave at us.
Productivity – the simple sum of the cost of materials, tools and labour deducted from the money generated by selling the end result – is no longer fit to measure what IT provides across increasingly long and complex value chains. Something new is required.
My take
If politicians can pluck a number out of a hat as the tax rate on the value added to a product or service by each process stage, surely the IT industry can derive a formula to identify and measure the increasingly complex value chains that now come with the application of IT. Without that the IT industry will go the way of information in the Internet age – assumed to be free.

Read more on: Collaboration sharing and digital productivityFuture of workInternet of ThingsProductivity 