
Angry customer? Yeah, I resemble that person – just ask Intuit. At diginomica, we’ve been known to vent spleen (airlines are a frequent victim) as well as document the rare times we can actually use the word “delighted.”
But how do you actually quantify the angry customer’s impact? And what the heck do you do with them? I hold the unpopular view that the answer lies beyond the lazy rhetoric of the so-called “empowered customer.” If the empowered social customer isn’t fiction, it’s limited to industries where meaningful choice is available.
As the only viable Internet Service Provider in my location, Comcast has all the power. My social beefs might be temporarily cathartic, but they matter not. Same with airlines. “United Breaks Guitars” is infamous, but have you seen United’s stock price lately? They’re doing very well, thank you very much, and flying with them is still a study in human misery.
The angry customer – crunching the numbers
In search of better data and better answers, I had a chat with Nick Stein, SVP of Marketing at Vision Critical. Stein also pointed me to some stats on the angry customer which Vision Critical released as an infographic.
I find the data useful, because it quantifies money spent, not spleen vented. As in:

Customers are 3x more likely to tell their friends about a negative experience.
It takes 12 positive experiences to make up for one unresolved negative experience.
80 percent of people will not buy products that have negative reviews.
It takes 10 positive reviews to make up for one negative one.
According to Google, businesses with 3 star reviews or higher get 87 percent of the clicks.

As per the infographic, “$1.3 trillion is the amount up for grabs in the consumer market”. Which gives more umph to these stats:

51 percent of customers have switched to another brand based on a negative experience.
81 percent of customers who switched say the company could have prevented that switch.
“Totally satisfied” customers contribute 14 times more revenue than “somewhat satisfied” customers.
It costs 6-7 times more to obtain a new customer than to keep an existing one.

Social network “engagement” isn’t getting it done
Let’s say we accept that avalanche of stats – what should companies do next? Vision Critical founder Andrew Reid advocates this formula:

Deliver a great customer experience. Know the audience, get consumer feedback and deliver on those preferences.
Have conversations with customers. Create an environment where customers can weigh in on decisions about products and services through a secure, online community.
Provide flawless support. Customers want better customer service, so be sure to support them through their preferred channels.

That works. But I see problems: companies are still struggling to figure out the role of social networks to meet these goals. (e.g. Intuit just “socially engaged” with me in a totally clueless manner about their forced march Quicken and Quickbooks upgrades; we all have reams of such stories). Is it even worth trying to defuse angry customers? If not, how should a company react?
I regaled Stein with my Intuit beefs to see if he would fall for my bait. But Stein frames it differently. By the time someone like me is roasting chits on Twitter, it’s already too late:
In the short term, somebody’s making a lot of noise. I’ve just got to quiet them down now. But that doesn’t really address the root cause of the problem, which is that somehow, in the way that I run my business, I’m doing things that are causing frustration among my customer base. If I can’t ultimately get to the root of it, it’s going to become more and more painful.
That resonates. The issues I have with Intuit are the same as ten years ago – they haven’t learned. Stein points to another issue: not all angry customers are created equal:
At one point social media held a lot of promise. But the challenge companies have faced is that you may have fifty people tell you something is great, and another fifty people tell you something is terrible. Or: there may be that one lone voice out there who is very angry and upset, and you don’t know if that is a voice of reason, a voice that’s going to start an outbreak against my company. Or is that just a lonely crackpot who isn’t really representative of my customer base as a whole?
For the first time in my blogging life, I played the Klout card. As much as I find Klout a putrid concept that destroyed Twitter by turning it into a high school cafeteria (with social status as the trading currency), wouldn’t services like Klout help companies weed out the trolls and the outliers, and engage with the angry customers who are most important to them commercially?
Stein’s response? Perhaps, but only to a point. Vision Critical found that the most vocal customers, however much Klout they might flaunt, are not representative of the customer base as a whole:
The people who are shouting loudest and being the most influential on a social channels may help you from a influence or marketing perspective, but are they really helping you understand what your customer base truly wants? We put out a report last year where we were able to quantify that about eighty-five percent of what you hear on social comes from less than thirty percent of your customers.
There are plenty of your customers who are on social, but who are just lurking there.  It turns out the percentage who are lurking have markedly different behaviors when it comes to how they buy, how they shop, and how they engage with the brands that they are connected to.
The report took it further, asserting that social media analytics as we know and hate use them are fundamentally flawed: “Social media analytics tools don’t capture all social media activity, don’t correctly mirror customer preferences and poorly represent the entire social media audience.” But it was Stein’s next comment that shook things up:
What you’re speaking to Jon – all of these interactions are reactive, right?
Managed communities – an alternative to social “whack-a-mole”
Bingo. Responding to angry customers is a form a whack-a-mole. So what’s the alternative? Back to Reid’s three pro-active steps – in particular, “Create an environment where customers can weigh in on decisions about products and services through a secure, online community.” Vision Critical’s version of this is called “Insight Communities.” Their customers can spin up communities from small to substantial – groups which strike me as a combination of classic online communities and instant focus groups.
Including loyal/influential customers should reduce the whack-a-mole by incorporating customer feedback prior to making massive PR and product mistakes. As a former Salesforce employee, Stein sees the value of such a platform, but he believes that companies need community interaction beyond CRM, and yes, even beyond that trendy notion of “experiences”:
It’s not just about creating a meaningful experience for your customers – it’s actually learning from them, using your customer as a valuable input as you think about a new product you want to develop or a new service you want to roll out. Technology like Salesforce is very helpful when it comes to aggregating and understanding a database of who your actual customers are. But that only takes you part of the way.
Stein suggests using community groups to organize everything from early adopters to CEO peers. You could have a group of 1,000 brand advocates to sense test new campaigns or features. Or you could organize a group that is more skeptical of your brand, or that represents an accurate cross-section or demographic segment.
The logic of conducting private conversations with key constituents seems obvious, but for companies heading in this direction, Stein cautions against the stale route of one-way surveys:
A big thing we’ve tried to do with our software is create more of an on-going level of engagement. Typically when companies want this kind of feedback, they send out a survey to their customers. It’s very much a one-way street. For the respondent, the experience is more like, “I’m going to reach out to you randomly, ask you a bunch of questions, and expect you to respond.”
It’s a very dehumanizing, one-off sort of experience. Our philosophy is: if we can actually get to know you over time, the quality of feedback  is going to be much greater, because you feel a sense of connection, a sense of belonging.
Final thoughts
Stein points to a familiar bellwether, Apple,  as a company that has succeeded in creating a vast emotional connection with their customer base. He believes a focus on long-term customer relationships via disciplined community engagement can help companies accomplish something similar, by using the feedback gained to better anticipate demand. A happy byproduct? Less angry/disappointed customers.
There’s no doubt that the angry customer can hurt a company, if not on social channels, than with their wallets. At press time, Den Howlett forwarded a report on British retailer Tesco’s massive earnings loss. Tesco’s got loads of problems, but one of them is clearly protestors who have used social channels to organize.
Stein also cited a different danger: the disruptive startup. Example: one of the biggest taxi owners in New York City, who recently requested a government bail-out, partially due to the pressure Uber is putting on his business. Stein:  “Our large enterprise customers are telling us, ‘I don’t want to be the next New York Taxi Commission. I have to figure out what my customers really want today, so I can adapt how I operate as a business.”
It’s a fair point – the “empowered startup” may be a more urgent motivation to invest in communities than the empowered customer. Though as always, it’s how the ideas are surfaced and implemented that counts. I’ve seen “ideation” type projects fall flat not for bad community ideas, but for appalling follow-through.
I’m still not swayed that companies are beholden to the social customer. But I am convinced it’s a huge risk to depend on flawed social networks to manage such relationships. As Den just posted in Can you own your community or do the big social networks own it all?, there is a persuasive case that owned communities are worth pursuing – despite their risks.
Stein would certainly agree. None of that will stop me from giving Comcast a hard time on Twitter tomorrow. But what Stein is advocating might avoid a next generation of chip-on-shoulder types from airing it out. Even the most curmudgeonly grouch is just a customer who once wanted to be delighted and, perhaps on some unforeseen day, might be delighted again.

Image credit: aggressive man screaming at laptop © ArtFamily – Fotolia.com.
Disclosure: diginomica has no financial ties to Vision Critical – their PR team aided in the interview logistics. Salesforce.com is a diginomica premier partner.
Read more on: Digital and content marketingSocial 