
Over the past year, Verizon has spent around $9 billion on a content strategy that’s included the takeover of AOL, partnerships with Hearst and AwesomenessTV and, of course, the ongoing acquisition of Yahoo!
With the latter still trundling through its various regulatory approval processes, some insight into the telco’s plans for its digital media and content play came from AOL CEO Tim Armstrong last week during an appearance at the  Bank of America Merrill Lynch 2016 Media, Communications & Entertainment Conference. 
Armstrong began by emphasising that the media and video strategy for Verizon is one that will be played out on a global stage and that size will matter here, noting that when the Yahoo! assets are put together with AOL, the resulting combo essentially has over a billion consumers: 

From a macro standpoint, I think, we’re in the right industry. Verizon’s got a serious set of assets and serious set of data to bring to the table overall. Consumers are going to go from analog to digital and you will assume that video consumption is going to override tech consumption and those things, which we believe and the statistics period that out.
You have a near-term opportunity over the next four to five years of about $90 billion of new market opportunity, just in mobile and mobile video alone. So, if you woke up today and said, ‘Hey, the size of this total pie there’s going to be 3.5 billion more consumers that could connect to this network, so there will be 7 billion people connected by the early 2020s. There’s a $90 billion near-term opportunity.

Overall, Verizon is in a very good position to grow a sizeable business, Armstrong added, arguing that there is a very small handful of companies that actually have the tech and the scale to compete in the new content and media landscape:

When you talk about our video strategy at a global basis in the next couple of years, we should have one of the top five global video properties that has opportunity to reach billions of consumers. You have a fertile analog-to-digital marketplace behind it, where there’s $600 billion of early spending that has to go from analog-to-digital. And we have the resources tools and talent to do it.
So, I think, our media and video strategy is exactly where the kind of the world is going right now. And I think we’d be really disappointed if we didn’t capture a huge amount of value for Verizon in that.

The easiest way to think about this is around supply and demand for technologies for advertising, argued Armstrong: 

On the supply side, we work with many of the largest brand publishers in the world. What we bring to them is essentially the capability to do creation, distribution, and monetization of content on their properties and help them get to other properties as well. That is a super sophisticated supply side marketplace that does monetization yield management for them.
So every time a publisher creates content, we offer them the ability to get the highest marginal dollar for that – for their creation overall. 
On the demand side, we bring tools to clients and agencies that are essentially self-service that allow them to have one front-end plug in and look at the world of advertising that target bid and measure their advertising.

Measurements
Armstrong has a clear idea of the metrics that will be used to measure success, such as the monthly active users engaged on these platforms and the daily ad value that run through systems against those monthly active users?  He sees two types of monthly active users – the ones ‘owned’ directly though AOL and other Verizon properties and the ones accessed via the third party relationship with Microsoft for display advertising. 
One thing Armstrong doesn’t want to do is just copy Facebook and Google’s strategies: 

We were successful at AOL, because we chose a very clear gap in the market, where there was opportunity and we invested against it. I believe there’s a gap in the market that’s bigger than we’ve got AOL. With Google, it’s search and Facebook is social. I think we will be the brand company that essentially builds brands, builds consumer brands, but also on the B2B side helps other people build their brands.

There’s a gap in the market in two places, he argued: 

On the consumer side, you’re having consumers basically connected 24/7, where they’re ingesting more media than they’ve ever ingested overall and that pie is growing. Most of the companies that are going to struggle to go to analog-to digital to provide the content brands to people. So we believe there’s a gap for us to provide consumer content brands out in the world, both on our platforms and other people’s platforms – Snapchat, Facebook, YouTube,  Apple, we partner with all those people today.
And then the second gap is on the monetization. If you are in the advertising business and you follow what Google and what Facebook do…first of all, both of those companies are executing very well and they are very, very, very great competitors overall. I think it’s something we aspire to get to the same level of output that they are and they’re doing a great job.
But in the marketplace right now, brands have really three things they’re concerned about with advertisers. One is building a brand, so they can keep pricing, value, and things like that; the second is scaled ROI; and the third is, innovation.

This is where Verizon will differ, says Armstrong: 

Facebook and Google systems have very specific ways they go after those needs from customers. What we’re building, and have built is a different way to go after those needs and a lot of it is built around actually brands. When you talk to customers who have – are in brand pressure position, there’s a lot of people are in the retail channels, auto channel, those things.
We’re coming to them with a different set of metrics, different set of data, and different set of targeting criteria around content. And that allows us to have a differentiated place in the marketplace. 
And then number two is, in a lot of cases, where search and social have gotten tremendous traction, and they’ve done a very good job with that overall, a lot of the dollars have lagged behind or in this brand space. That’s where we’re working on a number of things that I think, are super innovative, that will be done at the end of this year and into 2017, that will allow us to kind of push new types of metrics and opportunities to those customers overall. 

There are also co-existence opportunities for Verizon with Facebook and Google, he adds: 

There are places where we are going to be number one. For instance, on Facebook, we’re generally the largest distributor of news service on Facebook. So Facebook may have the number one platform, but we want to be the number one news provider on that platform and with ourselves.

Armstrong is also critical of the ‘anything-but-Facebook-and-Google’ mindset: 

Because we partner with Google and Facebook and because we partner with many people in that food chain better in the secondary tier, we can bring real value to customers that Google and Facebook frankly probably don’t want to.
Their businesses are big and strong enough that they basically have their essentially walled garden and this is the value they produce. We’re in a different position. So we tend to do a lot more open partnerships, where we’re going to actually increase customers, data capabilities, their media capabilities, and their platform capabilities overall.

All of this means that Verizon can harbor Olympian ambitions: 

We may be in the third position now. And by the way, the third position in the We are not shooting for the bronze medal, but if out of the gates we are at bronze medal position, and we can work our way to Olympic gold medal, that’s what we’ll do. I think it comes down to being really focused and knowing what we’re going to do. 

My take
Some bold claims and certainly no shortage of ambition here. Execution will be a critical success factor here as will market perception. Creating a strong and credible differentiation between Verizon and the Google/Facebook axis will be a particular challenge. 
Image credit - Freeimages.com Read more on: Collaboration sharing and digital productivityCRM and customer experienceDigital and content marketingRetail e-commerce and the omni-channelUX and application design 