
The Institute for Government has made a number of recommendations in a new report, for how Britain could improve the management of digital government. The influential think tank has created a list of sensible suggestions, which vary from applying standards more deeply to appointing a Minister for Digital Government.
The report comes at a time when there is a great deal of uncertainty around the future of digital government. On one hand this is as a result of resistance to change and a significant amount of leadership change and disruption within the Government Digital Service. On the other hand, the political climate is so focused on Brexit that the Civil Service is having to allocate more time and resources to the challenge of leaving the EU.
However, we can’t become complacent and assume that the progress made (the UK ranks number one on the UN’s e-government score board) is job done. It’s not. And there are improvements that could be made.
One criticism of the plans and progress around digital government that has been consistently made in recent years is that much of the work done thus far is essentially ‘lipstick on a pig’ – i.e. a front end digital service, whilst the back-end remains unchanged. If the government wants to see the benefits of digital, it needs to rethink its business models.
The report states:
The reach of the internet creates economies of scale, so a service can be run by few and used by many and the networks created by those services become more valuable the more people use them. In this environment, where new services and companies can rapidly evolve.
These changes are relevant to the Government because it should mimic the way services are provided to citizens and how citizens interact with each other and with government, because it should learn from the innovation that the digital age has brought to organisations, and because it needs to understand and manage the market for digital services and products. To do these things effectively and securely, the existing patchwork of standards across government and the public sector will need to be replaced by clearer and more extensive standards, applied more decisively.
More APIs
The Institute for Government’s report is wide ranging and is worth reading in full. However, one of the main recommendations I believe to be particularly interesting and hasn’t had much discussion or analysis is the government’s use of APIs. More needs to be done in this area if the government is to rethink its business models to suit the digital age.
The Institute for Government acknowledges that the likes of Apple, Facebook, Google and Microsoft build core platforms, which are surrounded by a range of services provided by other companies – the most obvious examples being the App Store and Google Play. The companies don’t have to manage what services are created, as the users decide.
Instead they provide access to the platform under certain conditions using open APIs, which provide publicly available standard connections, the report reads.
HMRC has been doing this for years, opening up its systems so that third party software providers can help people and companies manage their tax more effectively. However, broad use cases and adoption isn’t being seen and this is something that the government needs to figure out, as the benefits can be great. The report states:
The large suppliers to businesses have started to follow the platform model adopted by consumer companies. Rival API standards and other support to software developers are among the instruments of this competition, and help to give the platforms powerful market positions.
Building a platform on the internet can be expensive, but once it is built, the cost of each additional user is low. This has allowed WhatsApp, for example, to have 900 million users while employing only 50 engineers. This cost structure and the availability of services in ‘the cloud’ (renting access to other people’s computers) makes infrastructure and software a variable rather than fixed cost, reducing the risk of procuring new systems.
However, to improve the way that government operates it needs to focus more on its use of private APIs, which allow for the reuse of services and data across government. The Government Digital Service isn’t ignoring this – it has for a long time been talking about a platform approach and reusable components – but I do feel like the API discussion has been lacking.
The importance of private APIs within an organisation is highlighted by the report. It states:
Inside organisations, information, which previously travelled mainly up and down management chains, can be shared more widely using new collaboration tools. Services previously provided inside companies can now be contracted out, and procurement that previously relied on a small group of known suppliers can now use a marketplace that brings together millions of suppliers and customers.
The internal units of large organisations can communicate with each other in standard ways, using private APIs (which, in contrast to open APIs, are only used inside the organisation) to bring the benefits of the internet to internal processes. Amazon started this early: in 2002 its Chief Executive, Jeff Bezos, is reported to have told employees to work in this way, or they would be fired.
The Institute for Government notes that “there has been less progress in using private APIs inside government” and that if they were used more widely, government would operate more effectively and flexibly, so new services could be built and adapted rapidly. It adds:
In these systems, management information could be provided automatically in dashboards that update in real time rather than – as is often the case at present – downloaded onto a spreadsheet, turned into charts and a slide pack, and shared by email.
GDS’s cross-government components – such as GOV.UK Notify, which alerts people on the progress of an application for a government service, and GOV.UK Pay, which takes payments from users of government services – do use APIs to connect with existing services. But there are only limited examples.
Given the scale of its operations, the change in government’s internal processes is at least as important as opening services and data to citizens. Government has not set standards for private or open APIs, and there is no systematic way of sharing APIs across the public sector. This wastes resources and reduces interoperability.
The report highlights that the use of APIs is suggested, not required. And that producing standards for APIs will help to improve this and make the outcomes a reality. It urges GDS to curate, rather than impose, standards. And should begin by creating a catalogue of APIs currently in use, with owners and interested communities. It adds:
Over time, GDS should identify successful APIs that are generally useful across government and start to require their use by government and vendors.
GDS should create a store for Application Programming Interfaces (APIs) for the public sector that encourages reuse and supports the development of API standards.
Challenges with the Digital Marketplace
Whilst for me the API discussion in the report is the most pertinent, there is also an interesting section on the government’s Digital Marketplace. The Digital Marketplace – which incorporates a number of frameworks, including the G-Cloud – aims to make it easier for buyers across government to purchase commoditised services and specialist skills. It’s aim is to provide a transparent insight into the market for digital services, putting the power in the hands of the buyer.
And in many ways it has been a great success, with almost £2 billion having been spent through the frameworks in just a few short years, with many of the suppliers listed being SMEs.
However, the Institute for Government rightly notes that the Marketplace isn’t perfect and more could be improved in a number of ways. It states:
We found that for those who are familiar with the Digital Marketplace, its rigidity is frustrating. It is not run like a service and there is little calibration for different uses (for example, repeated procurement, focused contracts). It has not yet developed features such as one-click purchasing.
We also heard concerns about the Digital Marketplace’s quality control. One vendor told us that when it started, the Digital Marketplace felt like a catalogue of assured products; as it has grown, it has lost this element of quality assurance.
There has been uncertainty about the purpose of the DOS (Digital Outcomes and Specialists) framework, with people ‘gaming the system’ to get around its requirements, or lacking understanding of how to use it.
There are also examples of inappropriate criteria for tender, such as passing Digital Service Standard requirements to vendors – the Service Standard needs to be owned by the department or public body – or requiring a vendor to have worked with the tendering organisation for three years, thereby excluding new market entrants.
We also heard concerns from vendors that government is set up to pay fixed amounts for software, rather than paying a variable amount based on the number of people who use it, because procurement and finance teams prefer to know in advance how much a service will cost. One vendor suggested that this means government is “paying for the cost of failure, not success”.
My take
A really extensive and useful report from The Institute for Government – one that I will use as a resource over the coming months. However, one point I think the report missed was that whilst the government should be taking advantage of the business models that the internet provides, it also needs to recognise that this means a very different looking Civil Service and we need to prepare for that change. Ultimately, if government can look like an internet company, that means far fewer people required at the back end (maybe). What happens to all those people? If we want to keep the amount of people working in the Civil Service at a similar level to what we have now, what will those people be doing going forward? Plans need to made for this too.
Image credit - Images free for commercial use Read more on: CentralDigital government and public services

