
A little less than 18 months ago, Phil Wainewright said this of application monitoring and analytics vendor AppDynamics:
With digital becoming increasingly important to business and an explosion in the mobile and ecommerce applications that drive digital engagement, it doesn’t seem unrealistic to portray ‘application intelligence’ as an important new category. It remains to be seen whether AppDynamics can seize the crown as its leader, but it has made solid progress so far. Definitely one to watch.
Fast forward to today and much has changed.

First, the company recently added $158 million in funding for a total of $315 million since its founding in 2008.
Second, the company’s application portfolio has expanded dramatically including deep database support for MongoDB, massive scalability and improved analytics.
Third, AppDynamics has entered into or expanded key partnerships with Accenture, Microsoft, AWS and Red Hat – among others.
Fourth, the customer portfolio has moved well beyond consumer retail where it made its bones, to financial services and government.
Finally, and perhaps most significantly, founder Jyoti Bansal has stepped back from the CEO role to concentrate on product vision and strategy. He was replaced by David Wadwhani, who also takes on the president’s role.

Wadhwani is an interesting choice. He comes from Adobe where he led the transformation of its lighthouse products Photoshop, Lightroom etc from boxed product stacked in stores to subscription pricing. I’ve lived through that transformation as a customer and it was far from plain sailing.
Wadhwani has the very rare experience of successfully implementing business model transformation as part of a genuine digital transformation inside an iconic company that, at the time, was going nowhere, but which has since seen its fortunes improve dramatically.
I will talk separately about why Wadhwani is a critical choice in a supplementary article but for now, I want to concentrate on digital transformation as the central theme for AppSphere 2015.
Digital transformation front and center
“Digital transformation” is a fuzzy buzzphrase that has been thrown around at just about every conference I’ve attended this fall. The moment I hear the phrase I groan. Yet hearing it from a combination of customers, partners and AppDynamics leadership at the company’s AppSphere event sends an important message the enterprise market will likely get, albeit not necessarily in a direct manner.
The AppSphere keynote was larded with the DT phrase with Wadhwani endeavoring to get developers interested by saying:
Virtually every company is wrestling with the challenges and opportunities of digital transformation…A disproportionate amount of that burden is going to fall on you (IT.)…Digital is about expanding the business.
The Barclaycard experience
It’s a nicely strung together set of arguments in the context of a belief that the future of business lies on software But it was when Peter Gott, head of Barclaycard technology delivery at Barclays discussed the importance of a changed view of what IT is really about in today’s world that it takes on meaning.
For those unfamiliar, Barclaycard is the UK’s leading payment card provider and has been at the forefront of chip and pin and contactless payment. Like many others in the financial services business, it is under a multitude of threats in an environment where the notion of ‘payment’ is changing. The shift to mobile is one example. Along the way, this has shifted the focus away from service delivery excellence in the form of Six Sigma, SLA delivery and so on to an effort at parsing those necessary quality related topics to the customer experience.
Many companies in many industries are suffering through the pain of understanding what the customer experience really means. It gets more difficult when terms like DevOps come into play because you want to deliver products that help your customers make the changes they need to make but deliver in very rapid fashion….it changes the conversations to one that’s much more about business enablement play.
Gott’s remit is to get in front of the user experience so that when things go wrong, they can be identified and remediated as quickly as possible and preferably before the events impact the customer. Alongside, Barclays is moving to self service cloud for non-production build out, ramping up microservices in lieu of monolithic applications but crucially, enabling collaboration for DevOps and continuous delivery models.
These changes introduce the need to implement systems like AppDynamics in order to predictably see what is happening and allow for self healing systems. For Barclays, and others in the financial services world, this is the reality of digital transformation. It’s all about managing massive change in the way IT provides services to the business, how those services have to be customer outcome based and what that means for delivery.
Predictive or preventative analytics
During the keynote, the company demonstrated a number of intelligence capabilities including dashboards, the ability to easily query results, the ability to trace problem areas and so on. This is the bread and butter of modern application performance management systems.
Going back to Wainewright’s call on this topic where he argued for application intelligence as a category, I was interested in discovering where this goes. The demos were as compelling as any I have seen but once again, I was left with that ‘show me the problem’ question. It was one I put to Bansal in a later conversation:
Of course we can take you directly to the problem area and you can quickly see how that might be impacting performance but we know that it is important to trace all the steps from the perspective of what the customer was doing that really matters.
Does this mean that over time, AppDynamics can be used to understand patterns of activity that allow for predictive analysis? Bansal is less than convinced. He argues that as an industry, we’ve been looking at predictive for many years but have not really come up with a good way of expressing that in useful terms. I’m not so sure but I am more convinced by the argument that end to end application performance analysis can form a solid basis for taking preventative measures.
Tying it together
In another presentation, DigitasLBI talked about a massive Renault-Nissan Alliance project that clearly demonstrated value delivery at scale in a complex environment. Once again, this was in the context of a large scale transformation. The point of interest here was the relative rates of adoption for AppDynamics as a change enabler and the challenges of getting the messaging around value right for individual constituencies.
When you take all these discussions and conversations together, the notion that AppDynamics can be a key enabler for transformation starts to make sense. The company is very specific about the journey as one that starts with the customer experience, a common refrain in retail, and one that is percolating across many industries.
In my executive conversations I kept coming back to the same theme: the potential or reality of commercial pain often drives change. But then I also see situations where super smart developers, who are curious about the impact they have on business, as change agents. There is little or no disagreement on that aspect. Where I think the bigger problem lays is in the communications from the CEO down into the L2/L3 tiers on the business side. This is a topic to which I will return, based upon my conversation with Wadhwani.
In the meantime, I came away impressed with the way AppDynamics is thinking for the very large businesses it is targeting. There is a huge market to tap and all the indications are that AppDynamics is well placed and well funded to keep the rate of innovation and acceleration going for some years to come.
Disclosure: AppDynamics covered most of my travel costs for attending AppSphere 2015.
Read more on: CRM and customer experienceDevOps NoSQL and the open source stackDigital transformation - frictionless enterprise 