
A busy day in the world of e-books as Apple stared to compensate customers three years after it was caught out conspiring to fix prices and Barnes & Noble continued to bleed red ink over its balance sheet.
Apple’s problems relate to accusations that the firm conspired with five major publishers to artificially bump up the cost of e-books. The publishers were Penguin Group, Holtzbrinck Publishers, Hachette Book Group, HarperCollins, and Simon & Schuster.
Thirty-three US states took action against Apple. Apple is now paying out $400 million in compensation to customers and an additional $50 million in litigation fees. The amounts received by each customer will be based on the number of E-books purchased. Customers will get $6.93 for each E-book purchased while the book was on the New York Times bestseller list, and $1.57 for all other books.
Customers who purchased e-books through Sony or Google will receive checks in the pots, while those who purchased e-books through Amazon, Apple, Barnes & Noble, or Kobo will automatically receive credits in their accounts.
The case and the payouts have been going on for several years. Apple was ordered to pay $400 million in compensation after the United States Supreme Court denied a request to review the decision of a lower court that found Apple violated antitrust laws. Meanwhile the five publishers paid out $166 million around 2014 before the case got to trial.
B&N red ink
If you purchased an e-book for Barnes & Noble’s Nook reader, you could be in for a payment, which is about the only bit of good news that that company could rustle up yesterday as it turned in its 8th consecutive quarter of profit and revenue decline.
The company’s net loss widened to $30.6 million for the quarter ended April 30 from $19.4 million a year earlier, while revenue fell 3.7% to $876.7 million. Sales in the Nook business fell 20% in the quarter as the company shut its Nook UK, app and video businesses.
The firm is now looking to expand its loyalty program, which charges customers a $25 annual membership to get discounts on books and other products, and free shipping on online orders. It also plans to open four “concept” stores later this year.
Chief Executive Ron Boire said:
As we look ahead to fiscal 2017 and beyond, we are focusing on executing a number of initiatives to grow bookstore and online sales, reduce retail and Nook expenses and grow our membership base. We believe our marketing, merchandising and membership initiatives will lead to increased traffic and conversion in our stores.
Barnes & Noble isn’t the only major book retailer to admit defeat on the e-books front. Last month Waterstones in the UK decided it was giving up as well. Existing customers will receive emailed instructions from 14 July on how to transfer their online library across to Japanese e-book specialist Kobo, while new customers will be sent to Kobo by default.
Waterstones had been one of the first book stores to push digtial books when it started selling Sony e-readers back in 2008. It tried to launch its own device, but pulled out of selling those last October.
According to Nielsen Research, consumer e-book sales fell by 11% last year, while physical book sales increased.
Meanwhile in Europe, e-books could soon be treated the same as printed books in libraries after Maciej Szpunar, advocate general to the Court of Justice of the European Union (CJEU), published an opinion that libraries should be allowed to lend e-books so long as the author is fairly compensated.
Image credit - Barnes & Noble Read more on: Retail e-commerce and the omni-channel 