
Performance measuring
Following its being hived off from Compuware, once the latter had become part of the Thoma Bravo equity management group, developments at Dynatrace indicate the possibilities that can emerge from being within such an environment – not only in product or service terms, but also as restructured businesses.
In this case, according to Dynatrace CEO John van Siclen, the results have fallen into both camps. There are product developments in the Application Performance Management (APM) space, while in the business restructuring camp Thoma Bravo has not only separated the company from Compuware, but has now grafted on another APM player, Keynote, that is already on its books.
Keynote had two businesses that were quite independent. One was a telecommunication testing company, and the other an APM offering. Thoma Bravo has merged the APM half into Dynatrace while setting up the other piece as a separate entity called Sigos. Van Siclen sees this as a good example of the strength of the private equity approach to managing businesses:
There’s a piece in the portfolio that logically fits with something else, but another piece that wanted to be independent, and they had that ability to make those kinds of moves, without having to do it in the public market.
There is obviously the moot point as to whether a `dictator’ is better than a marketplace as owners of businesses, though if the dictator is benign the chances are it has a much better view of not only where the money is but also, when compared to the short-termism of the marketplace, of where it will be in a few years time.
Performance is a non-technical issue
This is important when the marketplace is changing fast, argues Van Siclen:
What we found in the last couple of years, by visiting with some of our more innovative customers, is that their world is changing from wanting tooling or performance management, to more of a fabric that underpins how they build and innovate and expand their application portfolio. They have all become digital businesses.
And their customers’ customers have largely become digital as well. Businesses used to build a new application that would be rolled out to a few thousand, possibly 10,000 and, rarely, 100,000 users. he adds:
Today we roll out applications, built on frameworks we hardly even know, and try to make them scale for 10,000,000 people. So we provide visibility for the performance side of that development effort, which has been for years the blind spot.
The need now is to create an environment in which a business manager, particularly the CMO these days, can observe what is happening in business terms, such as conversion rates. And if they notice it is dropping, they need a system which can seamlessly transition their business-related enquiry – why has that happened? – into a technical enquiry for the Development or Operations team.
This capability has recently emerged from Dynatrace as the first release of what they are calling the Customer Experience Cockpit. Aimed initially at least at the retail market, this is designed to give business users actionable insight into what their customers are doing, in real time.
Using graphics, the goal is to provide business managers with a real time view of users’ actions across channels, device and connection types and the user experience being delivered, giving a holistic view into individual users’ end-to-end experience, and a faster response to the changing user demands. Van Siclen explains:
All a business person has to do, when they see an anomaly, is click on an icon that captures the underlying data set that’s going on at that moment. They just click on it, it gives the URL and they just fire that off to Operations. The business guys just click the button, grab it and say `could you just take a look, it looks like something is going on’.
It’s that ‘one version of the truth’ thing again
One of the key features here, according to van Siclen, is that all sides of this process are using the same single source of transaction data, whether that is the business manager, operations, or the apps development team. He suggests that, with other approaches to this issue, each team has its own applications and its own version of the dataset.
The goal
He claims that having this consistent set of information across both business and technology sides means that problems can be identified and resolved in minutes rather than in days or weeks. And there is often little need to report back to the business manager. That is likely to only occur when a significant change in user interactions is identified and new business approaches and processes may be required. Otherwise, a tech issue gets resolved, a bug gets fixed, and the business manager see the results coming back to expected levels:
The results are the results, and business guys are going to look and go are my conversion rates coming back and go, oh yeah my conversion rates are coming back, what you did must have worked. That’s sort of the dialogue that I’ve heard. We hide, for those stakeholders, the complexity of the plumbing view which we leave to Operations and Development.
It is more about the business performance of the application, rather than the technical speed of a transaction. You know you say `do you want business performance or do you want application performance’, and the answer is yes. That’s the change that we’re making, shifting the value proposition of APM up another level to be relevant not only to the Ops and Dev, but also to the business.
My take
This is another example of how technology companies are learning where the real value of their technology lies and who the real customers are – and it’s not selling ‘technology’ to techies.
Read more on: Analytics planning and data analysisCloud ERP financials and supply chainDevOps NoSQL and the open source stackInfrastructure 