
No more home sharing
So now that three months of free Apple Music is available and Taylor Swift is getting paid, the next big question is how Apple will convince the Macolytes to cough up cash every month when the trial period ends.
You might feel you’ve been given an unwelcome clue to that if you’ve upgraded to the iOS 8.4 update, which you had to do to get Apple Music at all, and found something missing.
That’s because if you did update, you’ll suddenly have discovered that Home Sharing, a feature in place since iOS 4.3 back in 2011, no longer works.
Home Sharing allowed you to stream your local iTunes music library from your computer to iOS devices on the same network. It’s now listed in the iOS 8.4 support notes as “not currently available”.
Does that mean it might become available again? Who knows? (You can still stream video and audio via an AppleTV box.)
Take your pick
While many will start to look for third party fixes to address this ripped-away functionality, Apple will be counting on others deciding that the easiest solution will be to sign up for the Apple Music Family Plan at $14.99. That will give you full access to the Apple music catalog for up to 6 people as well as song caching for offline listening.
(That $14.99 converts to £14.99 in the UK or €14.99 in the rest of Europe, based on Apple’s currency exchange rates! So if you’re a non-US user, you’re going to be paying more, as usual. Sigh.)
Helpfully your free trial will just sign up for a membership subscription at the end of the three months. If you’re not so keen on that idea, you can disable Apple’s auto-renew function by going to your profile, choosing “View Apple ID”, then logging in and going to Subscriptions > Manage > Your Membership and switching off the auto-renew function.
Is this just a cynical ploy to strong arm users into paying up? Perhaps. That’s certainly an obvious interpretation. But as 9to5mac.com points out, there is perhaps a more generous one:
It’s entirely possible that Apple doesn’t have the rights to allow content obtained via Apple Music to be streamed over WiFi like Home Sharing requires.
Reactions
While there’s a lot riding on Apple Music, things didn’t get off to a great start yesterday as users found that they needed to upgrade to iTunes 12.2. Just one problem, as many on Twitter noted:

Once that little glitch was overcome, reaction on social media was invitably mixed from users and analysts alike.


Still, according to Futuresource Consulting, the launch of Apple Music will lead to a significant increase in streaming music subscriptions which it reckons will make up at least one third of total global consumer music spend by 2016.
Futuresource’s lead entertainment analyst David Sidebottom says:
The launch of Apple music is another part of the audio renaissance we are currently witnessing. It is unprecedented, making its success difficult to predict, however the service could potentially hit tens of millions of users almost instantly, and many users will likely be drawn by the three-month free trial period.
Inevitably Apple’s spin on the launch took an artistic angle with Eddy Cue, Apple’s senior vice president of Internet software and services, declaring:
We love music, and the new Apple Music service puts an incredible experience at every fan’s fingertips.
But Piper Jaffray’s Apple watcher Gene Munster reminded everyone that this is a pragmatic business venture driven by specific motivations.
Noting that even if Apple increases its subscriber base to match Spotify’s, it would add less than one percent to Apple’s revenue in 2016 but if Apple Music takes off, the knock-on effect will be to encourage more iPhone purchases.
As those still account for over half of Apple’s total revenues, that’s a big incentive to succeed:
Apple Music matters because music broadly is fundamental to the mobile phone experience. By having a compelling music experience, the hope is Apple will sell more iPhones.
My take
Initial impressions of Apple Music – solid first release, some work to do in places. Is it enough to make me opt for this over Spotify? Come back to me on that one in a couple of weeks. But in the meantime, I’ve been in and switched off auto-renewal!
As for the ‘rebirth of DRM’ home sharing decision, whatever the real reason, Apple’s lack of upfront candor around this leaves a nasty taste in the mouth and a lot of questions for Eddy Cue and chums to answer. A bad PR move at any rate.
Read more on: CRM and customer experienceDigital and content marketinge-commerceMobile 