
President Obama
If President Barack Obama went to the SXSW festival to inspire the tech-savvy to get involved with the digital transformation of civic engagement, then he may have succeeded; if he went to win over the tech industry to the government’s view on encryption, then he certainly failed.
That’s unfortunate, because the former was by far the more important aspect of his Q&A, but was, inevitably, also almost completely overshadowed as soon as the stand-off between Apple and the FBI entered the conversation.
Let’s get that bit over and done with first. The President had some good soundbites, such as:
We can’t fetishize our phones above every other value.
Then again, he had some rather daft ones as well, such as:
If the government can’t get in, then everybody is walking around with a Swiss Bank account in their pocket.
He called for the audience not to take what he called an “absolutist view” of the issue:
Before smartphones were invented… if there is probable cause to think you abducted a child or are engaging in a terrorist plot, law enforcement can appear at your doorstep [use a] warrant to search your home and rifle through your underwear to see if there’s any evidence of wrongdoing. And we agreed on that because just like all of our other rights, there are going to be some constraints that we impose to ensure that we are safe, secure and living in a civilized society.
If it was technologically possible to make an impenetrable device where there’s no door at all, then how do we apprehend the child pornographer? How do we disrupt a terrorist plot? How do we even do a simple thing like tax enforcement? If government can’t get in, then everyone’s walking around with a Swiss bank account in their pocket. There has to be some concession to get into that information somewhere.
He added:
How do we create a system where the encryption is as strong as possible, the key is as secure as possible, it is accessible by the smallest number of people for a subset of issues that we agree are important?
An implicit warning was issued to the tech industry that it needs to find a compromise if it is to avoid Congress rushing through badly-thought out legislation by itself:
What you’ll find is after something really bad happens, the politics of this will swing and we’ll become sloppy, and rushed, and it will go through congress in ways that have not been thought through. And then you really will have a danger to our civil liberties because the people who understand this best, and who care most about privacy and our civil liberties, have disengaged.
In the end though, no-one’s view of the encryption row was likely to be swayed one way or the other by Obama’s comments. Breaking down the debate crudely, if you were pro-Apple before, you were still pro-Apple afterwards; if you were pro-FBI before, ditto.
Transformative planning
The encryption debate inevitably dominated the headlines afterwards, but in fact the President’s appearance at SXSW was in the main a rallying cry for the tech industry to support initiatives to improve civic life in the USA. He said:
We are at a moment in history where technology, globalization, our economy is changing so fast. And this gathering, South by Southwest, brings together people who are at the cutting-edge of those changes. Those changes offer us enormous opportunities but also are very disruptive and unsettling. They empower individuals to do things that they could have never dreamed of before, but they also empower folks who are very dangerous to spread dangerous messages.
And part of my challenge since I’ve been President is trying to find ways in which our government can be a part of the positive change that’s taking place and can help convene and catalyze folks in the private sector and the non-profit sector to be part of the broader civic community in tackling some of our biggest challenges.
He identified three key initiatives that he said reflected the role of technology in today’s society, beginning with the digital transformation of government to make it easier for citizens to interact with agencies:
Across agencies, we’re interacting every day with our government, and the question is, how do we make that work better? Because an anti-government mentality grows if people feel frustrated because they’re not getting good service.
Next up was the use of new technologies to tackle problems, such as finding cures for diseases:
There’s incredible research taking place all around the country, but we haven’t gathered all that data together to make sure that the whole is greater than the sum of its parts.
Finally, Obama touched on using technology to encourage citizens to get involved in society more:
We want to make sure that we’re using big data, analytics, technology to make civic participation easier. Increasing voting rights and making sure that people are informed about who they’re voting for and why they’re voting. Making sure that community organizations or activists are able to meet and help to shape our society in new ways.
Voting is a major concern for US society, he argued:
We’re the only advanced democracy in the world that makes it harder for people to vote. We take enormous pride in the fact that we are the world’s oldest continuous democracy, and yet we systematically put up barriers and make it as hard as possible for our citizens to vote. It is much easier to order pizza or a trip than it is for you to exercise the single most important task in a democracy, and that is for you to select who is going to represent you in government.
One of the things that we’re doing is engaging folks who are already doing interesting work in the online space, how can we create safe, secure, smart systems for people to be able to vote much easier online, and what are the technologies to help people get aware of what they’re voting about, who they’re voting for.
The irony that this conversation took place in Texas, the state with the worst voting record in the US, was not lost on Obama. In Texas, citizens aren’t able to register online their right to vote, let alone actually vote online. Obama struck a political note here, stating:
The folks who are currently governing the good state of Texas aren’t interested in having more people participate. Obviously you’ve got to make a political argument about why this is important, and not every state is going to move along the same direction…Look, Texas is never going to be an early adapter of what I’m talking about here. But over time, pressure builds for us to create systems that make government more responsive and make it work better.
This is where the tech industry and digitally-skilled individuals can make a difference to society, he added:
We cannot solve the problems in government and we cannot solve the problems that we face collectively as a society unless we, the people, are paying attention. In an age in which people are getting information through digital platforms, through the Internet, where people’s attention spans have shrunk, it is critical that all of you [in the tech industry] who are shaping this environment are spending time thinking about how are we getting people, how are we getting citizens engaged, and you yourselves have to be engaged and spend some time thinking about it.
But this doesn’t need to be a government-only challenge, he added, citing one of his favourite examples of private and public sector co-operation – diapers:
Diapers are really expensive. We’ve actually set up a system whereby through social media and the Internet, non-for-profits are able to make bulk purchases of diapers, save 25% on those, so that they can distribute them to low-income moms and families. It’s a convergence of diaper makers and logistics companies and Internet companies. And we sort of convened the thing, but it’s not running through a government program.
It shouldn’t be a matter of waiting for a crisis either, said Obama. Alluding to the collapse of the Obamacare website on launch, the President jokingly admitted that this had damaged his “cool, early adopter President” image, but went on to make the more serious points that:
The procurement systems, the specifications, the way that software was built in government was adapted for the age when procurement was for buying boots or buying pencils or buying furniture as opposed to buying software. And so there’s an example of an outdated system — bloated, risk-averse, not working well.
On the back of that debacle, talent was seconded in from Silicon Valley to fix it and this in turn, according to Obama, led to US Digital Services being set up. This is working well, but Obama clearly sees this as a long-term process and part of his ‘legacy’ to the next administration:
The folks who are working in this Digital Service, they’re having a great time, and in part because they are harnessing incredible skills to a purpose where they know that millions of people can be helped.
What they’ll tell me is that as long as they feel that they’ve got a President and somebody who’s providing some air cover, there’s no system that they can’t get in there and work and change and make it significantly better.
So part of my job is to try to institutionalize that over the next several years. And I want to make sure that the next President and the federal government from here on out is in constant improvement mode.
My take
Viewed from across The Pond, this was a laying out of a digital transformation agenda in the public as good as any I’ve heard from any politician of any creed, (although the ‘oldest continuous democracy’ is a moot point…). Obama said:
These are solvable problems, but it’s not a matter of us passively waiting for somebody else to solve it. And that’s part of the mindset that I’m trying to break. I tried to break it back in 2007, 2008, when I ran for this office. As you will recall, the slogan was not ‘Yes, I Can’, it was ‘Yes, We Can’.
If we can re-conceive of our government so that the interactions and the interplay between private sector, nonprofits, and government are opened up, and we use technology, data, social media in order to join forces around problems, then there’s no problem that we face in this country that is not soluble.
Replace ‘this country’ with any digitally-enabled country and that’s as good a mission statement as you’ll get for why public sector digital transformation matters.
It’s just a shame that this positivity was overshadowed by the Apple v FBI aspect – and here Obama was on far less sound footing. But as no-one’s going to change their mind around that based upon this outing, we’ll leave that argument for another day.
 

Image credit - SXSWRead more on: Digital government and public servicesUser experience

