
On occasion, we hear about a worthy cause and will publicly support it. This is one such occasion that happens to include SAP, one of our premier partners, Apple and award winning band, Imagine Dragons in what is being dubbed the One4 Project, designed to help aid organizations alleviate the Syrian refugee crisis.
According to Dan Reynolds, lead singer with the band, 11 million people are homeless ad while there is plenty of aid on the ground, much more needs to be done. From the One4 Project site:
Apple, KIDinaKORNER/Interscope, and Imagine Dragons will donate their respective proceeds to the UN Refugee Agency (UNHCR). Further, SAP will also donate USD 10 cents for every download up to the first 5 million downloads from iTunes.
From the SAP blurbs:
SAP’s culture is reflected in our vision of helping the world run better and improving people’s lives. When one of our employees had an idea of how SAP could use two of our greatest strengths —  our employees and our expansive network of customers, partners and friends — we felt compelled to see this idea through to fruition,” said Robert Enslin, member of the Executive Board of SAP SE. “Uniting the passion that SAP and our friends at Imagine Dragons and iTunes share for social responsibility through the One4 Project is a natural extension of these networks in action and represents the power one idea can have when supported by many.
It is likely not well known but inside SAP, there has always been a small if vocal community of people who see giving as a central part of what they do. Over the years I’ve met many who believe that giving is its own reward. On occasion I’ve been on the receiving end of that generosity. Like the time a team I was involved in was given some incredibly helpful code that allowed us to show a user interface that we had not thought about developing. And the numerous offers of help in getting people to appear on video segments both for fun and for eduction. Then there are those who not only provide help inside the SAP community but also in their personal lives. They live this stuff. You all know who you are. Then there are those who have taken on legend status to the point where they end up with T-shirts expressing a sentiment. Here’s an example from 2011. The expression is still in use today.
I see this effort as a great example of a large company using its network power to amplify a project that is both worthwhile and needed. That has to be a good thing.
If you’re interested in this then there are lots of ways to help. A simple gesture on Twitter might be enough for people in your network to take an interest. Here are the hashtags: #one4 #iwasme
Better still, here’s the link to the song “I Was Me” on www.iTunes.com/IWasMe.

Disclosure: SAP is a premier partner at time of writing.
 
Read more on: Social 