
Healthcare US style is a strange beast. A mixture of public but predominantly private funding via for profit organizations sits uneasily in the minds of many I know. So far, much of the public discourse has been given to patient care and, to a limited extent, outcomes. The problem is that there really isn’t any incentive for the healthcare industry as it exists today to focus upon preventative care. Apple’s recent announcement of its release of an open source framework for developing health apps and update on ResearchKit, might change that.
So far, most of the commentary around this topic has focused upon privacy. And rightly so. Apple is embroiled in a set of legal maneuvers with the FBI over unlocking an iPhone which, Apple believes, cannot be guaranteed to be used beyond the immediate purpose for which the FBI is seeking access to a specific device. Assuming that healthcare apps get good take up, then what does this mean for individual data privacy? Constellation Research’s Steve Wilson provides clear insight into how he believes this should play out:
“I’m really optimistic about ehealth,” Wilson says. “I’ve worked in this field for nearly 30 years, including a lot of work in clinical trials for medical devices, and I appreciate the potential of new technology. Smart devices for collecting health signals, big data for analyzing and discovering deep new insights, monitoring drug efficacy and public health interventions, instrumenting more and more of what we do. This need not be creepy if it’s properly designed, properly explained to consumers, and the benefits properly shared with people.”
“The quality of the ehealth outcomes rests on good participation,” he adds. “We need people to be comfortable giving up their data. We don’t want incomplete data or biased datasets as a result of consumers opting out, or worse, sabotaging data. Privacy isn’t hard. It just requires respect, and for businesses to resist the temptations of exploiting the data they are so lucky to have.”
Apple has said that control over data sharing will be placed in the user’s hands. That is a good thing and over on LinkedIn, Michael Arigo is optimistic:
Apple also mentioned that HIPAA Privacy and Security are being considered, and patients can configure who has access to their data.  As an expert witness who works on HIPAA breach litigation with health plans and hospital systems, I like the fact that Apple is giving patients control and direct knowledge of how their information will be shared.  Of course, the final test will be in how this is implemented.
This to me is where things get a tad murky. Contrary to what I guess many people understand, HIPAA only applies in certain circumstances. The fact Apple is ‘thinking about it’ suggests that Apple doesn’t currently believe there is a clear case for HIPAA compliance. If, for example, data is shared with physicians, then what does that in turn mean? Health and privacy activists tell me that physicians are routinely put under pressure to ensure that patients are in ‘compliance’ with their medication regimes. Cynics argue that this is one way to ensure that patients are continuously medicated and so act as profit drivers for the pharmaceutical industry through data that is gathered and then analyzed. I have heard of cases where pharmacies are under pressure to make patients pay with credit cards so that data gatherers can get better insight into lifestyles that in turn might be used for the development of treatment regimes. If true, then that would run counter to at least some of the intentions suggested by Apple’s healthcare framework and especially where ideas around academic research are geared towards preventative outcomes. One of what I see as a gray area was mentioned in the Apple press release: 
Start, by Iodine, helps people on antidepressants understand if their medication is working for them or not, and helps their doctors deliver more informed care.
My question then – how will that impact co-pay and insurance arrangements? Another area:
“With ResearchKit, we quickly realized the power of mobile apps for running inexpensive, high-quality clinical studies with unprecedented reach,” said Ray Dorsey, MD, David M. Levy Professor of Neurology at the University of Rochester Medical Center. “We hope that CareKit will help us close the gap between our research findings and how we care for our Parkinson’s patients day-to-day. It’s opening up a whole new opportunity for the democratization of research and medicine.”
I’m sure everyone will welcome these initiatives as representative of improved care for vulnerable sections of the community who live with conditions that today have no obvious cure in sight. But will this mean that those who are diagnosed with Parkinsons, Alzheimers, MND and other aggressive conditions have a better chance of financial support than exists today? One would hope so but it is a far from done deal.
Over at the Mayo Clinic, Mike Sevilla gives an optimistic doctor’s view:
My take? Well, I think that HealthKit and ResearchKit are important in three ways:

 Moves Medical Research Closer to the Mainstream: Apple has an uncanny way of moving products and ideas from the edge to the mainstream. What mp3 player were you using before iPod? What phone were you using before iPhone? And, are you even wearing a watch right now?


The Acceleration Of The Research Cycle: Those in the medical industry know how painfully long it takes for a research project to get from idea to completion – sometimes many years. If ResearchKit delivers on its promise, better treatments will come to market faster, and that’s better for everyone.


Engaged Patients plus Interactive Medical Teams equals Better Medicine: What everyone is looking for is better communication among patients, families, and the medical team. Imagine the synergy that will be created with the right app technology, engaged patients, and interactive medical teams. Just mind blowing.

I’m excited about the potential [of] HealthKit and ResearchKit.
The good news is that Apple has it within its power to make the rules of the game work in patients’ favor. Putting control in patients hands is a first step that needs to be precisely explained. Tim Cook, CEO Apple has made very clear that he believes firmly in the sanctity of individual privacy and Apple, as a company, is really the only business that has enough economic power to get its way. Will for example patients know exactly who gets to see their data? The indications are that they will but then what will Apple do to ensure there is no leakage of that data?
We shall follow this story with interest. Despite what some think means a dilution of the restraint that Wilson expects from Apple, the potential for positive outcomes from apps developed with ResearchKit and CareKit is too attractive for anyone to ignore.
Image credit - Featured image:  medical healthcare doctor wearing a mask, stethoscope and typing on a computer laptop. - via fotolia, story image via AppleRead more on: Analytics planning and data analysisHealthcare transformation 