
At last
So I’ve got the iPhone and I’ve got the Watch. Now with Apple Pay set to hit the UK tomorrow, I can finally use the Wallet!
Last week, as Apple added 23 more companies to the list of US banks and credit unions supporting Apple Pay, Tuesday emerged as the launch day for the service rolling out to its first non-US country.
With less than 24 hours to go, there’s the usual hoopla of security and ‘no comment’ from all sides. But we’ve also had the inevitable slip-ups by interested parties. So far we’ve had:

McDonalds branches sticking PAY notices in their windows.
Grocery chain Waitrose alerting employees to an “imminent release”.
HSBC publishing a now-redacted tweet boasting “Yes! It’s due to launch this Tuesday! We are excited too”.

More than 250,000 merchants will accept Apple Pay when it launches, including M&S, Boots and Nando’s.
Commuters using Transport For London services will also be able to carry out contactless payments on trains, buses and the tube. The take-up here will be interesting to watch. A similar program in Washington with its Metro system has seen poor take-up and significant budget overspend. The transport network targeted 3,000 customers for the pilot program, but only got 400 involved.
Apple Pay also has the support of almost all the major UK banks. The first tier this week to support Apple Pay will be made up of First Direct, HSBC, Nationwide, NatWest, Royal Bank of Scotland, Santander, Ulster Bank and American Express. These will be followed up over the next few months by Lloyds, M&S Bank, MBNA, TSB, Bank of Scotland and Halifax.
So what are the prospects for Apple Pay on its first international outing? While expecting that Apple Pay uptake in the UK will grow faster than in the US thanks to wider existing acceptance of NFC, research firm Forrester reckons that only 27% of iPhone customers trust Apple when it comes to mobile digital wallets.
Forrester analyst Thomas Husson comments:
Apple still has to demonstrate the added value it will bring to merchants (better experience, faster checkout, incremental revenues etc…) and brands.
Also, Apple needs to create trust among UK consumers. They managed to do so in the US and no doubt trust will increase with the backing of the main banks.
Elephant in the room
The elephant in the room is Barclays which is the only one of the big 4 providers not to be part of the program. But in the face of a Twitter storm of irritation from customers, the bank seems to have reversed course and is now saying that its support is “imminent”, whatever that means. (Barclaycard already supports Apple Pay in the US).
On Twitter, the party line from the bank is:
We can assure you that we’ve been talking with Apple about how our customers could use Apple Pay in addition to our existing mobile and payment services, and that these talks remain constructive.
But the bank has its own competitive PingIt offering which the bank reckons has handled £4 billion of transactions to date. The Pingit app runs on both Android and iOS devices.
Barclays?
Barclays is beefing up its capabilities by signing a deal with digital payments service Zapp, which enables customers to make online transactions through the “pay by bank” application on mobile devices.
Apple Pay supporting banks are also spreading their bets. This is likely to be a major factor in the uptake of Apple Pay in the UK. Forrester’s Husson argues:
Zapp is likely to be main competing service when it launches in October with the backing of Sainsbury’s, Asda, House of Fraser, Thomas Cook, HSBC, First Direct, Nationwide, and Santander.
Away from Apple Pay, some banks are trialling their own mobile contactless options, such as Lloyds Tap to Bank offering. This enables customers to verify their identity by simply tapping their debit card against their smartphone. The next step will be to allow customers to authorise payments using the same process.
Now the downside. Firstly, the current trial is limited to 125 people. Secondly, this Lloyds offering isn’t available to Apple iPhone users, only Android devices with NFC (Near Field Communication) contactless technology built in. That’s not a huge number of devices right now, but the old journey of a million miles beginning with a single step idea kicks in here.
According to the bank, early results have been promising:
By replacing the automated phone call with the ‘tap to bank’ authentication, the vast majority of those involved in the testing found the process is simpler, quicker, and easier to use. It is anticipated that in the future, this innovation can also be applied to other tasks, such as authenticating new payments.
Director of innovation and digital development, Marc Lien says
With the widespread take up of contactless cards and most new smartphones now having NFC technology, this tap to bank trial is developing enhancements to banking processes that many people could benefit from. This is one of a raft of new technologies that we’re experimenting with to help our customers.
Lloyds Bank has around 2.5 million active mobile banking users, with over 1.5 million downloads of the Lloyds Mobile Banking app.
According to a new study into European Union Mobile Banking by App Annie, Barclays leads the UK mobile banking sector, publishing three of the top ten retail banking apps in the United Kingdom in Q1 2015.
My take
McDonald’s, Waitrose or a Tube ticket? Who’s going to take my Apple Pay virginity?
As Forrester notes, NFC uptake in the UK has been on the rise. I even noticed the other day that you can pay for your lunchtime sausage roll from Greggs with contactless payment.
This is likely to be a more receptive market than the US. But that’s no guarantee of success.
Read more on: e-commerceFintechInternet of ThingsMobile 