
Jack Ramsay
One of the more startling headlines we ran last year was Please stop innovating – digital heresy from Accenture. It accompanied the write-up of an excellent presentation on digital transformation from Narry Singh, Digital Strategy lead for Accenture.
I was reminded of this a couple of weeks ago when I met Jack Ramsay, Global Technology Delivery Director at Accenture Digital Business Group, who delivered his own digital strategy overview at a keynote event during London Tech Week.
Ramsay’s ‘sit up and pay attention’ moment for me came with the following advice on how organisations should tackle digital transformation:
One of the worst things that can happen is to appoint a Chief Digital Officer (CDO) and make it their job, like with a customer service officer and saying customer service is your job.
At a time when every analyst firm under the sun appears to be urging organizations to get busy appointing CDOs, this gave me a bit of start. Ramsay expanded on his point by explaining that the important thing is to have a digital culture, not a digital individual, and that needs to come from the top:
It needs to be something that’s engrained in everything. You can create something that is called digital if you empower it. The best thing is if the CDO is reporting directly to the CEO and is given a lot of power. Sometimes the CDO is above the CIO, sometimes underneath. But if the CEO gets it – and a lot of CEOs do get it – then it can be impactful.
But that’s not always the case, he added:
What I still see is a lot of companies saying digital is going to be important. My point is is that digital is not going to be important, it’s going to be everything. If you don’t get that and you don’t get that quickly, then it’s going to be a problem.
During his presentation, Ramsay pointed to several examples of one-time brand leaders in various sectors who failed to anticipate disruption in their markets, such as Sony which once owned the music industry and had everyone buy their Walkman devices, only to see that dominance stolen from under it by the likes of Apple.
Organizations need to rethink their approach, he advised:
There’s a simple exercise. Sit down and draw an entity relationship diagram for your business and see how that compares with your database. It’s going to look completely different because your business has evolved in an incremental way.
You need to keep on top of everything, like when is there an opportunity to talk to my customer and how can I talk to my customer? When I’m presented with information, where can I capture that information?
A case in point came recently when Ramsay had some interaction with his bank:
I had a problem with my bank lately and complained about charges on my account. Someone phoned me up from the bank. That’s a cross-sell opportunity. All they said was that they would reverse the charges. They didn’t say, ‘While I’ve got you on the phone…’. They didn’t take the chance to get feedback. They’re not interested. This is one of the big banks in the UK. This happens a lot. People need to sit down and say, ‘What is the opportunity here?’
Think data
Every interaction should be providing valuable data on your customer, he added:
Ever wonder why you get free video streaming if you sign up for Amazon Prime? That’s not an interesting business model for them, they just learn more about what you like and then they can sell you more stuff.
If you stop reading a book on your Kindle, Amazon knows you didn’t like that book. You need to get your mind around every place you can interact and every piece of data that you can capture and how to analyze it.
CDO needed?
With the ever present danger of ‘Uber-ization’ of your market in the digital economy, there’s a need to get back to first principles, suggested Ramsay:
Companies really need to start from the beginning and reassess the landscape. When a company like Uber comes in they don’t say, ‘What works today?. They say, ‘What do people need?’ People need a car. Uber is about taking tons of information about user needs, with distressed inventory and matching them together. You need to look at your business model and how you interact with your customers, not look at how do I operate today. Never focus on your competitor, focus on your customer.
Market transformation and disruption is happening at a faster pace than ever before, Ramsay pointed out, citing the speed with which attention shifted from the desktop to the smartphone:
Now more than 60% of data that’s consumed is on a smartphone and that happened in about two years. The adaptation speeds of the market are so much more than it was and it’s killing the traditional players. Typically they’ll deliver new stuff two years after they’ve had the idea because it’s gone into the queue of the portfolio. But the customer is not going to wait. They’re going to go for the experience.
What’s really essential is to have the vision and a sense of direction in order to ride changing waves. Ramsay argued:
The Uber app is not a complicated app. The business model is very sophisticated. I’m sure the legal team is considerably bigger than their technology team. You need to have a vision of where you want to get to. You need to have a data strategy. But you need to be very quick out of the gate and work with vendors who are going to give you a very quick solution. Your customers will move quicker than your development team.
My take
Sound advice.
Read more on: Analytics planning and data analysisCloud ERP financials and supply chainCRM and customer experienceDigital and content marketinge-commerceInfrastructureInternet of Things 