
David Murphy, Apttus
Enterprise quote-to-cash provider Apttus expects to have a new CEO before the year is out, following its takeover by private equity group Thoma Bravo, which closed last week. The company is currently run by Executive Chairman and Thoma Bravo partner David Murphy, along with a triumvirate of senior managers. But a promotion from within is not on the cards — the successful CEO candidate will most likely be an outsider, says Murphy, who spoke to diginomica this week:
I personally believe a permanent CEO and a more traditional structure with that executive in place is likely to re-emerge. For the time being, it’s the four of us. In parallel the prior board had already started a CEO search — we’ve taken that over and that will be ongoing. The timing of when that’s complete is dependent on external factors …
From an internal viewpoint it’s not obvious to me there would be a successor internally but we have not ruled that out.
Murphy is optimistic that the new CEO will be in place by Christmas, he says:
We will over the next couple of months have a permanent CEO in place. I’ll continue on in the executive chairman role.
A middle office leader
Apttus has been without a CEO since founding CEO Kirk Krappe abruptly left the company in July. Murphy declines to elaborate on the reasons for the sudden exit but his ambition for the company carries on where Krappe left off:
Kirk contributed a massive amount to what the company is today and we’ve been focused on bringing in and adding to the leadership to take that forward.
He says the company continues to see itself as a potential leader of what it terms the middle office — the cluster of functionality such as sales order management, contract management and billing that lies between front-office CRM and back-office ERP systems:
We’re not changing the agenda, we love the idea of building a dominant leader out in the middle office, we think there is an important opportunity out there.
That opportunity has already driven the company’s revenues above $250 million, Murphy tells me, and the priority now is to continue building out its “professional operational excellence” and international growth potential:
We see this as an opportunity to really accelerate the build-out of the company … We are good at helping to build the operational scaling into these kinds of business and make the effort to be much more global.
Continuity after change
Alongside of that, Murphy recognizes the importance of emphasizing continuity after a change of ownership. He’s therefore putting a priority on getting out a strong message about the company’s goals, both externally and internally.
Middle office has not been historically that well established and understood. One of the most important parts I’ve found key is the articulation by us, as the new owners, of our beliefs around that and a true realization of that kind of leadership.
Customers and prospects want affirmation that we are serious about staying invested in the mission of the company.
But it’s more important internally. As an executive coming in, I tend to spend a lot of time overcommunicating, building a bridge from where the company was and our agenda in taking the company forward. Building confidence in the internal team is job number one.
There are no plans to merge Apttus with any other of the 26 companies in the Thoma Bravo portfolio, he says, several of which are already longstanding Apttus customers. There may be opportunities to share expertise in the field of AI, but that will be up to Apttus and its peers:
Several companies are doing things in augmented intelligence and AI. While we won’t ever force these kinds of partnership to evolve, there’s some important capabilities Apttus will be able capture insights from and be a part of, in leveraging analytics from other parts of the portfolio.
SaaS and the Salesforce relationship
Existing relationships with platform partners Salesforce, Microsoft and IBM will continue as before. The multi-cloud strategy is something customers want, Murphy believes.
We are serving the enterprise market from a customer perspective and have to follow where those companies want to make their investments. We have to offer the business operations and infrastructure they would want to have their middle office applications operating in.
At the same time, the original Salesforce relationship remains very important and Murphy sees the CRM giant as a key role model for Apttus as it continues its growth.
The most important area to continue to advance is continuing to deliver in the SaaS way of operating the company and delivering customer success.
Salesforce gave power back to the end customer based on the SaaS model and as a vendor you’ve got to be excellent at delivering value.
From an operational standpoint that’s critical — to be highly reliable if we’re going to serve mission-critical enterprises and to be a partner with them.
But the company may take another look at some of its relationships with systems integration partners, he hinted:
There are lots of different choices and there are some that are legacy choices themselves and would not advance the customer success as fast as we would like or would want to. Who we work with is important.
Murphy joined Thoma Bravo as a result of its acquisition of cybersecurity business Blue Coat Systems, where he was President and COO. Blue Coat was subsequently acquired from Thoma Bravo by Symantec in 2016. Last year Thoma Bravo appointed him as interim CEO at portfolio company Qlik Technologies during its CEO search. Prior to Blue Coat, he held senior roles at HP, Mercury Interactive, IBM Tivoli, Asera and McKinsey.
Image credit - via ApttusDisclosure - Salesforce is a diginomica premier partner at time of writing. Read more on: CRM and customer experiencee-commerce 