
Earlier this month I caught up with quote-to-cash cloud vendor Apttus, the Salesforce-native ISV that now finds itself in direct competition with its platform host after Salesforce’s acquisition of Steelbrick.
Even while this was going on, Salesforce has itself become an Apttus customer, recently bringing its own enterprise sales teams live on the product. Apttus sees this as validating its focus on mid to large enterprise. As Kamal Ahluwalia, chief revenue officer, explains, the Steelbrick acquisition gives Salesforce capabilities that smaller companies have started demanding:
Salesforce is trying to solve the coding piece for their small to midsize customers. Anyone with price complexity in the products or channel, there was nothing in the platform for them.
Meanwhile, Apttus continues its rapid growth among those larger enterprises, reaching more than 500 customers — over 150 of them in the past year — and almost half a million user licenses (that total inflated by several customers making Apttus ecommerce deployments across a partner ecosystem). With several hundred customers already up and running, there’s now a substantial installed base with a track record of using the platform, says Ahluwalia:
We have reached a point where we have a very large number of them deployed and seeing an impact on the business. That’s when we realized it’s probably time to aggregate these things and quantify what has been delivered to customers.
Those outcomes are quantified in a report published this month, The State of Quote-to-Cash 2016. Most eye-catching of all are the metrics compiled from customer feedback on the impact of implementing quote-to-cash automation:

105% larger deal size
60% improvement in contract cycle time
28% shorter sales cycles
26% more reps achieving quota
49% higher proposal volume
17% higher lead to conversion rate

Deal size doubled?
Looking at these metrics, I’m particularly struck by the reported doubling of deal size, which leaps out as not only significant but also the least self-evident to explain as a by-product of automation. Greater speed and volume clearly makes sense, but by what mechanism does automation serve to inflate deal size?
In answer to my question, Ahluwalia cited the example of Aesynt, a leading provider of equipment to manage and automate the delivery of medication in hospitals and clinics. Its sales team immediately saw a 45% increase in average deal size per quote when it implemented Apttus.
With the level of automation we gave them, their sales reps could spend more time getting back to [their customers].
The biggest thing we gave to them initially was more selling time. That’s what then triggered them to have more time to be the trusted advisor.
So simply freeing up time that can be better spent with the customer creates more scope to build a relationship and more opportunities to upsell. But it turns out there are other factors too. Simply being able to turn around proposals more quickly makes it far easier to come back with alternative propositions, which means salespeople are more inclined to suggest additional options. Ahluwalia explains:
In legacy systems it can take two to three weeks to turn around a proposal, whereas we can do it in minutes or hours.
Speed takes care of several issues. When you’re able to turn things around and you’re there all the time, the whole conversation becomes very different. That’s why we’re seeing, even with new customers, the net new revenue is higher.
Business confidence
There’s also the support the system provides to help salespeople identify what to offer their customers, he adds.
For existing customers all the contract data is inside Apttus. We have the ability to recommend what should be offered to customers. We’re helping the reps in making those recommendations versus relying on their own individual brilliance.
You’re able to eliminate revenue leakage, you’re increasing what you’re getting out of customers, and the cost of sale is lower.
That in turn leads to greater business confidence and in Aesynt’s case it helped them strengthen their investment in product development, he tells me:
They built really good confidence in their pipeline and after a year, the board decided to invest more in R&D because they had greater confidence in the pipeline they saw ahead of them.
Deals are getting bigger and more predictable, and with no more people you’re actually getting more done.
My take
There seems to be a bullish mood at the quote-to-cash vendor, which is gearing up for its annual Accelerate conference next month.
I was fascinated by the effect that automation of all the various processes that lie between customer interest and realizing revenue is having on sales behavior and performance. To me, it’s analogous to the effect that automation has been having on the IT development process.
Because automation has made it far easier and faster to deploy new software, the development process has become more iterative. Instead of spending weeks to build one big project that absolutely must succeed, IT people are getting into the habit of building multiple small projects that are easily replaced if they fail.
Automation seems to be producing exactly the same behavior in sales. Instead of getting just one shot at a mega-proposal, salespeople are able to iteratively fine-tune exactly the right proposition. It’s one more example of digital transformation producing completely unanticipated new behaviors in long-established enterprise processes.
Image credit - Businessmen shaking hands © Minerva Studio - FotoliaDisclosure - At time of writing, Salesforce is a diginomica premier partner. Read more on: CRM and customer experienceDigital transformation - frictionless enterprise 