
Click for full infographic (PDF)
Digitally sophisticated college students expect their schools to offer a digital environment on par with the technology they use every day. However, the student management systems used in many institutions may not be up to the task.
Disappointed students who face a ‘digital downgrade’ on campus are less likely to recommend their school to others. This means that flexible, responsive digital systems play a key role in keeping colleges competitive in today’s global education market.
‘Traditional’ students who started college in their late teens and attend full-time are considered digital natives. They’ve spent their entire lives surrounded by digital tools and devices for work, leisure and entertainment. However, joining them in the classroom is a growing population of non-traditional students, too — people who are working, raising families or returning to school after years away.
These ‘digital immigrants’ also use trending digital technology in their daily lives. Like their digital native classmates, they expect the same kind of tools to manage their student affairs. These two groups make up a student population with high expectations for the availability and quality of digital technology on campus.
All too often, though, these digitally experienced students encounter outdated systems that are cumbersome to use and still require a considerable investment of staff and IT resources. These legacy systems still in place on many campuses have an average age of 13 years. Even with upgrades, they typically fall short of the level of digital technology students are used to using every day.
Traditional student management systems are assembled from older ones, with some upgrades that solve issues within the original framework. That often means that students can manage some aspects of their college career online, but not all — and different parts of the system may require different log-ins and sub accounts.
Universities must increase the pace of digital innovation
What kind of digital experience do students want? A recent survey of college students from around the world reveals that they’re looking for mobile-responsive, cloud-based student information systems that offer ‘one-stop’ access for all services whenever needed. This kind of system lets individuals manage all aspects of student life on their own terms, from applying for financial aid and paying tuition, to tracking degree progress and connecting with instructors. The new generation of student information systems can help both traditional and non-traditional students stay connected and involved with their education, wherever they happen to be.
Institutions are starting to really focus on improving the student digital experience. The Swiss Education Group (SEG) for example, is an alliance of Switzerland’s leading hotel management schools, with five schools spread over seven campuses, attended by over 6,500 students each year. SEG is offering a variety of high quality bachelor and master programs in hospitality with specializations including tourism, culinary, design and events, all in partnership with universities in the UK or USA.
Its digital strategy aims to transform the educational experience for students, bringing the latest technological advances to the classroom and aligning education with the realities of the industry today. The digital revolution plays an important part in SEG’s learning environment. Across SEG schools, students are no longer viewed as consumers of knowledge but rather as active producers of information that are engaged, supported and equipped for their future, demonstrating a clear shift from traditional lecturing to student-centered learning. SEG has continually integrated new technologies in an inter-disciplinary way into all its programs. This pedagogic approach with its emphasis on the digital world ensures that graduates develop the skills necessary for the international employment market.
Reykjavik University is Iceland’s largest private institution for higher education and a dynamic international university with around 4,000 students. Heidar Jon Hannesson, the university’s executive director of IT says:
We want to ensure our IT infrastructure delivers a great user experience by leveraging new digital technology advances. Recently we upgraded our internal network to the latest technology and Wifi standards to prepare the campus for IoE and the flood of bring-your-own student gadgets. Now we are taking the next step by reviewing and redesigning all our workflow and processes related to student lifecycle management and teaching …
Deliver a digital upgrade to students, faculty and staff
Schools of all sizes can benefit from a shift from outdated student management systems to innovative digital technology that mirrors the level of sophistication students have come to expect in the world beyond the campus. Cloud-based information systems eliminate the need for on-site hardware that requires IT staff and maintenance, freeing staff to work toward other goals. Because these systems are mobile-friendly, faculty and staff have constant access to the latest versions of tools and services from any device at any time.
Administrators and faculty benefit from new digital technology that reflects their ‘real world’ user experience, too. Systems that organize and unify student information make it easier to monitor student progress, identify problems and work toward solutions to keep students in school and on track to graduation. With tools for messaging, conferencing and collaboration, advisers, instructors and support staff can offer students the support and resources they need to be successful, without the limitations of fixed schedules.
In a world driven by rapidly evolving digital technology, digital innovation is a standard that draws students and builds your school’s reputation for excellence.
Image credit - Midsection view of students sitting on steps using smartphones © kalim - FotoliaRead more on: EducationPartner ZoneUnit4

