
CIF
A recent survey conducted by the UK’s Cloud Industry Forum (CIF) has highlighted a real problem for both users of cloud services and the Cloud Service Providers (CSPs) that would profess to meet their needs. In short, the problem is that the latter have some serious failings when it comes to meeting the needs of the former.
What is worse, in a way, is that these failings have been evident for at least 18 months and little seems to have been done to narrow the divide between the two sides. The evidence suggests that the CSPs still have some way to go before to understand what it is they are actually trying to sell.
To be fair to the CSPs, the CIF does apportion some of the problem to the cloud customer community, suggesting that they should be a tad more savvy about what they are getting into when signing up for cloud services. That does, however, raise some interesting debating points about how much your demon cake maker Great Aunt really needs to understand about energy distribution networks when she turns on the Kenwood Chef mixer.
CIF polled 250 senior IT and business decision-makers in public and private sectors on their experiences in migrating to the cloud, and found that for many the transition had not been straightforward. In fact only 10% said the process could not have been improved.
About a third of them indicated the CSP could have offered better initial support, with 38% finding the complexity of migration difficult. The specific issue of data sovereignty was a further problem for 30%.
Even before the migration process started, 27% experienced contractual obstacles such as clarity of liability. A more understandable, though nonetheless annoying issue was that, during migration, 28% encountered an initial, if only small, loss in employee productivity.
Vested interest
The CIF has, of course, a vested interest here, especially when it comes to issues such as liabilities. The organisation has a widely respected Code of Practice aimed at the cloud services vendor community in general and the CSPs in particular. One of its strong suits here is the development within the code of practices that help define and manage what the liabilities are in using cloud services, and where they lay.
This does lay some responsibilities at the door of the users and, as the CEO of CIF, Alex Hilton, observed, providing some help here could make individuals in the user community more attractive to future employers:
It is important that users have sufficient knowledge about Cloud services to ensure that the services rolled out can support business objectives – 35% of respondents felt that they lacked the skills necessary to do this, which is one of the reasons why we’ve launched our Individual Membership Programme, allowing them to become more valued to their businesses and enhance their credentials in the labour market.
It is certainly the case that end users need to have a good understanding of their current business – both in terms of markets and business processes – as well as very clear ideas on the future direction of the business, and the processes that will be needed to make it happen. But it is an open question as to how much more they need to know.
Should it be necessary for them to know more about the definition and implementation of services in technical terms than the CSPs themselves? If that is the case then what are the CSPs selling?
And that self-same question was being asked 18 months ago, for example at the annual Summit held by Parallels. The company provides CSPs – and in particular MSPs looking to move into the CSP market – with packaged cloud services management suites.
Which way to turn?
Parallels CEO Birger Steen was aware that the emerging CSPs at that time were lacking in understanding about the marketplace. It was a common complaint by users, then, that the only help CSPs could offer growing businesses was more resources rather than additional management tools and services.
Most seemed to lack understanding of whom they were selling to or what their business issues might be. As a result they just sold resources as `products’.
Steen understood that more was needed. As a response, the company started offering a range of support programs to help channel partners, and especially the traditional VAR and SI communities, understand how to move into the cloud and exploit their existing expertise in vertical market sectors.
He also acknowledged that there was a need to play a role in helping to create end user market `pull’ from the SMBs themselves, as he observed at the time:
Marketing support is something we are doing it for the channel and yes, we probably should be doing more for the end user SMBs. But it is extremely difficult to sell to 150 million very different potential customers across the world. There is no single channel to market, for example. And the rules of what each of them might need from us will be different by different countries.
And filling that gap, making it as painless and effective for the customers as possible, is still the role – and opportunity – for that channel, the CSPs. Otherwise they are just resellers of bare metal, and that is arguably now one of the best ways of going bust known to man.
As Steve Zimba, the President of CSP and Parallels partner, Mural, said at the Parallels Summit:
As well as targeting a definable market sector with the right tools and applications they will have to provide a white glove level of service and support. There is no money to be made in reselling cloud applications, but there are now business opportunities in providing services around those applications.
As he observed, the problem is that the early cloud service brokers were largely just buying and reselling cloud applications with no added value except availability. That could even be a disservice for end users, as they could even cost end users more yet give them no added value from the purchase.
The answer is that the reseller has to become the arbiter and owner of the SLA of the overall aggregated service. This is something applications vendors will just have to get used to.
But it is also something that the CSPs also have to face up to. By providing cloud services they are taking over the implementation, running and delivery of information and business processes on behalf of a customer. This is no longer selling a product and running away.
That would be like saying William Shakespeare sold paper, pens and ink.
My take
While it is reasonable for cloud users to understand the ‘why’ of using it, it really is down to the CSPs to understand all the `hows’ and `whens’ and `this might helps’. These are all part of the service they are providing. They really need to invest in more ‘white gloves’.
Read more on: Cloud platforms - infrastructure and architectureInfrastructure 