
Last week, two of the most influential names in PCs, Apple and Microsoft, unveiled products that collectively comprise a vision of today’s ideal laptop and desktop. While the new machines are attractive, by moving further up-market, they leave mainstream users behind.
The refreshed MacBook Pro, Surface Book and Surface Pro have all the attributes one could want — thin, light and fast with beautiful, photorealistic displays — except one: affordability. This summary shows that well-equipped models of each run well over $2000 and as my colleague Den Howlett points out, “you can go way higher.”
With pricing like that, one can be excused for feeling stuck in 1990 and that you’ve missed out on a quarter century of Moore’s Law improvements in price-performance. Yet one look at the weekly Best Buy Sunday circular belies the fact that decent laptops are available for under $1000 and Chromebooks, the modern incarnation of a thin client, can be had for under $300.
According to one estimate, the average sales price of a PC is about $660, more than double that for a Chromebook, but much cheaper than the $1235 average for a Mac. In pushing the state of the art, Apple and Microsoft have doubled down on the high-end market to become the Teslas of the PC industry. Den Howlett exemplifies the target audience when he writes,
I know enough about MacBook Pros (I’ve had them for over 10 years) to reasonably assess whether a new one is worth the investment from online reviews although I always reserve final judgment until I’ve had a chance to take a look in real life. This time around the answer has to be a flat out ‘NO!’ Why?
There is a reason that Apple uses the word Pro to distinguish the machines I buy. I need them for power hungry applications like video editing which sometimes takes place when on the road.
By building laptops designed for a niche of creatives that use them to create 3D graphics and edit 4K video, not the masses that do little more than write memos, respond to emails and work with spreadsheets, these industry leaders are making a statement, but it might not be the one they intend. Instead of catering to business users, Apple and Microsoft seem intent on pushing that group further into the world of mobile devices, cheap laptops and cloud services.
Although most people would love to have a Tesla in the garage, few can afford nor justify it within their budget. The same goes for business users evaluating today’s high-end laptops.
The disconnect has me wondering whether it’s time to rethink the role of the business PC and if the nexus of cloud services, mature VDI software and thin clients (whether Chromebooks or a cheap Windows laptop) mean users are better off renting desktop horsepower rather than buying it, particularly when smartphones start to displace PCs as the device of choice for business activities.
Business needs Uber, not Tesla
The transportation business provides an apt model for how IT organizations might think about providing PC functionality to their colleagues, whether office workers, mobile users or students. Just as some millennials are forgoing car ownership for ridesharing, it’s time for organizations to reconsider renting remote PC capacity rather than buying it. In other words, think Uber, not Tesla.
I have long been critical of Virtual Desktop Infrastructure (VDI) for it’s terrible performance, clunky UI and poor integration with the underlying client. Worse still, VDI was also expensive to deploy (which fueled the rise of hyperconverged infrastructure) and often unsupported by underlying client applications leading to multi-party finger pointing when anything went wrong.
Together, the implementation complexities often ate up any management cost efficiencies. Vendors like Citrix, Microsoft, VMware and now AWS have been grinding away at the problems and the result are virtual systems that are supremely usable and tolerant of remote networks of varying quality. Just as important, organizations no longer need build on-premise VDI; they can rent it. Desktop-as-a- service (DaaS) is the PC equivalent of Gmail, providing a consistent set of applications, data, user state and UI from any device, anywhere.
Although this encomium to the AWS Workspaces service comes from Jeff Barr, an AWS employee, it jibes with demos that I’ve seen and tried and illustrates the immense progress VDI technology has made:
At this point you are probably thinking that the combination of client virtualization and server virtualization must be slow, laggy, or less responsive than a local device. That’s just not true! I am an incredibly demanding user. I pound on the keyboard at a rapid-fire clip, I keep tons of windows open, alt-tab between them like a ferret, and I am absolutely intolerant of systems that get in my way.  My WorkSpace is fast and responsive and makes me even more productive.
The beauty of cloud services is that your applications and data are always available, as Barr goes on to illustrate (emphasis added):
During this time I was also doing quite a bit of domestic and international travel. I began to log in to my WorkSpace from the road. Once I did this, I realized that I now had something really cool—a single, unified working environment that spanned my office, my home, and my laptop. I had one set of files and one set of apps and I could get to them from any of my devices. I now have a portable desktop that I can get to from just about anywhere. The fact that I was using a remote WorkSpace instead of local compute power faded into the background pretty quickly.
Uber riders know that even renting isn’t cheap
$2500 will buy a lot of time on a cloud service, but virtual desktops still aren’t cheap. Workspaces runs $25-60 per month plus $15 for the Microsoft Office applications most business users will want. That’s $600 per year for the average user. However, organizations with enterprise Microsoft Windows and Office 365 licenses and users with sporadic needs can save money with the hourly plans. For example, a standard, mid-range desktop used 10-hours per week, i.e. typical of someone primarily using mobile and cloud apps but occasionally needing a full Windows desktop, would run under $250 per year. Those doing serious computations can opt for a dual-vCPU for about $400 per year for the same usage. Monthly pricing from other desktop-as-a-service providers like VMware Horizon likewise runs about $50 per month and up.
My take
Some of us have embraced the post-PC era and have centered our workflows around mobile devices and cloud apps. Many organizations will continue, whether by choice or necessity, to rely on PC applications and thick clients. For most of these users, a two or three thousand dollar laptop doesn’t make sense, however hosted DaaS can provide a mainstream PC experience on virtually any connected device.
By pushing laptop prices further into the stratosphere, Apple and Microsoft provide IT organizations an excellent opportunity to reevaluate their needs for traditional PCs consider displacing them with Chromebooks and mobile clients with cloud backends and filling application gaps with DaaS services. Indeed, even full-time PC users may prefer the mobility and disposability of a less costly device tethered to a cloud desktop. With more organizations deciding that it’s time to rent IT infrastructure, Uberizing PCs can’t be far behind.
Image credit - via MavenspireRead more on: Infrastructure 