
Mark Hurd, co-CEO Oracle
I planned to publish a prequel story about the upcoming Oracle HCM world conference but Vinnie Mirchandani’s tongue in cheek crack at the old school enterprise world of vendors got thinking more deeply about Oracle and its cloud offerings.
All the soundings I am taking tell me they are onto something interesting. At a recent private meeting – details of which have to stay under wraps for the moment – I saw a slide that talked to the number of customers Oracle is winning, what they’re buying and what those customers look like in terms of size and industry. It was impressive. The most important metric which I can discuss is around the net new wins Oracle is making and especially in HCM.
I may have mentioned this before (?) but Oracle is the only old school vendor I know that’s picking up a substantial amount of its new cloud business from net new names. That means Oracle’s customer base is growing and in one of the less served parts of the market – the 500 users segment. Neither of its old rivals SAP nor Microsoft have cracked that particular code and yet Oracle has to the extent that many of the net new are coming from this section of the market. When questioned about this, it seems that whether an Oracle database shop or not, customers are coming over and in sensibly sized deals but also at sensible prices.
Oracle has learned from NetSuite and Salesforce that although the long term revenue stream from SaaS is attractive, you can’t get greedy upfront. From what I have seen in terms of deal sizes, Oracle is looking remarkably attractive. Add in the fact it has SWAT teams that react quickly to problem solving on the ground and you have the makings of a good business strategy.
Lining up the ducks
I am the first to acknowledge that when a vendor is pointing a rosy picture then you can be sure there is more to the story than meets the eye. But my sources all confirm my impressions. That is also backed up in the financial statements Oracle has put out.
Brian Nicholls, who is long on Oracle had this to say on Seeking Alpha:
To put Oracle’s performance in perspective, it is now guiding to sell over $1 billion in new SaaS and PaaS during calendar 2015. This puts Oracle on the same playing field as SaaS leader Salesforce.com, who is also guiding to sell $1 billion in new SaaS and PaaS revenue during the full-year. Importantly, this outlook is measured in recurring revenue, not total revenue, meaning the $200 million in new sales it gained during this last quarter, and the $300 million it expects in the current quarter, will not be one-time, but rather built upon.
That said, Oracle’s cloud growth during calendar first quarter did decelerate a bit from its fourth quarter, but what’s important to look at is the new sales, which increased quarter-over-quarter and is expected to increase 50% in the current quarter over the three months prior. That’s remarkable performance.
Given the other metrics and information I have to hand, it’s hard to disagree with this assessment. Here is what Mark Hurd, co-CEO Oracle said on the last earnings call:
We added 800 brand-new SaaS customers, nearly 800. Nearly 530 existing customers expanded their cloud services in the quarter; in HCM, 220 new customers; in customer experience, 407 new customers; in ERP, 160 new customers.
These are not insignificant numbers albeit Oracle’s cloud business is only around five percent of overall revenue.
I would add that this performance is all the more remarkable given my past perspective that Oracle has never been that interested in application software except where it made financial sense to milk them for maintenance revenue. As an aside, I also hear that the old JD Edwards line has had a significant amount of work done to refresh and keep going.
Of course it’s not all sweetness and light. The database and ‘engineered systems’ (hardware and software to you and me) are looking sluggish by comparison. Even so, what I am hearing from multiple sources on the ground, from briefings and now in the earnings calls are all tying together nicely. In short, there is a sense of authenticity in what is being reported that is making Oracle look well set for the future. At least in HCM in the mid-market.
Aaaah but…
Now we come to the caveats.
It is no surprise that on earnings calls, the company routinely picks on both Salesforce and Workday, equating growth to be on par or exceeding one or other, depending which company it is referencing. It’s not that simple and you have to read between the lines to get a better sense of what’s going on.
You might notice for example from Hurd’s remarks that he doesn’t reference CRM wins (he talks CX) and that is a surprise. Earlier versions of Fusion CRM I have seen looked very good and so I’m kinda scratching my head a bit there. Similarly, while Oracle talks of ERP, we’re not seeing financials deals coming to the fore. This is an area I hope to get more detail on in the coming months so watch out for field reports.
I am aware that when Oracle acquired Taleo, they made a mess of the pipeline, more than half of which was tied back to Salesforce and which Oracle cut off. That didn’t go well and much of the talent drifted away in short order. Oracle didn’t make the same mistake when they acquired Eloqua but these things always leave a bad taste. We will see how that’s playing out when we visit Oracle CX in a few weeks’ time. It will for example be interesting to sense test the mood among some of those net new names compared to that of the Salesforce marketing cloud fanboys and girls which we already know.
And while Oracle is making HCM hay in the mid-market, Workday continues to pick it off in replacement deals. It will therefore be interesting to see which customers are wheeled out and referenced at the upcoming show later this week.
My take

This is the first time in a long time that I’ve felt good about Oracle applications. In the past, the best I could muster has been ‘neutral.’
Colleagues have been whispering sweet nothings in my ear for a while on this topic but without putting much meat on the bone. Having seen for myself how this is coming together, I’ve sloughed off much of my skepticism, hopefully  without losing a sense of proportion.
Regular readers will know that I am bullish on Workday which seems to find it easy picking off large deals from both Oracle and SAP. I am therefore looking for those blockbuster lighthouse deals that tell me Oracle is competitive at the beauty parade stage on the large deal circuit.
Oracle HCM World is one of Oracle’s smaller events and from what I can see, it looks comparable to Workday Rising in terms of main content structure. If correct then I can make comparisons which will be useful from an experiential perspective.
Despite Vinnie’s skepticism and poke at SIs, I am less concerned about the showcasing of Deloitte and Accenture. Both understand that the SaaS business model is different to the on premises deals and have responded accordingly. I am however surprised to see that Fujitsu isn’t on the list but then interested to see Baker Tilly on that list.
Continuous sense testing is essential in a market that is moving very quickly. Oracle is no exception and so I am looking forward with a sense of curiosity to what we see later in the week. Stay tuned.

Disclosure: Oracle is a premier partner at time of writing.

Read more on: Cloud ERP financials and supply chainHCM and the digital future of work 