
 
One of Europe’s largest online retailers, ASOS.com, has posted a 10 percent fall in first half profits, but has said that it remains fully committed to investing £75 million in its technology and platforms by the end of the next financial year.
ASOS has also recently hired a new Chief Information Officer (CIO), Clifford Cohen, whom will be joining the group in May. Most recently Cohen spent seven years with British retailer Marks & Spencer in a variety of IT roles, including multi-channel.
Despite the dip in pre-tax profits to £18 million, down from £20.1 million made in the same period in last year, ASOS still managed to beat analyst expectations and its share price rose over 6% after the release of the interim results.
ASOS CEO Nick Robertson said:

Trading for the six months ended 28 February 2015 included a record Christmas season, with total sales increasing by +14%. UK growth remained strong with sales up +27% and International sales up +5% (+10% on a constant currency basis). Our customer engagement remains high, with growth in visits, average order frequency, average basket size and conversion all improving. Our active customers grew by 13%, exceeding the 9m mark for the first time.
The successful launch of our zonal pricing capability and planned investment in our international prices resulted in a gross margin decrease of 230bps during the period, which together with increased investment in building our global distribution capacity, has reduced half year profit before tax by 10% to £18.0m.
With our continued investment in our international price competitiveness gaining traction, momentum in the business is building. This gives us confidence in the outlook for the second half and that full year profit and margin will be in line with expectations.

ASOS also provided us with some good detail on how it is continuing to invest in technology, platforms, its warehouses and customer experience.
It said that it has made significant progress during the last six months, where it has now rolled out its zonal pricing functionality in Australia, France, Germany, Spain, Italy and the US, which has enabled the retailer to offer more competitive local pricing and to sell brands that were previously restricted to those territories.
It has also launched localised versions of the ASOS Android and iOS apps in France, Germany and the US over the last six months, with the apps due to be rolled out in Italy, Spain and Russia during 2015.
According to the results, traffic from mobile devices represents over 50% of all traffic for ASOS, and as a result, it has also launched mobile-only promotions. It said that it has also continued to “improve the speed and stability” of all its apps.
In a results statement to investors, ASOS said:

We continue to invest in our underlying platforms and behind-the-scenes technology in order to support our global expansion and deliver the best customer experience. Our website replatforming continues; we successfully reengineered our order processing platforms to support peak volumes and we are focused on developing our new checkout function to launch on mobile during the next six months.
We have recently commenced our global fulfilment programme, which will optimise our global stock management capabilities and provide greater flexibility to move stock efficiently around our global warehousing network. During the period, we delivered a new warehouse control system to support our automation in Barnsley, as well as developing stock monitoring capabilities within our Eurohub fulfilment centre in Germany. This global fulfilment programme is a key step in our journey to becoming a truly global retailer.

With regards to customer experience, ASOS said that engagement remains high, with growth in visits, average order frequency, average basket size and conversion. Active customers grew by 13% over las year, surpassing the 9 million mark for the first time.
Speaking at a conference last year in London, ASOS’s previous CIO, Peter Marsden, explained that online fashion shopping is more difficult when compared to other retail categories, because companies like ASOS still have to compete with the high street, where when it comes to clothing, consumers often like to try before they buy.
He argued, that this means that if online fashion retailers are going to compete with physical outlets, they have to make the customer experience as seamless as possible – this doesn’t just mean a fancy website and mobile app, but also unrivalled delivery and next generation payment options.
In the results statement today, ASOS pointed to new social functions and recommendation engines. It said:

We recently introduced our ‘social sign-in’ functionality across all our websites and apps, enabling customers to sign in using their Facebook, Twitter and Google+ details, simplifying the customer journey from browsing to buying product. Our personalised product recommendations function has also been launched across our mobile apps, and will be rolled out to our websites over the next six months. To improve our international customer experience, we recently added our upgraded search facility to our Spanish, Italian, Australian and Russian websites.
Uptake of our ASOS Premier membership in the UK, US, France, Germany and Australia continues to grow, with total members up nearly 70% on last year.

My take
ASOS is one of the more exciting digital retailers out there, as it has consistently invested in innovative technologies. And although it has had a tough year with a fire at one of its main warehouses, which cost the business, its investments and growth seem to be impressing shareholders.
Investing £75 million in technology is no small sum and the experience on ASOS speaks for itself – it is far superior to many other online fashion retailers out there.

Read more on: Retail e-commerce and the omni-channel 