
ASOS style
The talk in politics is of the economic impact of Hard Brexit v Soft Brexit, but in retail circles, it’s Smart Brexit that’s boosting the bottom line for online fashion supplier ASOS. 
The firm has seen global retail sales soar 36% for the four months to the end of 2016 as a weak pound in the wake of the 23 June UK Brexit referendum brought beneficial side effects, including being able to cut prices in the US, Russia and Australia.  CEO Nick Beighton says: 

We set ourselves up, following the weakness in sterling after the Brexit announcement, to capture that opportunity, build our business and attract customers. The immediate weakness meant that we invested in price, captured the weakness and the benefit in sales and invested heavily in the proposition.

ASOS also enjoyed a good Black Friday, with sales were up 45% and visits up 35% year-on-year. Beighton noted: 

The cyber week, the Black Friday week, is growing in importance and is becoming a critical trading event for ASOS and the ASOS customer. During that period, we see a greater share of spend in that week than we do now over the Christmas period.

Mobile particularly dominated traffic over the holiday season, he adds, making up 68% of the total mix overall. Beighton also argued that ASOS’s investment in its technology platforms has enabled it to ramp up customer satisfaction levels: 

Over the Christmas and New Year period – and please note our Christmas cutoff was the latest it’s ever been – ordering by 23rd of December for deliveries for customers, we achieved a customer satisfaction, on time delivery of 99.9%, which means during that week, we only failed to deliver 92 orders on time, something that has been unheard of before at ASOS. I’m delighted with that and that’s a result of many years of investment in our infrastructure, in our capability and having our teams focused on customer experience.

More investment
Up next is more investment, including in its Eurohub infrastructure. The firm also announced in December that it plans to hire 1,500 staff for its Camden headquarters, expanding its head office workforce by 60% and spending £40 million on revamping the building to include a wellness centre and a concierge service to handle deliveries and “non-work related needs”. 
The company has been under fire from claims of poor working conditions at its warehouse in Barnsley, South Yorkshire, something the firm has consistently said is ”inaccurate and misleading”.
All that said, the longer-term impact of Brexit remains to be seen and Beighton conceded: 

I’m expecting to increase our UK manufacturing from around 4% to 9% and I’m expecting some import pressures on the non-UK-sourced product. We expect to have the ability to mitigate some of those cost pressures with our suppliers. My intention is to hold prices for our customers, while giving a fair deal for our suppliers at the same time.

He added: 

We’re in a growing channel. The acceleration in online appears to be clear. My view on that: it’s being driven by the growing social media and mobile shift. We’re investing bravely to capture that potential, which I’m super happy about. And we’re building our capability and backing it with investment, which will give us traction again into the future. 
As always, there’s something that’s going to be uncertain when you’ve got a global business, particularly with the environment that we’re now operating in. But I’m very happy that we’re navigating ourselves and we’ve got a growing in-built resilience to soak up what comes our way.

My take
ASOS has ridden the Brexit ‘storm’ well do date. As George Salmon of investment analyst Hargreaves Lansdown notes: 

Although the vote to leave the EU could have an impact on consumer confidence at home, the UK makes up less than half of group revenue. Unusually for a clothing retailer, ASOS pay around 80% of sourcing costs in Sterling, which should offer the UK business some insulation against the pound’s weakness. In fact, the group’s overseas operations should provide a currency benefit as rates are now more favourable for converting revenues earned in dollars and euros into sterling.
If it can keep its competitiveness sharp, there’s little reason to think that ASOS is going to be constrained in its growth by anything other than its own ability to manage the pace of expansion.

Wider figures this week covering the Christmas period seem to suggest that the weaker pound is benefiting many retailers for now, with international shoppers using online channels to pick up a bargain. Goods on British websites are 10% cheaper in Euros than they were on the day of the Brexit vote.
While not at the ASOS levels of year-on-year growth, Debenhams said its like-for-like internet sales were up 13.9% over the holidays, while baby goods retailer Mothercare pointed to a 5.5% rise in online sales for the 13 weeks to 7 January.
The online and offline retail sector has benefited. Retail spending on foreign credit cards was up 22% on-year to more than £725 million in December 2016, according to data from Worldpay.
But it’s the online investment that’s paying off. High street footfall continued to disappoint over the holiday season, falling 7% on Boxing Day and 6% in the two days before Christmas, according to data from HSBC. 
That’s where the online pureplay nature of ASOS and Amazon wins. Will it continue? That remains to be seen but Amazon has said exports from UK businesses listed on its marketplace are set for a 30% increase this year to £1.8 billion. 
Image credit - ASOSRead more on: Retail e-commerce and the omni-channel 