
Aaron Levie, Box
After spending almost three days at BoxWorks this week catching up with Box and its partners and customers, the biggest takeaway for me has been the many different reasons why organizations adopt the cloud content platform.
The most common motivation is still the convenience of using the cloud to share files, often combined with a need to have some kind of enterprise oversight of the cloud platform. For many of these customers, adopting Box has allowed them to impose order on previously haphazard cloud storage and sharing of enterprise content.
For a smaller but growing subset, other factors are coming to the fore. These customers are attracted by additional capabilities that Box has built into its platform over the past few years — security and data protection features, specialized content manipulation capabilities, and workflow automation. This week’s launch of a framework to apply machine learning to content will bring a new set of use cases.
As the event drew to a close, I had a few minutes to catch up with CEO Aaron Levie and reflect on Box’s progress to date and its plans for the future.
Cloud content enters its third phase
That growing subset of customers using the platform to do more with content reflects a maturation of the cloud content sector, says Levie, as it enters a third phase of capability.
The cloud initially was purely for efficiency reasons — let’s get lower economics, let’s get burstability, let’s be able to use the cloud for just making sure that we have a more efficient IT architecture.
Then it started to be the case where we said, ‘Oh maybe actually the cloud could be more secure because we will get a modern security strategy built into the cloud.’ That was phase two. Then phase three was, what if we could actually now do completely different things with our information? That’s when intelligence, and ML [machine learning] gets applied to information.
So it went from cost takeout and efficiency, to better security and better compliance, to now we can do completely new things with our data that we never thought was possible before.
It’s exciting to finally see so much understanding and awareness and appreciation for the idea of, OK it’s not just cloud storage, it’s not just about collaboration. You actually need to be able to manage, and govern, and secure, and organize, and protect your data in the cloud now in a new way. The market is saying OK, this needs to be a category.
Doubling down on content vs messaging
One question I had at the start of the week was whether Box is missing a trick by focusing on content rather than on messaging. Regular readers will know that I’ve revised my original view on content and I now see messaging as the linchpin of collaboration in the digital enterprise — especially in view of the rise of conversational computing.
But I was impressed this week with the richness of functionality Box now brings to its platform. While I still believe the center of gravity in digital collaboration will lie with messaging, content isn’t going away. There’s still a significant market that Box can service, and Levie is confident the company has made the right choice in directing resources at continuing to build out its content platform.
It’s always felt like, OK do we have to get more social? Do we have to do more in collaboration? Do we have to do more in messaging? And honestly it’s just, the content problem is so big, that we have no ability to even do the roadmap of what we want to do with content, with the amount of people that we have.
Maybe if we had, like, ten times the number of engineers, we could do content and then do something else. But we are just even scratching the surface on things we want to do just in content.
Every time we think that, you know, we’re going to have a plateau of new information creation, new content creation, there’s a new device, there’s a new sensor, there’s a new set of ways that enterprises are generating data.
We’ve only seen this increase over time — the amount of information that companies are working with, and their unrelenting demands for securing it, and governing it, and enriching it, and making more sense from it.
Instead of aiming to build out its own messaging platform, Box will stay open to connecting into third party platforms, and delivering its content capabilities there, he says.
Obviously we have a very partner-oriented approach here as well, which is let’s plug in all the different communication and collaboration platforms out there. We also want to build in some of those capabilities into Box. But wherever the messaging is happening, we want to make sure that content is served up.
Overall we do want to be very content-focused. I think this is the focus of the company, this is this is where we understand the problem the best.
A new approach to partnering
Box has formed deep partnerships with several heavyweights, and keynotes at this week’s event were notable for participation from both Microsoft and IBM. The new AI announcements tap into machine learning resources from both these vendors and from Google Cloud, and the Box Skills framework can also connect to other ML providers.
The Box Relay workflow product, which is already in beta at around 250 customers and becomes generally available next month, showcases what Levie calls a “unique” partnership with IBM. This incorporates a workflow engine that runs on the IBM Cloud but which is fully embedded into the Box platform as native functionality.
[IBM] has a core workflow engine that’s powering the capabilities, and built a lot of the end-user interface. We designed the user interface, and it’s built on the content management capabilities of Box.
So it’s our API for storage, for security, for metadata, and their API for the workflow engine. And they did a lot of the front end development.
It’s really unique. In many cases you can almost think about it as another app built on the platform. But because of how closely we co-designed it with them, it’s being sold by both of the companies. It’s definitely a unique approach for our industry.
Work continues to build out the capabilities of Relay, with more integration coming next year. But the main focus will still be on automating business processes around content in Box, rather than connecting into other collaboration providers.
Building a professional services ecosystem
As the capabilities of the Box platform become more sophisticated, Box will need to grow the size of its consulting partner ecosystem. There are signs that the pattern already seen at other enterprise SaaS vendors is starting to repeat itself in the Box ecosystem. Former partners of legacy enterprise content management vendors such as Filenet and Documentum are reinventing themselves as Box partners. Others are coming in as pureplay digital transformation consultants.
Initially, that’s going to be more fruitful than relying on the larger global SIs such as Deloitte and Accenture to build out Box practices. But in due course that will need to happen too. The vendor is conscious of the need to nurture a thriving partner base, says Levie.
I think we’re trying to bring on that ecosystem, whether it’s system integrators, whether it’s more boutique shops. We want to make sure that that we can paint the picture for what the future of content management looks like, and that we can bring along a very rich and healthy ecosystem with that.
Box at a double inflection point
All of this adds up to a big set of opportunities for Box, and Levie says this year is proving to be a crucial year in the development not only of its platform but also of its go-to-market capability. The appointment of Stephanie Carullo as the company’s new COO earlier this year is bringing significant organizational change.
There’s a certain inflection point on the product side — we’re becoming a multi-product company and we’re building on a much broader platform. And organizationally and operationally, we’re going through an inflection point where our go-to-market operations are changing pretty fundamentally with Stephanie Carullo coming on board.
So I think for the next year it’s really about bringing these two things together. How do you bring the product innovation and product development, and align it with the go-to-market and scaling out our ability to reach customers all around the world and then help them through this journey. I think that’s the big operational opportunity for us.
Levie says he’ll remain heavily involved in evolving the product, while leaving Carullo to drive the company’s growth.
I’m going to be, you know, moving the pixels on the buttons on the product. So I’ll be very engaged. She’s going to help us just really turbocharge the scaling.
My take
Box has done a good job of listening to its customers and understanding the many ways in which it can add value to content stored in the cloud. It makes sense to double down on that investment to maintain and enhance its distinctive strengths. Messaging may be hot right now, but content isn’t going away.
Image credit - via BoxDisclosure - Box contributed to the author's travel costs to attend BoxWorks. Read more on: Collaboration sharing and digital productivity 