
The Australian Government has announced a number of new job vacancies, as part of a recruitment drive to deliver on its digital transformation plans. Some of the posts point to how Australia’s Digital Transformation Office (DTO) is seemingly following the UK Government Digital Service’s early strategy.
Paul Shetler, previously Chief Digital Officer at Britain’s Ministry of Justice, who has now moved to become CEO of Australia’s DTO, tweeted a link to the job posts yesterday.
Two of the vacancies stand out in particular – head of GOV.AU and head of Digital Marketplace – not only because they are the most senior positions available, but also because they directly parallel work that has been carried out here in the UK.
The announced search for a head of GOV.AU is hardly surprising, given that the DTO wrote a post last week outlining how over the past nine weeks it has been undertaking a discovery and starting to build and Alpha prototype to structuring government “information that is based around the user, and could potentially scale across government information and services.”
The post states:
To explore our hypothesis, we looked at a range of common experiences that people have with government and the types of information and services they need. This included needs around tax, education, registering to vote, superannuation, registering a business, accessing benefits for older people, applying for permits to serve food and alcohol, importing goods to the country and more. We then focussed the prototype around two particular journeys, starting a business and the experience of coming to Australia to work.
After 4 weeks of user research and 5 weeks of designing and building a prototype, we devised an approach which has done well in concept and usability testing so far.
Similarly the UK started its digital transformation a number of years ago by building a pan-government website to carry out government transactions and present information to the public – in the form of GOV.UK. It was this website, which delivered a number of savings, which allowed the Government Digital Service to expand its scope into other areas.
Australia’s DTO states that the successful candidate will:
This role leads one of the largest and most visible transformation programmes in the federal government’s digital history. We are working to radically improve the Australian Government’s online presence.
Your role will be to lead this large-scale effort and ensure that no user of government information or service needs to understand how government works, in order to do what they need to do. If you are looking for a role with impact, this is it!
As a senior digital executive, you will bring experience in leading and executing whole-of-government digital strategy. You will have exceptional digital, programme management and stakeholder management skills to lead the development and whole-of-government transformation.
 Equally, the vacancy for a Head of Digital Marketplace suggests that the Australian DTO is looking to follow the UK by creating an online store for cloud, digital and hosting services. The post in the UK is currently held by Tony Singleton.
The job posting for this position also highlights that Australia is looking to simplify procurement for SMEs that are looking to bid for and win government contracts, which has been a key initiative here in the UK. The posting states:
Announced recently as part of the Innovation and Science Agenda, the Digital Marketplace is a breakthrough initiative that will put large and small digital service providers on the same competitive footing when it comes to providing services to government. The Digital Marketplace will be designed and built by the DTO, using an agile and iterative approach.
The Head of Digital Marketplace is an important role in the DTO that will lead that build, bringing together a suitably qualified team to execute this large scale reform the way government procures digital services.
As a senior digital executive, you’ll have experience in procuring digital services both large and small scale. You’ll have superior negotiation skills, significant experience procuring digital services from a broad supplier base, an understanding of cutting edge technologies, and a keen strategic eye.
Interestingly, both the job positions state a requirement to “lead cultural change” across Australia’s public services. This is an area that the Government Digital Service here has found particularly challenging, which was evident from the recent rural payments debacle, where old versus new clashed in spectacular fashion.
Other positions that are open to applicants include a service designer, content designer, information architect, user researcher, strategic digital recruitment lead and procurement lead. You can find the full listing here.
My take
The Australian government is pursuing this aggressively and it’s approach is very reminiscent of GDS’ early days. However, luckily for them, they’ve got our experience to learn from – and many learnings there are to be had.
One to watch in 2016, that’s for sure.
Read more on: Digital government and public services

