
The way people make things is fundamentally changing, says Andrew Anagnost, senior vice president of marketing at CAD/CAM software company Autodesk. It’s a big opportunity and a big challenge, not just for high-profile manufacturers of mass-produced products like cars or smartphones, but also for the legions of independent inventors, designers and hobbyists who combine artisan skills and computer programming to participate in the so-called ‘maker movement’.
As part of the Dreamforce Innovation Tour, diginomica met with Anagnost at the Autodesk Gallery on Market Street in San Francisco, where the company showcases to the public original designs created with its products by companies that include Lego, Mercedes-Benz and Nike.
There, he outlined four key areas in which Autodesk, a Salesforce.com customer of many years, sees big changes underway – and gave some details on the $2.5 billion software company is responding to these dramatic shifts in the business of making things.
Design
Designers, says Anagnost, are increasingly working in whole new ways – and many of these follow a more collaborative style than was seen in the past:
There’s a complete and utter comfort with teams coming together quickly to solve a design problem, often remotely, and then moving on again to work on other projects, possibly without ever having met face-to-face.
Cloud computing is supporting that change, he says, as well as enabling vendors like Autodesk to deliver the power of a supercomputer to a designer’s web browser, so that they can tap into massive compute power to help them make decisions, without needing super-expensive hardware.
A case in point is Lightning Motorcycle, which created the world’s first street-legal superbike using generative design, a process that relies on computer algorithms to identify and auto-design the best possible solution to a given problem, based on parameters set in advance by a designer. A number of Autodesk products were used in the design of Lightning’s motorcycle, including the cloud-based 3D CAD/CAM platform, Fusion 360.
Production
Manufacturing capabilities are become cheaper and more open to all, says Anagnost. In the past, if a designer wanted to build a product, they would need to invest in capital-intensive manufacturing facilities or learn how to outsource effectively to third parties in Asia and other low-cost centres. Kickstarter and its equivalents are helping small companies get started on their ideas, more quickly.
The rise of microfactories, meanwhile, means that individuals and organisations with no manufacturing facilities of their own now have a place they can go to bring their ideas to life using advanced manufacturing techniques and rapid prototyping tools – think robots and 3D printing, for example. 3D printing, in particular, is making major advances in terms of accessibility and cost, says Anagnost, while researchers are constantly coming up with new ways to get 3D printers to build products, parts and prototypes out of new materials, such as aluminium:
And as it gets cheaper and easier to deliver a more complex product, the field gets levelled and more people can participate in delivering innovation to the market.
Demand
Today’s customers expect more choice and personalisation from the products they buy, says Anagnost. Take, for example, Normal [nrml.com], makers of custom 3D-printed earphones: the customer downloads the company’s app to their smartphone, uses it to submit a few photos of their ears to the company, along with details of their colour and style preferences and Normal gets to work on creating earphones designed to fit that customers’ ears with maximum comfort. Another example is toy manufacturer Mattel, which now enables fans of its Hot Wheels die-cast models to create and purchase their own, customised cars or trucks online, delivered to their home a few weeks later.
Product
Connectivity is changing products. From smart-city street furniture like street signs and traffic lights to home appliances like dishwashers and coffee makers, more and more products are connected to the Internet and in many instances can be controlled, remotely, through a mobile app. Sensors are getting cheaper and customers increasingly have an assumption of connected intelligence. The Skully AR-1  motorcycle helmet, for example, claims to be the world’s smartest, offering a heads-up display that projects important traffic and safety information in the rider’s line of sight. It also offers GPS navigation and audio features like music streaming and hands-free calling.
So how is Autodesk responding to these changes, adapting its own product portfolio to support these trends as they play out over the next five to ten years? Anagnost says:
We have to assume that design teams work differently, across traditional borders and lines. We have to assume that the means of production is different from what we’ve seen before. We have to assume that our customers want to connect to their customers and deliver a more tailored product. And we have to assume that our customers will be looking to build smart, connected products incorporating sensors and connectivity.
These assumptions, he continues, are reflected in a number of recent initiatives from Autodesk.
First, the company offers free software to students and educators, on the basis that a fundamental understanding and literacy in how 3D design and modelling tools work will be a basic requirement for many jobs and careers:
It’s in our best long-term interests to ensure that kids and young people understand the tools that will shape their worlds.
In the same vein, the company is putting a big focus on its consumer product lines for non-professionals – tools for basic CAD operations, for example, or for creating 3D models from photographs. Anagnost says:
It’s about creating a 3D-literate consumer class.
Second, Autodesk is throwing its weight behind Fusion 360, its cloud-based product design environment, which was launched in mid-2013. It’s free to many people – individual hobbyists and schools, for example – and professionals pay just £300 per year for it. Anagnost explains:
That’s a pretty radical shift in the way people deploy design tools, so in a way, you can see we’re kind of attacking our own business in some respects. But we feel that the future of the company is so large and so different that this is what we, as a smart company, need to be doing.
Third, it’s launched its own 3D printer, Ember, and started taking orders for the machines late last year. At the heart of Ember is Spark, Autodesk’s 3D printing platform, which is about delivering open APIs that integrate 3D printers (including, but not limited to, Ember) directly with CAD/CAM software. Anagnost sums up the ethos behind these moves like this:
What we’re doing as a vendor is building out a cloud-based ecosystem for the new future of making things. This is what the future looks like to us.
Disclosure – at time of writing, Salesforce is a premier partner of diginomica.
Read more on: Cloud ERP financials and supply chainCloud platforms - infrastructure and architectureCRM and customer experienceMobileUse cases 