
With regulation limiting the scope to test out innovative business models, the only way US health providers can improve their viability is by driving down costs in their existing operations. And with spending under scrutiny as a result of recent changes in public funding of healthcare, that puts the spotlight on the role of procurement professionals, according to Hyrum Kirton, VP of procurement at long-term care provider Avalon Health Care.
We’re really not in a free market. It’s as regulated as it could be. Somebody is directing what we should do rather than us being able to innovate.
Over the next 5 years procurement’s going to be king in the healthcare sector. Procurement’s going to deliver savings. The business needs what we have to bring.
Avalon has been able to bring its costs down by centralizing procurement using cloud-based software from Coupa, with an estimated total savings of $5.5 million on an annual spend of $72 million. That’s been crucial after profit margins dipped below one percent in 2013, he said. Kirton was speaking yesterday at Coupa’s annual Inspire conference in San Francisco.
Adding flexibility
Avalon went live with Coupa in 2013, replacing a previous e-procurement system that required suppliers to pre-register with the network and pay a percentage of the transaction value.
We had a system that could only cut electronic purchase orders for suppliers that were on their network. It was vendor funded. A lot of our spend — 70 percent — was with vendors that were not on that network.
When those networks were created, most companies did not have the capability to exchange purchase order information. At the time it made a ton of sense. Today any ERP has that capability. You can buy solutions like Coupa in the cloud and you can self-enable. It’s just a different landscape.
The Coupa system allows Avalon to get all its suppliers into the system, free of transaction fees, and with the flexibility to write in ad hoc purchases when unexpected needs arise.
We needed to be able to have write-in POs — where the supplier is in the system but the items are not in the catalog. There’s a million reasons why someone may need to buy something and it’s not in the system. Things come up.
All this flexibility made it possible to have administration and approvals done centrally rather than needing local staff doing procurement administration. After a six month implementation process, Avalon went from a head count of 72 full-time staff approving and administering invoices across 55 locations down to just a dozen in central procurement.
Approvals, mobile and budgeting
The system handles many different types of purchase, including medical equipment and drugs, contract staff, maintenance and cleaning products and services and food. While the administration is centralized, there are various purchases that still have to be sourced locally, such as sprinkler inspections, parking lot repair, or snow removal. These can be as much as three times more expensive when bought from a national supplier.
For this type of purchase, a local manager enters the details using a Coupa web form to seek approval. In the future, Kirton would like to add the ability to have suppliers bid competitively online for this type of local sourcing.
The ability to implement an approval process for all purchases was one of three key impacts of the Coupa systems, said Kirton. The other two were mobile access and budgeting.
Mobile was important because it cut out delays in the approval process, he explained.
Our cycle times were too long — people were circumventing the systems because managers had to find a PC to do an approval. They’re not normally at a desk. Being able to do it from their mobile device was huge for adoption.
Budgeting has become a lot simpler to do as a result of moving all purchasing into one tool that automatically calculates spend on the fly.
We had a horrible budgeting process. For a low-margin business that’s tough. Now, when somebody buys something they’re going to see what’s left after they bought it and can make better decisions.
As well as keeping costs down and improving margins, the time saved contributes to better care for patients, he added.
My take
Even though healthcare spend represents very nearly a fifth of US GDP, many healthcare providers run on a shoestring and margins are wafer-thin. Efficient procurement is one area that can have a big impact on improving margins and controlling spend, as Avalon’s story shows.
Disclosure: Coupa is a diginomica partner and funded my travel to attend its Inspire conference.
Image credit: Senior woman with caregiver © Alexander Raths – Fotolia.

Read more on: Healthcare transformationSpend managementUse cases 