
3D scans in action
One of the bigger tech deals in Europe last year was the formation of a new £3 billion company as UK engineering software firm Aveva merged with the software arm of French energy group Schneider Electric.
Aveva supplies software to the oil and gas, mining, and paper and pulp industries, while Schneider’s software division was previously part of Invensys, the UK engineering group that Schneider Electric bought in 2013.
It was a case of third time lucky. The first attempt at a merger came in 2015, but fell through as a result of integration challenges. There was another abortive play the following year, which came to nothing after 48 hours. But now the deal is done and the integration work that was so hard before is being tackled head on.
The combined company covers a wider range of sectors, from oil and gas and power through to chemicals and food & beverages. It’s also pitching a big Industrial Internet and Internet of Things (IoT) story. CEO Craig Hayman, formerly Chief Operating Officer at PTC, sees the digitization of the industrial sector as a big opportunity and one that has yet to see a winner declared, arguing that perceptions of IoT have shifted:
I would say 12 months ago, there was this view that one platform would be the savior of the world here as an IoT platform. In reality, there are many. If you were to look at a Gartner chart, there’s no leader, there’s no top right quadrant. They’re all down in the bottom left, bottom right as emerging platforms. We think we have a very strong footprint.
Digitization in the industrial market is accelerating, he adds, noting that this is one of the drivers behind the merger:
There’s two sides of that coin. There is the capital expenditure, the build-out of facilities, process manufacturing facilities that produces the food and medicines of the world and the staples that we consume. And then there’s the operational aspects. Once you’ve built those environments, now operating them, ensuring that they’re operating a best-in-class model.
If you have a baseball team or a soccer team, you want to be sure it’s the best-performing soccer team or football team. Similarly, if you are running a process manufacturing facility, you want to ensure it’s the best performing process manufacturing facility. You want to be in the top division basically. In that context, digital technology is letting you do that.
And that was the premise between bringing together these two businesses, Aveva, the leader on the capital-intensive side, the build-out, the design of these process manufacturing facilities; and Schneider Electric Software, the leader in the operational side of those facilities, bringing them together into one business.
Show me the customers
Just over a hundred days into his role as CEO, Hayman picks up on a number of broad sector trends that Aveva is tapping into, not the least of which is data:
That is one of the secrets around the new Aveva, in that it has this great ability to pull in data from all of [the] end points…bringing in design data not just from Aveva’s tool sets, but from other companies’ design tool set, bringing it in from brownfield environments using point clouds. In the same way that with a Tesla motor vehicle, you drive through the street and build an image of the street, we drive through a manufacturing facility and build a 3D point cloud of that manufacturing facility to assist you in the further design and then revamps of that facility.
It’s the same on the operational side, he adds:
We can pull in data from not just our endpoints, not just Schneider Electric endpoints, but that of any vendor that sits in an operational environment. This is a different approach from the closed MES (Manufacturing Execution Systems) that we saw of old. We are able to take that data and then use analytics. We store the data. We have a historian. We store the data and then, based on differences in startup sequences and operational sequences, predict where a failure will occur before it occurs.
In the same way that you can simulate financial numbers in a spreadsheet, we can simulate process flows in a process manufacturing facility. We can, from looking at the sulfur content of oil coming out of the ground, predict what is the right mix and process recipe to apply to that oil to get the maximum benefit from that oil based on demand. This is what Aveva brings to bear.
As an example, Hayman cites a recent win at Abu Dhabi National Oil Company:
[They] have a dozen operating companies. And if you think about operating companies, they have disparate footprints. We were able to bring those disparate footprints together, 100,000 data points, whether that’s real-time data or aggregated analytical data points, and present that for the very first time for that business.
Another example, in this case of creating a hi-def 3D render of the design footprint of the Temelin nuclear power plant:
It’s visualized in a very nice environment. This has been [done] in partnership with Microsoft. You can also do this through a Holo Lens or augmented reality….Now, we have completed the early integration work [between Aveva and Schneider] to now connect that design data with operational data. This is a view that we’re sharing with customers. Now, as you look through that 3D view and you click on a pump within that 3D view, you see live real-time data of that pump being rendered in that 3D view. This is the combination of design data and operational data.
You can look at analytics around the pump. You can look at the cavitation of that pump. You can look at the heat. You can look at the voltage being consumed by the pump. Then you can connect it to the workforce automation tools that we have, to dispatch a repair to that pump and understand what is the isolation procedure for the three valves around the pump to ensure work is safety in the environment. Perhaps even activate a circling red light to ensure that those workers in that facility understand that that is an area under maintenance.
Another area of focus is the concept of the Digital Twin, another hot topic that is evolving, according to Hayman:
Digital Twin has shifted in the last 12 months from vendors laying claim that they have the secret sauce to Digital Twin, ‘Buy from me because I understand Digital Twin’. Twelve months ago, that might have been valid in the market. That’s really not valid anymore.
What you’re seeing is, in these industrials, many of them have hired Chief Digital Officers, Chief Information Officers, [who] already have a view of the Digital Twin. Some of them would say that they already have an idea of the Digital Twin. They’re looking for companies like ours to assist them accelerating the delivery of Digital Twin.
Our view is we can help you realize that vision of Digital Twin faster than anyone else out there. And in fact, with Schneider Electric, when you go into in combination with Schneider Electric, there’s very few people who would come close to accelerating your vision of a Digital Twin or accelerating the use cases around Digital Twin.
My take
Aveva is a European company that has global promise in a fast-evolving market space. It’s got some majorly-large competition, of course, but the basic story it’s pitching is clear and boasts some strong synergistic benefits as a result of the merger. This is a company to keep an eye on as the digital disruption of the industrial and manufacturing sectors continues.
Image credit - AvevaRead more on: Cloud ERP financials and supply chainCloud platforms - infrastructure and architectureInternet of ThingsIoT robotics and AIMachine intelligence and AI 