
Most IT users will be familiar by now with the idea of `the software-defined something or other’. Indeed, there vendors that already talked about software-defined everything, which really should cover all points.
But US-based Avi Networks looks like it may have discovered a hole where users can gain some significant operational advantages, and some healthy cost savings, with some cherry-picking and precise targeting in and around the network stack.
Software defined networks are, of course, already well-established, but there the target is really only the first three layers of the famous OSI 7-Layer network model – the physical, data-link and networking layers.
The company’s target however is beyond that….creating software defined management for layers 4-7 of the network stack, the transport, session, presentation and application layers.
According to the company’s VP or worldwide sales, Ted Ranft, the objective is pretty straight forward:
The goal is to hit the existing incumbents providing services such as load-balancing, particularly F5 and Cisco Netscalar.
These, he suggests, are hardware based systems that have to be pre-set with the load balance programs for individual applications. It also means that they have to have the resources available to meet the top range of demand – which can mean over-capacity of resources for most of the time, which is both expensive and wasteful. He claimed typical utilisation rises from 5% to near 70%.
There is a perhaps a hint that the company may have something going for it in the fact that Cisco’s investment arm has put money into the company and already resells Avi’s Vantage Platform into its markets around the world. Cisco Investments joined DAG Ventures, Greylock Partners, Lightspeed Venture Partners, and Menlo Ventures in contributing to the latest, $60 million funding round that brings the company’s total funding to $115 million.
According to Ranft as much as 50% can be taken out of the cost straight away because it is just a software product. So it load-balances itself and can even reuse existing hardware if it provides sufficient resources needed to run.
The system
Known as the Avi Vantage Platform, the system delivers automated application services using a Software Load Balancer, an Intelligent Web Application Firewall, and an Elastic Service Mesh for container-based applications. Together these form an intent-based network management system that uses AI and machine learning systems to head in the direction of building self-managed network environments.
It is also not just designed to operate in new application/greenfield environments, it can and does get used for brownfield rip and replace applications. Ranft claims much of that business is replacing F5 systems in major telcos.
Because it is software only it allows users to set, and dynamically reset, the policies that govern operations in the 4 to 7 layers. This allows to adjust operational parameters, such as service level minima, as and when required. In this way, workloads that have periodic peaks of demand or need to work with additional applications can be accommodated dynamically without needing to bring the workload to a dead-stop.
The platform’s scope of operations has a wide, granular range, from selecting individual servers and VM best optimised for a single workload, through to moving major services between major cloud service providers and on-premise resources as circumstances or policy requirements demand.
In addition, being software only it decouples the control layer from the data layer. This allows operational data to be extracted in real time, which in turn can be fed to predictive analytics and machine learning systems which can dynamically tune and optimise operations to more precisely meet policy requirements. It is compatible with REST APIs, he adds:
The goal is that users simply declare the outcome they require to the platform, and let the platform provide it.
The Advantage platform is already in use with Microsoft Azure, Amazon AWS and Google cloud services, giving users a wide range of multi-cloud service options at their disposal. This also means that users are likely to use all three of them as appropriate, simply because it is possible.
My take
This is a good example of de-cerebralisation in action. The 4-7 layer band in the OSI 7-layer network model covers some important tasks, such as load-balancing. But to date they have been pretty fixed – set once and reset at a fair degree of inconvenience: dead-stops and re-programming systems are not a boon to productivity. So using AI and predictive analytics is an obvious step to take, and specifying such systems becomes something of a ‘no-brainer’ for CIOs and IT departments, as it becomes one less pain-point to have to think about.
Image credit - Data security concept in blue with circuit board background © adrian_ilie825 - Fotolia.comRead more on: Governing identity privacy and securityMachine intelligence and AISecurity 