
Andrea Leadsom
I could not resist this. In the UK, the Conservative Party is in the throes of electing a successor to prime minister David Cameron who recently resigned having lost the Brexit vote to the Leave campaigners. Among the favorites to succeed Cameron is Andrea Leadsom, a heretofore little known government minister, who it would seem, doesn’t know her social media etiquette from a hole in the ground.
Newspaper reports emerged that Leadsom retweeted an offensive remark, which, in turn created something of a flap. Here is the offending tweet

Prominent Leave campaigner Andrea Leadsom RTing tweet about “country overrun by foreigners” pic.twitter.com/2jsdchuYEw
— Claire Phipps (@Claire_Phipps) June 20, 2016

As has become abundantly clear in recent times, but always widely suspected, politicians are the last people on earth you’d trust with the truth, let alone come up with a cogent explanation for a social media gaffe but try they did. This from the Guardian makes hilarious reading – at least it does to me:
Andrea Leadsom’s campaign team has denied she intentionally retweeted somebody saying the UK was “overrun with foreigners”, though websites that track posts deleted by MPs show that the retweet did appear on her account a fortnight ago.
Well of course she didn’t. More likely some idiot with access to her account thought it would be a good idea to affirm Leadsom’s Little England credentials given heightened tensions over immigration issues in the UK in the wake of the Brexit Leave majority referendum vote. That wasn’t enough. Having found themselves in a bucket of crap, Leadsom’s office then demonstrated a spectacular lack of understanding about how stuff happens on the Internet by jumping up and down in said crap saying:
A spokesman for Leadsom said they believed the tweet had been fabricated but later denied they had intended to imply a screengrab had been doctored.
“We have conducted a detailed investigation into the circumstances of this tweet. Andrea Leadsom did not retweet the message from @QueenBritain [sic].
“It appears that the message in question never existed, but was fabricated in some way. We are continuing to investigate how the impression was created that Andrea retweeted this message. We will not speculate about those circumstances.”
At this point I am wondering whether a magician might have been involved, but, more likely, the statement is sort of correct in places – because G-d help her if it isn’t – and that her office is offering what I am calling the Leadsom Defense. That might not be enough because:
Politwhoops, a website that tracks tweets deleted by MPs, said the retweet had been deleted five days ago. Another such website, PostGhost, also showed the retweet had been deleted 10 days after it was first retweeted. It is unclear whether it is Leadsom’s account that undid the retweet, or if the tweet simply disappeared when the @QueenBriton account was deactivated.
Let’s explain this via the Leadsom Defense a combination of plausible deniability coupled with obfuscation and misdirection, wrapped up in pompous talk about an ‘investigation’ that likely consisted of some poor social media wonk getting chewed out. In short, the antics of a sociopath.
Whatever they did, it could not possibly be an investigation of the kind I understand because Leadsom’s office could have gone to Twitter and asked for details of IP addresses used to send those Tweets in an effort to trace exactly what happened. Whether Twitter would have provided that information is another matter but then perhaps Leadsom’s office could have dialed up their pals at GCHQ, the UK equivalent of the NSA.
Regardless, her office could have provided a definitive statement that would likely have involved throwing some poor sod under the bus but that would have been the end of the matter.
All of which leads me to the punchline.
Never, ever do this. I know what it is like to spew out injudicious Tweets and then have to deal with the blowback but the Leadsom Defense rarely stands up to serious scrutiny – except perhaps in the mind of an ambitious politician who needs to sweep this particular piece of crap as far away as possible and as fast as possible. There are too many ways in which the truth can be uncovered in an age of semi-permeable transparency. In this case I wonder whether her office’s handling of this troubling incident will come back and haunt her at some point in the future. We shall see.
Image credit - Featured image © Jakub Jirsák - Fotolia.com, story image via TwitterRead more on: Content marketingDigital skills and training 