
Amazon Web Services (AWS) today announced a new training scheme that aims upskill 1,000 people across the UK and offer them workplaces in companies and organisations across the AWS Partner Network.
At an event in central London this morning, UK Managing Director at AWS Gavin Jackson spoke about the challenges the UK faces in supplying the skills the country needs to companies that desperately need digital capability. The skills gap in the UK has been widely reported in recent years, with the government overhauling the national curriculum to cater for technology demands.
However, despite government initiatives and investments, MPs warned last year that an extra 745,000 workers with digital skills were needed by 2017. This of course has been further complicated by the prospect of a hard Brexit, potentially cutting off freedom of movement from highly skilled candidates in Europe.
AWS and the government are calling on more companies to launch similar initiatives, focusing on upskilling those that are looking for new career opportunities, in an attempt to fill the void.
The re:Start programme looks to educate young adults as well as military veterans, reservists, and their spouses, on the latest software development and cloud computing technologies. AWS is working in partnership with the Ministry of Defence (MoD), The Prince’s Trust and QA Consulting to run the programme.
AWS’ Gavin Jackson took to the stage this morning to highlight the challenge facing Britain. He said:
The point I really want to drive home is this – the cloud is at heart of what it means to be a successful business and effective government in the 21st century and a thriving economy. But we’ve also concluded that having an infrastructure fit and built for the 21st Century is not on its own enough, it needs people to drive the benefit from cloud computing too.
There’s no question that the UK is bristling with some of the best minds when it comes to technology. We have a rich pedigree and a great education system. Britain is ambitious, it is creating new tech entrepreneurs and new companies. So there is a higher demand for skills.
The challenge is more simple to describe than it is to solve. We have more demand for skills than we can currently supply for. The problem is particularly acute when it comes to these specialist skills that many of our customers are asking for. A staggering 93% of companies are struggling to find the staff that they need.
Inclusivity
According to AWS, re:Start is designed to accommodate differing levels of experience – and even those with no previous technical knowledge can sign up. Those who join the scheme will complete technical training classes, led by AWS certified instructors, and will complete work experience to gain on-the-job training. They will learn about cloud computing and how to architect, design, and develop cloud-based applications using AWS.
They will also learn how to set up new cloud environments and to build applications using software development toolkits for popular languages, such as Python. In addition to the technical training, The Prince’s Trust, through their ‘Get into Technology’ programme, will support students with mentoring, soft work skills, and help in applying for jobs including resume writing and interview skills.
Jackson added:
We think there is actually a digital skills opportunity. To take those people that are left behind by the digital economy, give them the skills that they need to restart their careers and that Britain needs to get ahead.
This is something that we are deeply, deeply passionate about. AWS re:Start is a new programme which brings more qualified cloud skills and software development skills into the UK’s workforce.
We will provide training, skills development, and importantly, job placements for 1,000 young adults, as well as military service leavers and their partners. The aim is to give them the skills that they need for the jobs of the future.
That means completing a free, intensive, full-time training course, which will provide the fundamental understanding of software development and cloud computing technologies.
In partnership with gov
Karen Bradley
Joining Jackson on stage were key figures from the government, including Karen Bradley, UK Secretary of State for Culture, Media and Sport, who welcomed the initiative. The minister said that there is “no beating about the bush” that the UK had work to do when it came to addressing the skills shortage, calling on other companies to launch similar initiatives. Bradley said:
Given the level of change and the pace of change, we do not today have enough people with the digital skills that we need for the future. So it is incredibly important that we make sure that we upskill people now ready for those developments in the future. And we do need to see this as an opportunity.
It is an opportunity for people from all parts of the country, from all walks of life, to retrain so that they can be part of a series of professions that have the most incredibly strong career prospects. I am delighted that AWS is starting this initiative.
But I hope this is only the start. We want to see companies from the across the country join these exciting initiatives and join together with government to make sure that we can make sure that we reach as many people as possible. Because the only way that Britain can continue to be at the forefront of digital technology – and we are today – is if we have the people with the skills to take advantage of those opportunities.
Organisations that have pledged to take on candidates from the scheme for job placements include ARM, Direct Line Group, EDF Energy, Funding Circle, Sage, Tesco Bank, plus a handful of others.
In addition to the re:Start scheme, Amazon said that it will also support the Micro:Bit Foundation, which distributed ARM-based embedded systems, designed by the BBC, for use in computer education in the UK. AWS will develop training content and courses that can be used by students and teachers to build cloud applications, in the hope that this will help to inspire the next generation of young people coming through the system.
Mike Stone, the Ministry of Defence’s CIO, was also on stage at the event, talking up the importance of cloud in digital organisations and the need to find skills to support that. Stone said:
I believe that information is really the lifeblood of operations in any organisation. But it’s particularly apt for the military. If we are really going to get the most out of that, what we have got to do is to deliver information and capabilities that are a force multiplier.
And in order to do that what we have got to do is fully embrace the power of both mobility and the cloud. And the cloud is the fundamental platform that is really going to enable us to achieve that. To do that we obviously need a new set of skills, but we also need the availability of major cloud providers in the UK in order to be able to cope with the privacy and the challenges we have.
Skills shortages in this space are going to be everywhere. We are all going to have to invest in making people more digitally aware.
My take
Although this is also very good PR for AWS, it can’t be denied that more programmes such as this are needed. As I’ve highlighted before, to get the skills we need we should be focusing on retraining people that are finding it difficult to get work in the current market. There are plenty of digital jobs out there, and not enough people to fill them. If companies want these people, they need to play a role in that training process.

Image credit - new skills, 3D rendering, blue street sign © Argus - Fotolia.com.; Read more on: Digital government and public servicesDigital skills and training

