
Here’s a bit of festive cheer for all those retail organizations out there who’ve spent millions on social media and websites and mobile apps to attract the digitally-native millennial customer – it’s all been a bit of a wasted effort. 
Or at least it has if a new study of 1955 millennials – 18-34 year olds – across the US, UK, France and Germany is to be believed. The study by YouGov, sponsored by GT Nexus, found that nearly two-thirds of millennials  – 61% – have ditched one of the favorite brands over the past 12 months in favor of another. 
But only 6% of respondents globally cited lack of decent presence on social media or a non-cool website as factors in why they’d switch from one brand to another, while only 5% reckon that the lack of a mobile app is a reason to move. 
There are some geographic differences. French millennials are the most fickle, with 72% having ditched brands, while 67% of their US counterparts have done the same. In contrast, the British and the Germans are more loyal, with 55% and 54% of respondents stating they’ve jumped ship. 
US millennial shoppers are the most concerned about brands social media presence, but even there, the total comes in at less than one in ten (9%), while the Germans are the least concerned (3% of respondents). 
The main takeaway from the study is that retailers may find that focusing too much on social and online may be a misplaced decision.  This may be counter-intuitive, argues Guy Courtin, Vice President of Industry and Solutions Strategy at GT Nexus: 

When we think of millennials we think of their attention being drawn to cool, edgy and flashy. These survey results paint a different picture. This describes a demographic that’s more concerned with what goes on behind the scenes of a brand, how they produce goods or operate, opposed to being drawn to flash and sizzle such as apps and website.
In recent years, manufacturers and retailers have paid a lot of attention to consumer-facing marketing factors like websites, apps and social media to attract and keep millennials loyal to their brands. But this research suggests that ‘behind-the-scenes’ actions that occur in operations, production and supply chain – which directly impact product availability, quality, ethics and the environment – are a lot more important when it comes to influencing the brand loyalty of millennials.

Ethical thinking
One characteristic that digital age retailers do need to focus on is the ethical factor. If the brand does not pay or treat workers fairly that’s a deal-breaker for a quarter of respondents, while 21% would be unhappy if the brand is not environmentally-friendly.  Courtin says: 

Millennials are sending a very clear message to their favorite brands here. If you don’t respect the workers creating your goods – either inside your organization or in your supply chains – we will turn on you. Same goes for the environment. Manufacturers and retailers should heed this warning and strive for fair, transparent and environmentally friendly supply chains. The apparel and footwear industry has met some challenges in this area and should be extra vigilante. Because it also happens to be a category in which millennials are most likely to switch their favorite brands, forty-seven percent according to the survey.

That said, the most likely reasons for shifting are issues with product quality (40%) or the brand is not available in store or cannot be delivered (36%). That’s obviously a message that chimes with GT Nexus as a supply chain network provider. Courtin concludes: 

Companies are investing significantly in technology, but this begs the question if they’re spending in the right places. Most enterprise systems and supply chain technology investments still come up woefully short when it comes to helping companies orchestrate how they buy, make, ship and deliver their products.  It’s no longer a matter of just reducing costs. Supply chain excellence ties directly to the health of the brand.

My take
As with any vendor-sponsored research, there’s always a risk of accusations of confirmation bias being levelled and this study is no exception with its conclusion that there needs to be more focus on supply chain management. That doesn’t mean the point that’s being made isn’t valid. While I sadly don’t fit into the millennial demographic, nothing annoys me more about the retail experience than finding something online that I want to buy, only to find that it’s not in stock or not in store. 
It’s encouraging too to note the importance of ethical behavior, although I’m not entirely convinced that this translates into positive action when you look at the rise of low cost clothing retailers or indeed the criticisms levelled at certain high end consumer tech firms whose goodies will be on many a Christmas to Santa this year. (And is there a better example of supply chain management than Amazon? We’ve all seen the allegations about working conditions there…)
But the main point I take away is that digital for the sake of digital, in pursuit of supposed millennial modernity, is a wasted effort. As with all digital transformation initiatives, there needs to be a solid business case and drivers for the investment, not just a populist assumption that this is what the ‘young ‘uns’ want. 
Image credit - Freeimages.comDisclosure - At time of writing, Infor - which owns GT Nexus - is a premier partner of diginomica. Read more on: Collaboration sharing and digital productivityRetail e-commerce and the omni-channelSocial 