
 
Just as Apple Pay lands in the UK and begins to test the British iPhone user’s appetite for making their mobile phone central to transacting with retailers; across the pond in the US, Bank of America’s (BoA) latest quarterly results serve as a good reminder of just how much consumers’ behaviour are changing and how this channel shift can impact your business.
BoA surprised investors and analysts today as it reported a huge jump in its quarterly profits, which more than doubled to $5.3 billion, up from $2.3 billion for the same period in 2014. In fact, this time last year Chairman and CEO Brian T. Moynihan was explaining to the market how its profits were down a whopping 43%.
Whilst a big drop in the company’s legal and regulatory costs can largely be attributed to the turnaround, where last year it was having to fend off the authorities and accusations of wrong-doing, Moynihan and the results also explained that a change in customer behaviour has allowed the bank to lower its costs significantly.
The shift to mobile has meant that Bank of America has been able to shut down a number of its branches, increase the size of others, and as a result change its operating model to lower expenses.
BoA’s press release for the results states:

Non-interest expense decreased 4 percent from the second quarter of 2014 to $4.3 billion, as the company continued to optimize its delivery network. Driven by the continued growth in mobile banking and other self-service customer touch points, the company continued to refine its retail footprint, closing or divesting 267 locations and adding 33 locations since the second quarter of 2014, resulting in a total of 4,789 financial centers at the end of the second quarter of 2015.

In fact, on a conference call with analysts after the results were release, Bank of America CEO Moynihan said that “we can expect more pressure downward” and that he has shut down a total of 1,400 branches, which he adds “is bigger than a lot of companies out there already have”.
And most of this can be attributed to the investments in mobile banking made by BoA, which has allowed it to take advantage of new capabilities. Unlike some banks that have simply deployed mobile apps to allow customers to check their bank accounts and balances, BoA has made use of the channel to push interactions out of the branch itself, which limits the amount of face-to-face time needed in-store.
Moynihan said that because patterns of behaviour had levelled out in the market, and it was less surprising about how users would interact with an organisation, this meant that Bank of America could more effectively plan its network. He said:

So let’s step back and make sure that what we understand one thing. [The] idea is they were moving because the customers were moving and how they conduct business. So you’ve got to run your changes consistent with what they’re doing. And that’s a base line that you have to stick to. If you forget that you can overshoot or undershoot frankly. And so — and so that being said, that’s one point.
Second point is in the 6,100 branches that we had at the peak down to this level, there are multiple things we are doing, customer behaviour changes, change in the configuration of the market we attack, etc. So there are lots of elements. So now you’re more in a business as usual ongoing practice, which will really be driven more by the customer behaviour as opposed to some view point we have about markets and arranging the franchise. So I’d expect that they will continue to work themselves down. I wouldn’t predict a steady rate because to it’s a very composite equation.

Bank of America said that the number of mobile banking customers had increased to 17.6 million users, and that 13 per cent of all deposit transactions by consumers were done through mobile devices, compared to 10 per cent in the previous quarter.
And during the analyst call, Moynihan said that the number of ‘computing banking users’ (I assume he means desktop users) now stands at 31 million and that “number is actually growing again”. He added that 60 per cent of the bank’s sales are all digital now and mobile is growing at 300 per cent.
In fact, the bank is averaging about 5,000 new customers a day on its mobile banking platform, according to Moynihan.
He explained that this shift all results in a better experience for Bank of America customers and a cost saving network for the business. Moynihan explained:

There are about 10,000 appointments scheduled in the mobile device a week at the branch, that allows us to have a more efficient branch structure, even though we may have less, we may have bigger branches because you have more sales going on in them. So think about that, that’s up from 2,000 last year second quarter, 10,000 times a week now and growing at that rate implied there.
People are scheduling appointments to come see us, which is a lot better experience for us and them to serve themselves, allows us to have our staffing levels down.
So I won’t give you a 5% reduction or 4% reduction, or any mathematical equation we have done. But the key is our customers scores have gone up overall and even in mobile channels we’ve gone

up year-over-year a 1000 basis points on our mobile channel top of the box satisfaction. So it will be a complex thing.
It’s an integrated pool of capabilities, phones, online ATA at branches. And you’d expect it to be pressured going down, but remember we were early into this and if you think about 1,400 branches, that’s bigger than a lot of companies out there already have a system. So we’ve been at this for a long time and we will do it the right way because if you push too hard to you will hurt the clients.

My take
We’ve said it before, but financial services is a tricky one because of its legacy infrastructure and its previous investments in bricks and mortar. However, Bank of America is clearly taking digital seriously and is reaping the benefits of adopting new operating models via mobile.
However, mobile can also be somewhat of a fringe activity in some cases, which I’ve seen before with banking businesses. As this story progresses, it will be interesting to see just how deep the digital investments actually go.
Read more on: MobileUse cases 