
The Bank of Ireland first opened its doors to the public in Dublin back in 1783 with a single branch. It now has over 2,000 employees and is one of the ‘big four’ banks in Ireland.
However, with such a long history comes a lot of baggage. And since 2008, the financial services industry has come under a significant amount of pressure, not just in terms of economic strain, but in terms of facing challenges from start-ups and Fintechs that are rapidly changing customer expectations.
The Bank of Ireland largely outsources its IT, with an internal organisation serving as an integrator. However, the bank’s method of operating under this model was not allowing it to be agile and flexible enough to meet customer demand. This has only been amplified as it attempts to bring in new applications and services into the mix.
I got the chance to sit down with the two people in charge of solving this problem for the bank at ServiceNow’s Forum event in London this week. Colin McEvoy, Head Of IT Service Transition at Bank of Ireland, and Mark Kellett, IT Service Design Manager at the bank, explained how they have embarked on a multi-year project to properly implement a service and integration management (SIAM) system, using the ServiceNow platform.
McEvoy explained:
We were given an opportunity just over a year ago to step up and lead the SIAM programme of work, which was a fantastic opportunity, and a significant challenge at the same time. The programme itself was as much around implementing a core technical platform, as much as it was the organisational and cultural change needed to take advantage of the opportunities around automation and simplification of the tools.
Providing some background, Kellett added:
Did we do SIAM before? We thought we did. Between 2000 to 2010 we had application support in-house, we had a big infrastructure and outsource model. In 2010 we put our foot on the gas and brought in another five or six – mainly outsource applications, a bit more of the infrastructure. And we tried to act as the integrator.
There were challenges everywhere. Multiple providers, different cultures, different contracts. Obviously if you think of 2010 to 2015, for a bank it was a different climate. So in 2015, that’s when I got my head into going for service management and integration properly.
Working for outcomes
McEvoy said that one of the main drivers for getting the SIAM project approved, was that given the strictly regulated environment in which the financial services sector operates, if the Bank of Ireland didn’t get a firm grip on its systems and processes, it could be exposing itself to risk further down the line. He added that if the ServiceNow project didn’t go ahead, the bank was “positioned to fail” and in turn faced a risk to its reputation.
Kellett added:
Watermelon SLAs – you ever heard that phrase? It’s all green on the outside and all red and mushy for the customer on the inside. That’s the challenge because they’ve all got a piece of chain, our processes are not adapted for outcomes. Then you can have a lot of green SLAs for the providers, for their part, but your overall end-to-end service might not be as good for the customer. That’s probably the number one challenge daily.
Also, with all those providers, they have different ways of working, there is different technology, there is different contracts. The alignment of all that for an integrator is tough. That’s a daily challenge.
McEvoy said that the ServiceNow platform has been brought in to work as an enabler for organisational change, to help the Bank of Ireland’s teams redefine their roles and responsibilities. The idea being that if ServiceNow can introduce a large amount of automation into the bank’s processes, then efficiencies can be gained and resources can be allocated to more customer-facing activities. He said:
[It will provide] a very robust and governance model, supported by lean and very customer focused processes. The platform itself would move us from an objective census of what service looked like, to empiric data. The platform itself enabled and facilitated these empiric conversations.
One of the unexpected benefits it has had, is the positive impact on morale of the teams. What did it look like before we did this? People were very, very busy. Working very hard. But had a feeling and were aware that they weren’t working very smart. They’d get extracts and run macros and pivot tables and we would have different versions of the truth.
We were having constant discussions with our vendors, with our partners – and everyone had a different view. Multiple panes of glass. It wasn’t going to work for us. The platform now provides us across change management etc, with a single pane of glass.
Looking long-term
Thus far the Bank of Ireland has implemented ServiceNow’s incident, problem, change management and service desk applications. The next phase will be looking at taking advantage of the the increased automation and the opportunities that this brings to reallocate resources. And whilst Kellett states that at the moment the bank “cannot look more than two years ahed”, given the pace of the industry at the moment, McEvoy is optimistic about ServiceNow’s future potential internally. He said:
Year three will become exciting, because we will have a different set of challenges in year two. Rather than people saying I’ll have faith when you show me the proof. We think in phase two, given what will be being delivered, they will want stuff quicker and want more. As we approach the end of phase two, we will need to think about whether things like HR need consideration. It may well grow outside of the IT piece. The rise of this platform has been astronomical.
However, the main driver for the pair is flexibility. The ability to quickly move on exciting new technologies that will benefit the Bank of Ireland and its customers, and to be able to integrate them easily into the platform. McEvoy said:
If we get this right we can plug and play any vendor seamlessly. You want to swap out an infrastructure piece? You want to change an app piece? The whole bi-modal operation piece is a challenge for many organisation is a challenge – how do we make ourselves more relevant to our customers? We do that by being more flexible. We do that by putting in a small vendor here, or take a big one out, without having to reinvent the whole model. It needs to be scalable.
However, to ensure success, Kellett recognises that managing Bank of Ireland’s people will be critical. Without being able to bring the people along, the project won’t get very far. He said:
There’s one challenge for me, and that’s the people. The resistance change. And people react in different ways. The majority of people you can get over the hill and get them to acceptance. Some of them are still in shock and denial. That’s the fact of the matter. We manage that with a lot of effort. But you just focus on showing them the value ahead, and show them it’s okay to change.
Image credit - Images via Bank of IrelandRead more on: IT service managementUse cases 