
Although economists have spoken a lot about the potential growth in Africa over the past ten years or so, I think it’s fair to say that the continent has struggled to live up to that expectation. However, with the growth in availability of mobile broadband and mobile technologies, the ability to connect communities and for transactions to securely take place has meant that things are starting to change.
For example, African countries are leading the way in mobile banking and many of the major western banks start their technology trials in the region.
However, Barclays is one of the only banks operating out of the continent that is attempting to create a truly local, regional and global bank in Africa – the full financial stack. I got the chance to sit down with Barclays chief executive for corporate and investment banking for the bank’s Africa Group, Stephen van Coller, at Dreamforce in San Francisco this week.
Coller took the time to explain how Barclays has been on a mission to connect up a whole pile of disparate local banks and systems that have been operating across African countries for the past 150 years. He said:
But all the banks in Africa ran as local banks, almost from colonial times, if I can put it that way. Until literally two years ago they were really just retail and SME local banks, there wasn’t much connectivity. In fact they all ran their servers out of Johannesburg with various forms of software on it. But all different installations.
He explained how African financial markets are expanding and that Barclays has been investing in setting up an investment bank for the region, as well as consolidating all of the different local banking systems and setting up a regional bank, which is now listed on the Johannesburg stock exchange. Coller said:
So since then we’ve been basically been connecting the global dots with the regional dots with the local dots. We are the only bank that does all three in the same breadth. In Kenya I can put an ATM on your shop floor, I can give your employees a home loan or a credit card, and I can go all the way up and do your M&A and your capital markets raising.
But to connect those dots you need to create a very different top-end bank.
Nightmare mainframes
 Coller soon realised that now all the local entities aren’t managing themselves and that there is an umbrella structure in place, Barclays needed to better manage its information, clients and employees. To do this, Barclays has been using the Salesforce platform.
One of the things that became apparent to us was that as you start following your clients across all these countries is that you need to be joined up with a single set of management information. As we started standardising the payment systems and all the data and everything behind it, plugging Salesforce into it has been quite important in terms of managing these clients. And then we use it for employee management too. We are going to use some of their messaging services and some of that too. We have actually rolled out for four countries but eventually it will be across all fifteen.
My first question to van Coller – having spent some time in South Africa myself – was, what about the broadband infrastructure? Is Africa really ready for widespread rollouts of cloud platforms? His answer was confident. Coller said:
If you use it properly it’s amazingly fast. I suppose the man on the street may struggle a bit, but for corporates generally it’s not a bit issue.
Coller explained that Barclays has no intention of ripping out any of the bank’s mainframe systems in the region, as he believes that this would be time consuming and “nightmare stuff”. Instead what Barclays is doing is building an extraction layer on top of these systems that connects and pulls out the data into the Salesforce platform. He said:
We’ve tried a few of the CRM systems, but when you work in a big bank you can’t really use the latest, smartest, it has to have some kind of impetus behind it. That last thing we need is to roll something out and then it falls over. Salesforce just seemed to have the most flexibility in terms of plugging our own stuff in and getting out of it what we wanted. As opposed to here’s a package, use it.
Results
Coller said that one of the things that he has noticed as a direct result of rolling out the Salesforce platform is that the way that Barclays develops its financial products within Africa is now far more client-focused and that development is an easier task. He said:
When you get into this client centricity thing, what it’s really about is that banks have always been product pushers. So what happens with that is you create a product that you think is cool but then you’re just calling all pockets. So you end up with these tails of clients that do one product every three years, which is very expensive from a capital on-boarding and maintenance perspective.
And you end up putting 100 products through a product approval process and then you only trade 20 of them, so you create massive costs for yourself. So in building your business around what the client wants helps you get to market 10 times faster because they come standardised and then you can bespoke them. The ability to make some changes for each client makes quite a big difference. To be given the tool box to play with, that’s very helpful.
Interestingly, Barclays isn’t just using Salesforce for CRM in Africa (in the traditional sense). It has also begun using the platform to create employee and HR engagement tools, which are largely pitched at the younger employees. Coller said:
We have customised Salesforce for other things, where we’ve got a thing called Barclays Now, which is basically our employee app. It’s an internal HR, LinkedIn-type thing. What I wanted to do with the staff is create like a Barclays passport. Today we still do six-monthly appraisals, but the youngsters, can you imagine sending something on Snapchat and somebody liked it six months later? We are trying to create a passport so that when you do some training or some up-skilling, you get a stamp in your passport immediately. So you can start building yourself some credits.
And if you do a project and you get recognised for it, you get a stamp in your passport. Anytime in the year you can see how well you are doing. The ability to plug some of the Salesforce chatter and the coupons and vouchers, where you can send love and all that kind of stuff, it was easy to do. It’s gone down incredibly well with employees, especially the youngsters. There’s not limitation really. Whereas before you’d have to weave your way through an intranet page and try and find it. Now it pings you if you’re interested.
Disclosure: Salesforce is a diginomica premier partner at time of writing.
Read more on: Financial services and fintech 