
The Barnes and Noble experience
The re-invention of Barnes & Noble to transition from bookseller to general retailer continues, but with more than a few stumbles on the journey. The one called NOOK – the firm’s attempt to take on Amazon’s Kindle – is perhaps the most high-profile and shows no sign of undermining the company’s wellbeing.
The NOOK brand, which includes e-books, e-readers, tablets and accessories, has lost money every single quarter for the last two years,  and are down over a billion dollars since it first launched in 2010.
Back in the summer, the company, now the last remaining mass-market bricks -and-mortar book chain in the US, announced a hefty upgrade to its BN.com website which in turn led to complaints from customers about problems using it. The then-CEO Michael Huseby declared:
We expect the website to be a valuable resource for customers, whether they choose to have their orders shipped to home or made available for in-store pickup.
But Huseby, promoted in January last year from being head of the Nook and digital business to the top slot, only lasted 6 months in the job, replaced by Ronald D. Boire, the former head of Sears Canada, with a remit to focus on expansion into other retail markets.
With all the freedom afforded someone who wasn’t in charge at the time the mistakes were made, Boire now says of the BN.com redesign that:
We launched our new BN.com website this past summer and expected certain challenges that generally accompany any new site launch. However, the challenges were greater than anticipated and reduced traffic as well as conversion.
Our website challenges were greater than anticipated. We are focused on improving the performance of the site including search, more accurate delivery windows and inventory positions and a much quicker checkout experience. We believe these actions will improve the customer experience, increase sales and further reduce costs.
He adds:
These challenges have also impacted the timing of our efforts to migrate NOOK within BN.com systems and delay the synergies we expected to achieve. We expect the cost benefits of transitioning NOOK systems to the BN.com platform to begin to occur later this fiscal year and have a greater impact next fiscal year.
Work has taken place to correct the problems, he adds, which has paid off in rises in third quarter traffic. That improvement work has now to slow down in anticipation of the holiday season – the last thing the company needs is problems with its website over the next few weeks. Boire says:
We have stabilized the site for the holiday season. We plan to implement additional improvements after the holiday season to further upgrade the overall user experience.
 
The firm is also looking to use social media to create a more localised experience for customers, he says:
We are also giving our stores new tools to reach out in their local community. We just launched individual Facebook, Instagram and Twitter accounts for each of our stores, which has enabled them to connect with the community with their local community on the great events, author signings and reading hours occurring at their Barnes & Noble locations.
The NOOK problem
But hanging over all this is the NOOK problem and this is something that Boire intends to tackle through tighter integration with the wider retail market:
NOOK’s year-to-date EBITDA losses are $39 million. This level of loss is simply not acceptable and we are committed to significantly reducing NOOK’s EBITDA losses next fiscal year.
While Barnes & Noble has fulfilled its promise of any book, any time, anywhere and in any format we see opportunity to better understand and serve our customers through an omni-channel view.
Beyond the financial benefits of integrating NOOK with retail this integration provides us the ability for more holistic view of the customer. We are now in a position to have a better single view – single company view of our customer, which will provide us with richer insights into our customer base and how to better serve them.
There are also industry macro-trends at play here as well with something of a reversal of fortune around the book trade. Boise observes:
The bookselling industry has undergone significant shifts over the past five years as e-books initially grew very rapidly at the expense of physical books.
More recently e-book sales have been stagnant while physical book sales have stabilized.
This means that Barnes & Noble can think once again about offline expansion:
Improving bookstore trends are enabling us to close fewer bookstores. Last year, we closed fewer stores than initially planned and we see the same trend developing this year. We now expect to close only 10 stores as compared to the 2013 we originally expected to close. Additionally, we are looking at new store prototypes.
This leads to a potent omni-channel mix, he declares:
We provide customers a true multi-channel shopping experience with the ability to shop our stores, buy online and ship to home or pickup in the store which simply have the book delivered electronically to the device of their choosing.
Six months into the job, the Barnes & Noble CEO remains upbeat:
Barnes & Noble has a customer base unlike almost any other retailer and our stores have become community centers across America. Barnes & Noble is a destination for personal development, learning and entertainment and I could not be more excited as we look ahead at our opportunities for future growth.
My take
Barnes & Noble’s latest numbers indicate the ongoing problems the brand faces.
Total sales decreased 4.5% to $895 million. Of that, online sales fell 22% year-on-year, digital content was down 29.8% and device sales tumbled a hefty 36.9%.
Uncomfortable reading all round. Once the holiday season is past, let’s see what the next chapter holds.
Read more on: CRM and customer experienceDigital and content marketinge-commerce 