
The Barnes and Noble local experience
Here’s an encouraging few statistics. According to Pew Research, 72% of US adults have read a book over the past 12 months, a percentage that rises to 80% for adults between the ages of 18 and 29. What’s more, those books aren’t just being read on Kindles and other e-readers, they’re the genuine, paper-based articles. 

It’s part of a phenomenon that Ron Boire, CEO of troubled bookseller Barnes & Noble, calls ‘digital blowback’. And it’s a trend that he’s counting on as his company tries to find stability in an omni-channel retail world. He argues: 

I believe there is also an emerging trend of returning to physical ownership and physical experience which I call digital blowback, in which people want to own and touch a physical object, whether it be a beautiful, artistic book cover or a great album jacket and a piece of vinyl.

It’s all about an adjustment in the ‘balance of power’ when it comes to e-books v print books, he adds: 

The industry has undergone significant transformation over the past five years, as the digital book business grew from about $400 million in 2010 to about $3 billion in 2013, essentially at the expense of physical books. Since that time, e-book sales have plateaued and physical book sales have stabilized. As of today, we estimate the physical book sales account for about 85% of the overall US book market, and our market share is approximately 20% in the physical space and 9% within the e-book market.

That depressingly low e-book percentage is something we’ll pick up on in part 2 of this special report, but it’s the physical space aspect of the omni-channel operating model, the 640 Barnes & Noble bookstores, that Boise sees as a competitive advantage for the firm, positioning it as the ‘third place’ for Americans in search of community can find refuge. He points to: 

continuing strong growth of food services within the US and the rebirth of downtowns and village centers across the country, where people increasingly are looking for that third place to gather and be part of a community. This all plays to our strength as a place where people can learn and grow and be part of a community, strengths that you will see we’re building on with our strategic priorities.
Barnes & Noble is a true community center. Content and community are central to everything we do. Barnes & Noble stores are the focal point in the communities, where people of all ages come together to read, to think, to learn and to aspire and especially to discover. One of our key competitive differentiators beyond the massive selection we offer is the experience we provide. Customers come to Barnes & Noble to be entertained. Whether it is browsing through a book or magazine, attending an author signing, or one of our nationwide events such as our Relive the Magic of Harry Potter event which begins tomorrow, Barnes & Noble is a cultural hub in the communities we serve.

Customer analytics
It’s a tempting notion, if somewhat idealisitically ‘mom, pop and apple pie’ in tone. That said, the Barnes and Noble demographic is a powerful one, with Millennials over-indexing by 1.5 times, representing 37% of the total customer base versus 25% of the US population. Some 71% have a college education or higher and, says Boire, higher education certainly equates to a higher income, with 44% of Barnes & Noble customers earning an income greater than $75,000 per year. 
What’s needed is to understand, on an ongoing basis, what that customer base wants from Barnes & Noble, says Boire: 

While Barnes & Noble has fulfilled the promise of any book, anytime, anywhere, we see an opportunity to better understand and serve our customers through an omni-channel view of the market. What that means is we simply have a more holistic view of the customer which will provide us with richer insights into our customer base and how we may better serve them…We truly need to better understand all of the touch points of our customers and the touch points they have with the brand and how they engage us so that we can serve them more effectively. 

Key to this is increased focus on membership and loyalty programs, with a number of new initiatives being rolled out as pilots in August. It’s time for an update, says Boire: 

Our member program was well ahead of its time when it was introduced and continues to be a major success almost 16 years after its launch, despite minimal changes to the program in all these years. When the company originally evaluated the prospects of launching a membership program in 2000, few believed the program could be successful with an annual fee. Barnes & Noble offered loyal customers a tremendous benefit and in turn believed its customers would see the value of becoming a member. The goal was to capture greater share of their wallet and enable us to bridge with some of the online versus in-store pricing dynamic. The program’s success is due to its simplicity and the rich reward that it offers to members.

Members pay $25 annually and receive a 40% discount on hardcover books which brings in-store pricing of books closer to online pricing. They also get 10% off on other items within the store and online members receive free express shipping on BN.com orders. In turn, members are more likely to transact at Barnes & Noble due to the fee component. 
Boire points out that Barnes & Noble best customers are part of the 6 million strong members program, which makes having a full understanding of their needs essential for future growth. He explains: 

A major objective with the member program is also to track purchases and levels of engagement with the company in order to develop better insights on our customers. These insights include transactional and profile data that will inform our strategies, increase engagement and drive incremental sales and result in even higher retention rates. The customer profile data will enable us to fine-tune our member communications and be much more personalized in our communications to them.

The firm pumps out email campaigns that go to an 11.5 million-strong audience. To grow that audience there’s increased investment in new back-end systems: 

We’ve upgraded our email and loyalty engine technology which allows for better marketing automation, personalization and lifestyle campaigns. These new platforms will enable us to perform better segmentation for various marketing channels, including BN.com email, direct mail push notifications and online display marketing. We’re now in a position to integrate multi-channel data sets that will provide us a more complete and comprehensive single view of the customer. All of these elements will enable us to communicate with customers in a much more targeted and localized level. 

That localization objective maps on to the physical world ‘Barnes & Noble-as-community-center’ and is mirrored by the firm’s social media strategy, which last year saw stores provided with their own Facebook, Instagram and Twitter accounts. Boire says: 

This enables them to connect and communicate with their community on a local and personal basis on all the great events, signings, readings and other events occurring in their Barnes & Noble. We believe this is the most open and locally-oriented social media strategy in all of retail. We allow each of our stores to directly communicate with their community with central support but without control of content and voice. Today, each of our stores has their own accounts and are posting about author appearances, new book releases and educator events. 

In this way, the social media strategy brings the customer back to the physical world. Boire concludes: 

Our stores are typically where customers’ journey begin and are great places for community learning and discovery which cannot be replicated by an algorithm. As retail faces greater competition from e-commerce and digital alternatives, we will continue to make our stores more experiential and differentiated. Our stores as a destination and centers of the community is at our core.

But hanging over all of this is the shadow of the NOOK, a challenge articulated in part 2 of this report by Chief Digital Officer Fred Argir. 
Image credit - Barnes & NobleRead more on: Retail e-commerce and the omni-channel 