
Gene Austin
The reviews and ratings that customers give products and services on online sites are of huge value to retailers and brands – but there’s more to consumer-generated content than a glowing endorsement, a blistering attack, a five-star rating or a disappointingly low score.
That was the message from Gene Austin, CEO of Bazaarvoice, the Austin, Texas-based provider of social shopping tools, as he kicked off the company’s 2015 Summit [#bsocial15] in New Orleans.
Reviews and ratings still matter, he said. They’ve been “wildly successful” as a source of insight for retailers and brands:
For all the change [happening in retail], with everything that’s going on, the voice of the consumer continues to be the most powerful content available. Year after year, we see that. Whether it’s feedback about your brand, or whether it’s converting a shopper to a buyer, it’s the most trusted content out there.
What does trust mean? Trust equals consumer confidence. And consumer confidence equals more purchases, more loyalty.
But, at the same time, new types of consumer-generated content (or as Austin calls it, CGC) are emerging: photos, videos, chat, questions and so on. These could be valuable too, he said – but only if companies can better analyse and understand what their customers are telling them in their online postings. And the uses to which companies are putting CGC are changing too, he added:
It’s not just about a product any more, it can also be about an experience. There are now a number of companies employing ratings and reviews and other types of CGC to measure the customer experience – pre-sales, sales and post-sales transactions… That content can be extremely valuable for search engine optimisation and provide insight into company performance [in terms of] the consistency of experience you’re able to deliver.
Pressure to diversify
This message makes sense: Bazaarvoice has built its ten-year-old, $168.1 million business on the back of a software platform that enables B2C companies, including US DIY chain Home Depot, UK health and beauty retailer Boots and brands such as Philips, Samsung and Lexus, to collect, analyse, display and re-purpose online consumer reviews and ratings. Its key product in this area is called Bazaarvoice Conversations.
But growth has been slowing for Conversations, amid concerns that the market for reviews and ratings is rapidly becoming commodified. As Austin himself said on the company’s recent 3Q2015 earnings call:
As we go forward, growth is going to be much more dependent on our sales performance and new product performance looking ahead… Our Conversations business is below our expectations. We did not plan for Conversations to be a growth engine for the bookings plan this year, but it’s actually come in lower than we expected…. So we’re in that transition period where new products need to catch hold.
In other words, Bazaarvoice is under pressure to diversify, as are competitors such as TrustPilot, Reevoo, Shopzilla and Power Reviews – a company that Bazaarvoice acquired back in 2012, before being forced to divest it last summer, under orders from the US Department of Justice.
New products, new directions
Having outlined the need for new tools to handle new types and new uses of CGC, Gene Austin turned over the stage to executive vice president of product, Michael Paulson, who announced two new products: Spotlights and Competitive Insights.
Spotlights is about using CGC for better search engine optimisation (SEO), with the aim of driving more traffic to a site. It works by displaying the most freshly generated customer reviews, the type of content that search engines love, on product-category pages, so that a user searching on Google for “blue polycotton hand towels”, for example, is more likely to see the Bazaarvoice customer – let’s call them Towels R Us – as high as possible on the first page of Google search results and then be directed to the page on that retailer’s site the shows all available products matching that description.
Bazaarvoice
Competitive Insights, meanwhile, is a consumer analytics tools designed to help brands better understand the factors that drive consumer decisions. In order to deliver these insights, it relies on CGC and session data drawn from Bazaarvoice’s global retail network – some 1,500 retailers and brands, engaging with around 700 million shoppers.
That’s important, Paulson told diginomica, because:
A lot of the retail research and social listening tools out there don’t reveal at scale why consumers choose one product versus another at the point of purchase. It’s about unlocking the often-unseen connections between people, brands and retailers.
So, for example, Towels R Us would be able to see how its LuxuryDry towel compares with a competing products in terms of page views, review volumes, average ratings and other statistics. Competitive Insights could also be used to see how often consumers consider Towels R Us within a shopping session, as well as the other brands they consider.
Both Spotlights and Competitive Insights are currently being used and refined by early-adopter Bazaarvoice customers in North America and the UK, said Paulson. Both will be available to all customers by the end of the calendar year.
There’ll be more from the Bazaarvoice Summit in New Orleans later in the week, including an exclusive one-to-one interview with CEO Gene Austin.  

Read more on: Cloud platforms - infrastructure and architectureContent marketingCRM and customer experienceDigital and content marketinge-commerceRetail e-commerce and the omni-channel 