
Gene Austin
When we last cast an eye over Bazaarvoice, the social shopping tools provider had made some progress in its turnaround, but lost its Chief Revenue Officer (CRO).
Three months on, there’s a new CRO in place, revenues are up and losses are narrowing. So is the firm back on the straight-and-narrow? Well, not so much.
The company reported a net loss of $4.9 million compared to a net loss of $9.9 million in the same quarter the previous fiscal year, on revenues up 5% year-on-year to $49.9 million.
The new CRO is Elizabeth “Liz” Ritzcovan who will now lead Bazaarvoice’s global field sales organization, says CEO Gene Austin:
Liz brings significant sales and advertising leadership experience from Yahoo!, Parade Media Group and Time. Most recently, she was the CRO for Seismic. Liz brings strong sales leadership and digital marketing domain expertise to our team and will be instrumental in helping us improve our overall sales performance while also championing some of our new initiatives, specifically shopper advertising.
That last point is a primary goal, as Austin admits:
Thus far, our biggest disappointment this year has been the poor performance of our advertising business.
And there are other challenges to overcome, says Austin:
Bookings for the company in the second quarter, was again mixed. I realized the term mix has been used often to describe our sales performance, but I do think the trend is slowly heading in the right direction.
Europe had its best overall performance across all of our major metrics bookings, launches and churn since I have been with the company. However, in North America, bookings were soft after a solid first quarter.
The demand for our offerings remains good overall, but we have clearly seen a decline in average deal sizes and fewer large opportunities. In the second quarter, average deal sizes dropped 15% from a year ago and we only closed two large deals.
Things haven’t gone exactly to plan, admits Austin:
The core of our current advertising business is site monetization via online advertising by our retail partners. Entering this year, we had some momentum with a new large retail relationship, new sales resources that we thought would add to productivity and the early excitement of our shopper advertising initiative.
Midway through the year, our programmatic business, which is generally responsible for placing ads and retail inventory, was flat despite increased inventory to fill. Our direct sales team did not produce at the levels we expected and shopper advertising while still a unique and important initiative is not where we thought it would be timing wise from a go-to-market standpoint.
He adds:
Earlier this year, we stated that our core ratings and reviews business was under pricing pressure, primarily among our brand customers. We continue to see this phenomenon play out due to competitors using price as their differentiator.
To address this, the firm is drilling down on some new initiatives:
First and foremost, we are steadfastly focused on client satisfaction. I believe price to value stability begins with happy clients and we have more work to do in this area despite good progress.
Next, we have reignited the innovation engine of the company and have launched a number of consumer-generated content products and services designed to complement our core ratings and review business.
Any good news?
So that’s the bad news – and quite a bit of it – but there is an upside, argues Austin, specifically surrounding shopper advertising. He explains:
The power of shopper advertising is based on our large network where during Black Friday alone, over 100 million shoppers, up nearly 20% over last year engaged with reviews or other types of content. We capture their activity, like reading or creating a review or viewing photos from the curations gallery and create shopper specific segments. Our brands or retail customers can then create specific campaigns to a segment of shoppers as they shop online or into a store.
To date the firm has sold nearly $500,000 of shopper advertising, albeit in the form of trial programs in the main. But those trials are beginning to deliver repeat business, says Austin:
For example, one retailer spent $30,000 on Columbus Day for a trial campaign. Their results were so strong that we are now running a similar campaign for $90,000 in December and are in discussions for yet another one early next year. As we continue to amass more shopper data and construct more segments, we believe shopper advertising will provide even stronger revenue.
But this is not a short term gambit, he cautions:
We think the significant opportunity is in shopper advertising. The shopper advertising plan is late simply because we are assembling all the pieces to make it successful and that assembly has taken us longer to get there. We had no rights to shopper activity or shopper data in our network.
A year ago, we had methodically gone into the network, worked with a number of our largest customers to get those rights and we now have tens of millions of shoppers that we have rights to actually begin targeting and assimilating their information.
But those are contractual relationships, meaning we have the contractual rights to gather that information on sites. Now, we have to technologically actually match those shoppers, get those individuals and then begin to really go after them with specific campaigns. So, this is all taking time.
He adds:
The amount of data we have contractually gotten has grown significantly and the amount of targetable individuals has grown significantly as well in just the first six months, but we remain very excited about where we think it can go.
My take
Baby steps, baby steps. Ritzcovan has a big job on her hands in 2016.
Read more on: CRM and customer experiencee-commerce 