
Sometimes art imitates life. Sometimes life imitates art. And sometimes there are the most frightful collisions between the two that leave satirists shaking their heads in despair.
So it is with the sorry tale of BBC Three’s new logo.
Personally I think unnecessary changes of logo design are ill-advised at best and hugely-costly at worst, both in terms of brand and financial cost.
But it’s the first go-to position for digital marketers. So with BBC Three set to shift from being a terrestrial TV channel at the end of February and morphing into an online-only ‘yoof’ platform accessed via the iPlayer, there was no way that the BBC’s marketing gurus would be able to resist a pointless redesign of the logo.
Now of course, you could argue that when shifting an established brand into an experimental new environment, then hanging on to the continuity of the existing logo might be an idea, but it seems not. And the driver for this move? Digital, of course, digital and smartphones and cool stuff like that.
According to BBC Three’s Head of Marketing Nikki Carr, the new logo is designed to “fit the digital world”. She explains in a, frankly, hugely-defensive blogpost:
BBC Three’s logo hasn’t changed in 8 years so in an age of smartphones we needed a whole new system that fits the digital world, not something analogue just shoehorned into it. We needed to develop something that worked on a TV screen and as an app icon.
She adds:
We are going to spend 20% of our budget on different types of content that is not traditional TV. This could be anything – short form, blogs, animation, picture led stories. And for the first time this will be daily, delivered to you via new products we will launch soon. In the future we will still have the same amount of long form TV but a raft of new digital content as well. Content produced by us, by partners in news and sport and by production companies.
The new icon works equally as well on a TV as it does on a smartphone or tablet. It works as an app icon and digital on screen graphic.
OK. But that said, the new logo is….well, frankly ludicrous. According to Carr, the new logo and associated collateral is based on a different colour palette, although to my untrained eye, it looks like they’ve swapped pink for, well, pink.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
But the bit that’s stunned those outside the BBC is that the new logo:

(a) doesn’t say BBC Three – it says ‘BBC2 Exclamation Mark’ or ‘BBC11 Exclamation Mark’
(b) that the absence of the Three element is seen as one of its greatest achievements!

Carr says defiantly:
What is most striking is the new logo and the fact it doesn’t actually say three. It’s easy to belittle the importance a logo has in supporting a brand, and I’m sure the usual critics will have their say – “It looks like Adidas”, “it looks like a “hamburger menu icon,” “it doesn’t even say three”, “are they Roman numerals” – but ff I’m being honest I’m not worried. Some people are resistant to change and we wanted to be bold and create something that looks forward and will be around for years to come.
Er…and the lack of a 3 or a Three or even a III for a logo for something in which the three aspect is sort of the most important bit? Carr insists:
Look at Snapchat. They’re doing okay without having Snapchat in their logo.
Hmm, maybe so, but Snapchat isn’t part of a corporation that has exercised some pretty good overall brand consistency elsewhere.
But of course, BBC Three – sorry, BBC II! – is just…different, innit?
Very good, very strong
It’s all far, far too similar to the scene in BBC2 comedy W1A, about the Kafka-esque processes and New Age managerial madness inside the BBC, where the Perfect Curve agency re-brand the BBC by losing the letters B,B and C in favour of three vertical lines.

Carr is clearly sensitive to this and opts for attack as the best form of defence:
Thanks to W1A we’re cursed at the BBC when it comes to marketing and I don’t want to come across all Siobhan Sharpe but forgive me some lingo.
Well, OK, lingo forgiven – if only because it gave us a bit of a laugh on the bleak first day back at work.
I’m less willing to forgive the idea that BBC Three just spent (at least) hundreds of thousands of pounds of license fee payers money on a pointless attempt to equate the BBC with Snapchat!
My take
Let’s nail this puppy to the floor. The BBC hasn’t told anyone how much this digital folly cost, but it really doesn’t bode well for the future. Remember, one of the main reasons for the shift online for BBC Three was to save money!
Not being funny or nothing, but this is a really rather bad knee-jerk redesign built on a false premise representing the worst ‘must do that’ digital marketing mindset. And the end result doesn’t even look particularly well rendered either, as some have noted.

As W1A’s BBC Head of Better Anna Rampton would say: “No, I don’t want that!”
Read more on: CRM and customer experienceDigital and content marketingSocial 