
“Unmissable, now Ownable”.
That’s the strapline for the BBC’s BBC Store which launched today. It’s a strapline that begs the question – did iTunes and Amazon Prime never happen for the BBC? And what’s been on those silver disks that the BBC has been selling for the past decade or so?
Naff marketing aside, what actually is BBC Store? Well, basically it’s iTunes run by the BBC.
On launch, it’s 6,000 hours of content that customers can buy for around £1.89 per episode, then download to the BBC iPlayer app and playback whenever they want.
BBC Worldwide’s Marcus Arthur claims:
We want BBC Store to do for digital ownership what BBC iPlayer did for catch-up. BBC Store makes digital ownership really easy for audiences and means that we can begin opening up the incredible BBC television archive.

A bold ambition, but at present, there’s not much to choose between what you can buy from iTunes and what you can buy direct from the BBC. The price point is about the same and most of the content is the same, certainly the stuff that’s being pushed on the home page.
The BBC offering will work on Smart TVs, but with iPlayer now set to debut on Apple TV soon and already available on the likes of NOW TV boxes, that differentiator isn’t going to last long.
The Corporation is also competing against itself. For example, if you miss an episode of this week’s EastEnders, you now have two options:

You can watch the episodes free of charge next day via iPlayer – and indeed for the next 30 days.
Or for some reason you could decide to cough up £1.89 to download it the next day.

The BBC has a small time window ahead of the competition, on paper at least. New episodes of ongoing series will be available the day after they first air. So, if you take out a season pass to Doctor Who, this Saturday night’s episode will be available for download on Sunday morning. If you take a season pass out on iTunes, you’ll have to wait a week.
But again, if you really can’t wait for your paid version on iTunes, you can always download the episode free of charge on iPlayer for 30 days.
The key here is going to be content. In this first iteration of the BBC Store the emphasis is on the recent past and current series, as well as some tried and tested favorites, such as Dad’s Army and Only Fools and Horses.  But the BBC is sitting on top of millions and millions of hours of archive content dating back to the 1940s. The oldest piece of content is Muffin the Mule – for the benefit of US readers, see below!

If the value here is going to lie on opening up that archive properly, then in the first instance, in this respect at least, the BBC Store is a major disappointment. For example, EastEnders fans can buy from the previous 250 or so episodes this year, but not the very first episode from 30 years ago.
There’s certainly money being left on the table here for now. For example, sci-fi fans tend to be demographically big spenders on content and collateral. For the BBC’s big banker Doctor Who, there’s a curated selection of classic episodes dating back 52 years to 1963. But the BBC’s missing a trick by not offering up classic sci-fi like Quatermass, Doomwatch, Survivors or Blake’s 7.
On the comedy front, the likes of Dads Army, Fawlty Towers and Only Fools and Horses are up front and central – and also in constant repeat loop on both the BBC and various cable channels as well as across Netflix et al. They’re not exactly just “now Available”! Where’s Steptoe and Son? Where’s Hancock’s Half Hour?
The BBC Store is also a perfect vehicle for content that the BBC would no longer broadcast on mainstream channels, such as It Ain’t Half Hot Mum (“now Available” in the Store) and Till Death Us Do Part (not available). It’s also a place where content that was originally banned, such as The War Game and Dennis Potter’s Brimstone and Treacle, can now be viewed.
Fortunately there’s going to be more of this to come. Steve Wind-Mozley, the BBC’s senior vice president of e-commerce says:
We have a line that if it’s of its time it’s of its time…we are providing something for the consumer to buy and keep which is different from content we broadcast.
Clearly this is a work in progress. There are some pointers in the right direction. Cathy Come Home is there as are a couple of 1960s episodes of The Likely Lads and Jonathan Miller’s 1966 Alice in Wonderland. You can download the Queen’s Coronation from the 1950s. More of this is what’s badly needed to create that all important differentiator.
But there also needs to be more populist nostalgia for the casual viewer at work here as well. Take the Drama category. There is currently no Tenko, no Secret Army, no Dixon of Dock Green, no Duchess of Duke Street, no Colditz, no Z-Cars— the sort of shows that key demographics remember from years, nay decades, ago as representing the best of the BBC.
Some of this stuff is on DVD and some of it ‘unofficially available’,  but in authorised online/digital terms, they really would be “now Available” to  most people.
Unless such a differentiator can be put in place, the BBC remains open to attack at a difficult time when its future role and remit are under public and legislative scrutiny. Why is the BBC trying to expand its footprint into a market served perfectly well by commercial entities such as Apple and Amazon?
And as this content has already been ‘paid for’ by licence fee users, why are they expected to pay to have access to it again? That argument doesn’t really hold up to any scrutiny – you’d pay for it on iTunes or on Amazon Prime or on DVD. But there’s a psychological – and political – difference about being asked to pay for it again on the BBC.
Certainly the BBC-bashing right-wing media in the UK have fired their first shots, soliciting such quotes from politicians such as Tory MP Conor Burns as:
They are entering into interesting terrain by saying that previously paid for content should be paid for again. There is an argument they should make their entire archive free to download.
For its part, the BBC responds:
The licence fee funds the broadcast of programmes on BBC television channels and these shows are available on BBC iPlayer for 30 days. But for over 30 years audiences have wanted to own their favourite BBC programmes so they can watch them again and again.
What a pity all those people missed out on videos, DVDs and iTunes et al during all that time.
My take
A curate’s egg of an offering.
BBC iPlayer is one of the BBC’s finest achievements, knocking spots off rival offerings such as ITV’s third-rate ITV Player.
Nearly two-thirds of the population of the UK have used iPlayer in some form over the past year, so the BBC has an established installed base to sell to.
But in this first iteration, there’s little to catch the eye that a TV collector audience won’t already have sourced from other providers of catch-up content. The BBC says it intends still to work with those providers and indeed it can’t afford not to. The commercial success of shows such as Sherlock, Poldark and Doctor Who on US iTunes is a testimony to the need to keep those channels open.
Meanwhile that 30-day free-viewing window for currently-broadcast content is going to be an annoying loophole that no commercial provider would tolerate, but one that the BBC will, by dint of its public service remit, be unable to close.
Opening up that archive properly is going to be the key to success here. The Corporation hopes to have 10,000 hours of TV available by the end of this year. With 4 million programmes in its archive, the BBC needs to be offering up niche content that only it can provide, stuff that fans and nostalgists will pay a premium price to see.
Once that happens, then the BBC Store stands a chance of being something different.
Until then, it’s just a case of the BBC copying Apple and Amazon with an offering that on first sight doesn’t yet do it as well as they do.
Read more on: Content marketingCRM and customer experienceDigital and content marketinge-commerce 