
It was 2015 when Bed, Bath & Beyond’s earnings peaked. Since then it’s been a case of putting in place an omni-channel transformation program for one of the US’s best-known retailers that allows it to fend off the challenges coming from the likes of Amazon,Walmart and Target.
It’s been a bumpy road to date, with the firm having a particularly rough 2018 when its share price plummeted to an 18 year low as it tried to pitch its offerings to the ‘back to college’ audience. But this week the firm gave an update on its transformation progress that provided enough positive indicators to get 2019 off to a better start.
As we’ve noted over the past couple of years, the expectations for Bed, Bath & Beyond have not been high, although how much of this is down to its go-to-market proposition is a moot point. Behind the scenes, there has been transformational work underway, most notably the Front-End Optimization (FEO) initiative, pitched as “a re-platforming of our digital commerce platform”.
This has some specific objectives:

A responsive online design.
Quicker and more efficient implementation of new features online across all channels.
Improved page load performance.
Cleaner, simplified user experiences.

Those are all pretty ‘bread and butter’ stuff for any modern omni-channel retailer, but essential foundations for improvement. CEO Steven Temares says:
This new service-based architecture has a responsive design that enables us to change and deploy new sections or features within and across all of our web channels quite quickly and cost effectively. For our customers, FEO will create a better shopping experience with improved page load performance and a cleaner, more contemporary website design.
The roll-out is ongoing, but there have clearly been some issues, not helped it can be imagined by executing on this during the peak Holiday season. Temares admits:
We were anxious and excited to roll out FEO before the Holiday although knowing that not all of the existing website functionality would be available at launch. We believe that the valuable learnings we would gain in terms of customer experience and site performance during the peak sales period would be more beneficial in the long run versus the short-term risk to sales due to some temporary loss of relevancy in our search result rankings and any revisions required within the newly created platform. We are now building the functionality with additional features and capabilities and as we go forward, we will continue to optimize the platform and integrate more content and product imagery to display our expertise.
The timescales on this? Temares says:
Right now we are shooting for the middle of March to recover a lot of the functionality that didn’t go into FEO so that we could get FEO out in the timeframe we wanted to get it out. We are seeing improvements in conversion. The traffic itself, there was the impact and there is measurement of tax and its impacts in terms of our ability to look at.
That self-imposed March deadline frankly looks ambitious given the slow pace of change that has characterised Bed, Bath & Beyond’s transformational efforts to date. Temares doesn’t provide much more confidence when he says:
Right now, there is a lot of things are going on that we have to better assess to understand, but we knew going into it that things like traffic, relevancy could have been impacted by things that we did. We knew that there was functionality that we had [to have] that we didn’t have day one to be able to launch. We will recover that functionality by that second week of March. The plan [is] then to continue to add on functionality as we go forward.
In-store
Away from the purely online, the other necessary area for improvement is the physical stores. As a home furnishings provider, having a good looking shop would rather seem to be something of an essential, but Bed, Bath & Beyond’s real estate hasn’t been delivering on that front in recent years. Hence, the introduction of the Next Generation Store initiative which is “re-imaginging the in-store experience”. Temares explains:
We have identified as many as 40 or so Bed Bath & Beyond stores that will become our working labs in support of our next generation store initiatives. In these lab stores, we are testing new and different assortments and visual merchandising and re-imagining the in-store experience to be able to further reinforce our position as the expert for the home and heartfelt life events.
Again, this isn’t an unusual set of goals in the 2019 ‘legacy’ retail environment; and again, the question is going to be around the pace of change. While the program is intended to cover “as many as 40” stores, work is underway at only 18 to date. Temares says that the objective right now is to pick up early learnings and work out how these can be applied elsewhere:
We are incorporating the learnings from our assortment strategy initiatives and other ongoing tests to assess where we can selectively and efficiently rollout these new experiences to a larger number of stores. Just to note, these lab stores will each present differently, with different tests underway at any given time. In the 18 lab stores we have initiated so far, we have been augmenting our assortments with seasonal and treasure hunt product as well as commodity products consisting of health and beauty care and food. We have also been testing different visual merchandising presentations to create a more inspirational environment while at the same time reducing inventory to optimize the floor space and to create a cleaner and more open appearance. Again, early learnings and successes can then be rolled out to the broader chain as part of our ordinary course of business.
The next set of experiences we will be testing feature even more evolved models for visual presentations, merchandising and store operations, including creating more open sidelines, further integrating our assortment and focusing associate support across merchandise areas to better represent our key destinational categories, such as cooking and entertaining, bedding and bath, home decor and cleaning and organization. We are tracking the progress of these evolving experiences with several metrics, including customer behavior data, the new, existing and reactivated customers, space productivity, transactions, sales and profitability and inventory.
Beyond 2019, the intent is to spend more on “deepening our identity as a data-driven, analytics and technology company” with a focus on an enhanced digital experience. Temares explains:
Looking past 2019, our transformation will become even more visible to our customers. Our intent is to continue to put resources behind deepening our identity as a data-driven analytics and technology company. We will better represent whole home and heartfelt life events and better inspire our customers through a more robust decorative furnishings offering and more proprietary and meaningfully differentiated product. We will further integrate our life stage businesses. We will evolve our stores so that they will have cleaner sight-lines, less clutter and are better cross merchandised and our associates will be better enabled to support our customers’ shopping needs. We will continue to enhance our digital experience. We will better engage with our customers through both more relatable national branding and a greater emphasis on marketing personalization. And overall, we expect to operate fewer stores while continuing to drive profitable digital growth, all supported by an efficient corporate structure.
My take
So that’s the makeover plan. It’s fair to say that we’re talking about some full-scale redecorating, not just touching up the paintwork and investing in some new curtains,
Bed, Bath & Beyond did enough this week to get a break from Wall Street when it announced its third quarter numbers, although I’m inclined to side with The Wall St Journal’s cynical observation that:
Lower the bar far enough and you may be able to eek out a surprise win.
That’s not going to be sustainable for long. The goal now has to be to hit that March deadline and be able to demonstrate clear benefits and improvements from the FEO program before the next beauty parade in front of investors.
Image credit - Bed, Bath & BeyondRead more on: Analytics planning and data analysisCRM and customer experienceDigital and content marketingDigital enterprise in the real worldRetail e-commerce and the omni-channelSocial 