
Ever had a piece of kit that is always failing, but as soon as the engineer comes out to take a look at it, it works just fine? Welcome to the living hell of no fault found. Based on feedback at a session during this week’s ServiceMax user conference in Amsterdam, the NFF phenomenon affects anything from one in ten to as many as one in three service calls.
These ‘no fault found’ service calls are costing many industries untold sums in wasted service visits, underperforming assets, early obsolescence and customer dissatisfaction. It’s a particular concern in the aerospace, defense and automotive sectors, where failing electronics are often the root cause, says Dr John Ahmet Erkoyuncu, a research leader in the Operations Excellence Institute at Cranfield University:
The most commonly experienced source of no fault found is through electronics. Things like wiring face a lot of degradation, corrosion, those kind of things. Over time, you experience a lot of intermittent faults. This is a very common source of no fault found.
I think trying to understand why they happen, where they happen, and how they impact your service operations, is a big element of [resolving] no fault found.
No definitive data
But tracking down reliable data about no fault found is almost as difficult as solving the faults themselves. Companies don’t want to admit to customers that they don’t always understand why their products break down. Engineers don’t want to file a report saying they failed to resolve the customer’s problem. So there’s no definitive data, says Erkoyuncu.
We did a survey to find out how much companies experience the cost of no fault found — and they didn’t want to share that kind of data.
We collected ‘rough idea’ estimates and the overall experience in the aerospace sector was something like 20% of total service calls were NFF related. That just shows the scale, but getting actual data from industries is really hard.
It’s even harder to quantify the cost implications, which in turn undermines the business case for investigating what’s causing those NFF call-outs. There are many different factors that companies must look at when considering how to reduce the incidence of ‘no fault found’ problems, Erkoyuncu believes:
It’s not just one strategy that’ll solve everything.
There’s a number of elements. I don’t think it’s limited to just technological aspects, it’s also organizational culture, procedures and behavior of individuals.
The customer pays in the end
For example, measuring engineers based on how quickly they can resolve a fault deters them from taking the time to track down the cause of a fault that’s hard to find, says Erkoyuncu. The knock-on effect when they record a spurious fault is that no useful feedback goes back into the service knowledgebase, and the product developers remain ignorant of an issue that might otherwise be easily solved by a change to the design.
If [field engineers] are tracked based on how long it takes them to finalize a service requirement, I don’t think that’s the right measure in this context.
If they don’t apply the diagnostic tools properly due to time restrictions, that’ll have knock on effects in terms of this going out to the supply chain, trying to find what is the problem. At the end, the customer is the one that has to pay these additional costs.
He believes the way that service contracts are measured and paid for will have to change if companies want to reduce NFF rates.
I think incentivization is really important between the customer and the solution provider as well as the field service engineers, how you’re incentivizing them.
Reducing ‘no fault found’ call-outs
Erkoyuncu suggests a number of avenues for reducing the frequency of NFF call-outs.

Improve the design of the equipment, for example by reducing complexity.
Incentivize people to encourage behaviors such as taking the time to accurately record and identify hard-to-find faults.
Get a better understanding of the equipment and validate the data you’re holding. “Is it really telling us historically what has been happening with this piece of equipment?”
Ensure diagnostic testing processes are sufficient. “If you can improve how you’re testing the health of a component or equipment, that will also really help with identifying no fault found earlier.”
Look at procedures, and see if there are opportunities to improve the way maintenance is applied.

Reveiwing product data to make sure that it’s accurate and is recorded and stored in an accessible way is proving crucial in a number of fields. As well as investigating no fault found, the Cranfield team is also looking at the use of technologies such as artificial intelligence and augmented and virtual reality in field maintenance. The data on hand is often coming up short for these applications, too, says Erkoyuncu:
To be able to automate augmented reality visualization, you need very comprehensive, very robust data systems. That’s where we’re facing some challenges because it’s not stored in a structured manner, it’s not stored comprehensively most of the time.
For augmented reality, [data] is essentially the end product. We need to be able to find this link between the data, do some kind of analytics on the data, and then use it through augmented reality. But this fundamental part which is the data and how we use it, that is still not mature enough for augmented reality to really give benefits to companies.
My take
As digitization extends its reach, it’s joining up previously isolated stores of data and finding them wanting. It’s not enough to have volumes of data — it must also be consistent, reliable and relevant. And of course it often turns out that the data has none of these attributes, because they weren’t important until these other uses came into view.
That in turn exposes many of the human and organizational factors that are preventing the proper recording of reliable data. It’s not just a matter of putting in the technology — the processes and culture has to change to realize the full benefit.
Then perhaps we can finally expect to call out an engineer for an intermittent fault and it actually will get fixed first time. That’s something to look forward to.
Image credit - Back view of young businessman scratching his head at blue patterns © WavebreakMediaMicro - Fotolia.comDisclosure - ServiceMax is a diginomica premier partner at time of writing and funded the author's travel to attend its conference in Amsterdam. Read more on: Customer service managementInternet of ThingsProfessional services 