
Digital means something different depending on who you talk to. The most common meaning I’ve seen describes the shift to mobile, social and cloud-based services and solutions. But these are technical solutions to something more important, and before we look at digital from the technology perspective, we need to look at something more important to your organization’s digital success – your narrative.
What does digital mean?
Deb Lavoy, CEO of Narrative Builders, says digital is a thing, and it’s a way of doing things:
“It requires tools, habits, priorities, and processes. But digital isn’t a thing on its own. Digital is a way of communicating. It’s a form of expression.”
That leads Lavoy to point out a key element of your digital strategy. If you don’t have a clear idea of what you are trying to say and who you are saying it to, or if you don’t know what kind of relationship you want to build and why, your digital journey will “be very long and very, very hard”.
Put simply – being great at digital means nothing if you don’t have your story – your narrative – clearly defined.
So what is a narrative?
Lavoy defines a narrative as “a structured examination of the intentions, values, capabilities and importance of what you do.” Now this isn’t a mission statement; it’s much more involved, and it forms the backbone of your entire business strategy.
Your narrative takes a complicated idea and turns it into something your entire organization and your customers and prospects can understand, derive meaning from and care about. And that’s the key – caring. Caring is important for your employees because it helps build advocacy. It’s important for your customers because today, customers are not won and lost on the product alone, but on the value of the experience.
Your narrative – your story – drives your messaging from marketing and sales to service and support. Lavoy says it is the backbone of your website, messaging, information architecture and your content strategy, in addition to informing and accelerating your product, marketing, and strategic decision-making.
If you can nail down your narrative – your digital strategy is going to move forward much easier.
And it needs to:
Most content is now born digital – when was the last time you wrote a document in longhand? In this day and age, you can’t provide a valuable customer experience or employee experience that isn’t digital.
The point is – we are digital. There is no option to be otherwise and be successful.
Your narrative ties together the entire customer experience
The shift to digital typically starts in the marketing department. On the surface that makes sense. Marketing owns the customer purchase journey and much of how they support that journey is digital in nature. But what’s interesting to note is that many marketing departments don’t do digital well. Lavoy says, “When we’re talking about digital marketing, most people are doing a lot, but it’s disconnected. It is a lot of activity generating more heat than light.”
Marketers are trying lots of things, but pulling everything together in a cohesive well documented strategy that is monitored and measured isn’t happening in most enterprises.
The journey to purchase is only the start, though, and marketing has one role in how digital plays out in an enterprise and how the corporate narrative is delivered. There’s an entire customer lifecycle that needs to be addressed. As Lavoy points out, digital is a powerful enabler within the organization, and a clear narrative will help you move you closer to a successful digital strategy.
“Narrative development plumbs your core values and your core value proposition and distils that into a potent, shareable idea. A narrative will galvanize your organization and your market.”
Going full on digital is complicated
McKinsey outlines three key attributes of digital, noting that digital is “less of a thing and more of a way of doing things.” The three attributes are as follows:

Creating value at the new frontiers of the business world
Creating value in the processes that execute a vision of customer experience
Building foundational capabilities that support the entire structure.

It’s the second attribute where the value of a clearly defined corporate narrative hits home. Marketers who obsess with understanding every stage of the purchase journey and how digital capabilities can improve the experience have an opportunity to leverage digital to tell stories that are based on their corporate narrative.
These stories aren’t one-offs but are intertwined across channels to build on a greater story, and that is what captures the attention of customers or prospects and keeps them returning for more. A narrative enables you to build the trust of customers and prospects and develop relationships that support the entire customer lifecycle.
McKinsey’s three attributes of a digital enterprise demonstrate how complicated going digital is. Lavoy agrees and points out that there’s no single formula to follow – every organization’s journey is different. Every organization’s narrative is different:
There’s a feeling that this should have all been done ten years ago, so we’re behind. We’re biting off more than we can chew – we do too many ambitious projects at once. There is an imbalance in the level of investment in clarifying goals and direction vs. the technology. Technology that is not in very clear service of goals and narrative is usually a source of complexity and confusion.
My take
When I sit back and think about what drives customers to buy from a brand, and what brings them back for more, the idea of a well-defined narrative makes perfect sense.
Whether it’s B2C or B2B, a narrative tells the story that builds brand affinity. Lavoy often uses Nike as an example of a brand that instills its narrative into every ad they make and every product they sell. HubSpot is another example Lavoy shares of a brand that has built a loyal customer base and has developed a brand that everyone knows, whether they use the product or not, through its inbound marketing narrative. Both are just two examples of what a successful narrative can do for a brand.
I’m curious to know if your organization has a narrative that you design your digital strategy by, one that excites your entire team and builds great digital experiences.
Like every shiny new object we desire to carry around in our pockets, digital is enticing and deeply desired. But without a good story to tell, digital is simply a series of channels and campaigns and websites and mobile apps that won’t deliver a consistent, relevant experience.
Read more on: Digital and content marketingFrictionless enterprise 