
Ben Sasse
In 2006, Sen. Ted Stevens of Alaska famously described the internet as “a series of tubes.” With a few exceptions–12 years later–most members of Congress are still playing catchup on technology. Not Ben Sasse.
In the pre-Trump era, Ben Sasse, the telegenic junior senator from Nebraska would be the blueprint for cloning a perfect politician. Tall, good-looking, smart (Harvard and Yale), laconic in that laidback midwestern Jimmy Stewart way, Sasse has nonetheless angered the President and many of his fellow Republicans by openly disagreeing with Trump on both policy and style. In the sad state of affairs that is American politics today, that means he probably couldn’t get re-elected to a second term in Nebraska in 2020. But, by appealing to independents and moderates and Never-Trump Republicans across the country, he might have a shot at the Presidency.
And now that the ideal Republican model has clearly shifted from “Mr. Smith Goes to Washington” to Archie Bunker on steroids, he certainly seems to be exploring that notion. He is the author of the new book Them: Why We Hate Each Other and How to Heal and is suddenly appearing on both conservative and liberal TV shows, which is rare these days. A chapter of his new book appeared as an op-ed piece in the Washington Post under the title This new technology could send American politics into a tailspin. He writes:
Deepfakes–seemingly authentic video or audio recordings that can spread like wildfire online–are likely to send American politics into a tailspin, and Washington isn’t paying nearly enough attention to the very real danger that’s right around the corner… The word deepfake has become a generic noun for the use of machine-learning algorithms and facial-mapping technology to digitally manipulate people’s voices, bodies and faces. And the technology is increasingly so realistic that the Deepfakes are almost impossible to detect.
Sasse is referring to a human image synthesis technique the typical voter may not even have heard of yet. Deepfakes are fake videos constructed by artificial intelligence algorithms run through deep neural networks that combine and superimpose existing images and videos onto source images or videos. It’s cheap and all you need is some easily accessible materials and open-source code. Deepfakes uses open-source machine learning tools like TensorFlow, which Google makes freely available to researchers, graduate students, and anyone with an interest in machine learning.
As a result, there are thousands of people out there who could potentially create damaging videos in which people appear to say things they really didn’t say. That means it is an easy and inexpensive way to spread false information about regular people, not just celebrities and politicians.
It started with porn
In 2017, a subreddit user by the name of Deepfakes posted that he had found a way to take images of celebrities (and, frighteningly, girlfriends and wives) and paste them over the bodies of porn stars. The subreddit grew rapidly to 100,000 users before it was shut down. By then, the secret was out. One Australian writer wrote:
Very quickly, Deepfakes also started to get convincing, convincing. Early deepfakes have an air of the uncanny valley to them, faces stitched on top of things where they clearly don’t belong. But as machine learning has evolved, matching the video’s participant’s facial expressions with the new imagery at a shocking level of photorealism, it can sometimes be hard to tell the real from the fake.
Political implications
Sasses describes a scenario in which “bad actors” might use Deepfakes to spread false information that could impact the outcome of an election:
Flash forward two years and consider these hypotheticals. You’re seated at your desk, having taken your second sip of coffee and just beginning to contemplate the breakfast sandwich steaming in the bag in front of you. You click on your favorite news site, one you trust. “Unearthed Video Shows President Conspiring with Putin.” You can’t resist.
The video, in ultrahigh definition, shows then-presidential candidate Donald Trump and Vladimir Putin examining an electoral map of the United States. They are nodding and laughing as they appear to discuss efforts to swing the election to Trump. Jared Kushner and Ivanka Trump smile wanly in the background. The report notes that Trump’s movements on the day in question are difficult to pin down.
The video is a fake but convincing and potentially catastrophic to the victim. Who do you believe? At a time when suspicion of traditional media is at an all-time high, the potential that fake videos will be accepted as true and destroy lives and careers is enormous.
So, what can we do about the Deepfake threat? Sasse offers several solid suggestions, including:
We can work hard to roll back the distrust of our opponents that makes us more susceptible to the effects of disinformation. Rising political tribalism, shamelessly exaggerating our opponents’ claims or behavior, is leaving us vulnerable: No one loves America’s internal fighting — and our increasingly siloed news consumption–more than Vladimir Putin.
My Take
The significance of Sasse’s book and op-ed go far beyond his expressed concern for the political chaos that could be stirred up by foreign and domestic troublemakers using a still fairly esoteric technology (although Deepfakes is a very real concern.)
In the larger context, it is a sign that technology is now becoming a full-fledged political hot button issue and not just a sideshow to other issues like immigration, climate, jobs, arms control and so on. Technology disasters like the Facebook Russian misinformation campaign, Cambridge Analytica, ransomware attacks, the Equifax hack and so on has led political leaders to begin thinking about the potentially negative implications of some of the technology that we have so eagerly adopted.
All presidential candidates of the future are going to be required to understand the potential risks and rewards of complex technology and to have a tech agenda. Sasse’s book and op-ed is clearly meant to let people know that he is a cool kid who knows and care about this high tech stuff.
Politicians have come a long way since “the internet is a series of tubes” days. That probably means more scrutiny and industry regulation is on the way.
Image credit - TwitterRead more on: Collaboration sharing and digital productivityDigital and content marketingSocial 