
Marc Benioff, CEO Salesforce
At Dreamforce 2016, Marc Benioff, CEO Salesforce dropped a bombshell. In one of several color pieces, Stuart Lauchlan quotes Benioff, saying:
If we did true marketing, then we’d have two or three customers on each slide and they’d be giving each other a hug or a high-five, because they are on the phone or emailing in the success community. They are deciding what products to buy. They’ll gang up against us if there’s a problem. They will ask for support from us, but they are their own entity. We have a great support team, but when they have a problem, they call each other first. They don’t call us.
Initially, Lauchlan was surprised but equally aware that this is a reflection of the Salesforce business model which requires that it service its customers every day. In a later conversation, Lauchlan hears Benioff saying that in the pre-Dreamforce roadshow, Benioff had something of an epiphany when he realized that the Dreamforce marketing is too focused on the individual and not the community.
I had this experience when I was on the road that our marketing itself and the way we understand our community and how we look at this, is skewed. After this is over, I will take our marketing people in and I will re-conceptualise our marketing for them. We still have too much of an ‘us and them’ approach internally, versus it’s all one collective. What’s going on and what’s exciting is that these customers all love each other.
Why is this important right now and why a bombshell? Several reasons.
In and among the conversations, Lauchlan noted a degree of ‘innovation fatigue,’ a situation where the things a vendor is bringing to market are running ahead of the buyer’s ability to consume the ‘new.’ That’s problematic and Benioff knows it. Customers have told him to double down on the core, which suggests that Salesforce Sales Cloud is in need of some work.
In addition, Salesforce is trying to come to market with new capabilities, focusing heavily on AI-related topics. While this may catch the technology eye, questions remain about the extent to which this is ‘Dreamforce as usual’ with too much marketing ahead of ability. Benioff said as much when noting that:
They (customers) are very focused on us doubling down on our core, especially Lightning technology. They have heard about Lightning for the past couple of years and are getting ready to implement Lightning. The number one request on the tour was Lightning. They want to make sure that we are absolutely focused on our core and committed to delivering Lightning. The number one message from our customers is that they want us to dedicate ourselves to the core.
Does that make all the talk about Einstein a mistake? Not really but it does mean that Salesforce has to rethink what this community means to both itself and the company. Right now, Benioff characterizes the community as a self sustaining organism that doesn’t need Dreamforce as currently configured.
This is a rock solid community. I’ve never seen the likes of it in my career. We sort of had the beginnings of it at Oracle with the database administrators and Cisco had it for a time with the Cisco Network Engineers. We’re trying to call them the Trailblazers, but we don’t know actually what to call them. We probably should ask them what they want to be called.
So now we get the germ of where Benioff is going with this line of thought. He offers:
You see those banners? We take one person and a quote and a logo. Bad. Never again. We will never do that again. We are a community but we don’t market the community. We’re only marketing individuality, but we’re not about individuality. We are about family. We have the family spirit, like we’re all on a family camping trip. We need to bring it together.
It’s been said many times but worth repeating: Salesforce is a marketing company that happens to have software. That combination has worked well, and even now, we can see the marketing wheels turn once more as Benioff tries to figure out how marketing can fit with a community. One thing – Benioff & Co need to exercise care.
The fact Salesforce community is self supporting makes a big and positive difference because, as he notes, that same community backfills where Salesforce lacks. The fact that maintenance is included in the SaaS pricing puts it at an advantage to its on-premises competitors because the inevitable ‘what’s my maintenance paying for?’ question doesn’t arise. But the company doesn’t get a pass either. The reality is these community relationships can become fragile.
Benioff remembers the Cisco and Oracle experiences. I remember both but can point to the SAP Community Network experience as well. To my mind, SAP did a great job in keeping SCN as vibrant as it has. That came about as a result of a number of important tactics, not least allowing the community to self censor for the most part but also through the creation of its own version of Salesforce Trailblazers – the SAP Mentor group. But when, as seems the case, SCN became de facto Line 1 support, things started to get difficult. Having a community, where help is freely given in exchange for the reward of being part of the community is one thing, but when community becomes part of a profit center then dissent surely follows.
SAP Mentors were often seen as an elite group – which was the intent – but it created a sense of otherness rather than mindfulness which left the Mentors as an unapproachable elite. The sad fact is that was anything but the truth but then as all marketers know, perception is reality and once that perception was fixed, it was mighty difficult to change.
I worry that Benioff makes too much of marketing the community when what it likely needs is more support from internal technical teams such that the community doesn’t become de facto Line 1 support. I wonder how Salesforce will figure out how to maintain communities that reflect the different horizontal segments within that vast sea of customers? What about vertical industry support?
Salesforce could deploy some of the Einstein technology into the community so that, for example, predictive help is available to those who need it. This would lift the burden of repetitive first time questions and allow for the emergence of advanced help from the community, alongside providing a better feedback loop to the development teams.
The fact that it took a pre-Dreamforce tour for Benioff to learn about core requirements has to be a concern. Had anything fundamentally changed? Perhaps. Dreamforce is predictable in terms of the announced blockbusters but with little of substance behind the demos and, if like me, you were becoming jaded, then is it any surprise that vocal customers want a ‘back to roots’ conversation?
You have also to wonder if Benioff had become semi-detached from the customers he so clearly cares about. While the CEO of such a large company cannot be expected to get into detail on these topics, it strikes me that the basics of sensing the customer mood is fundamental to understanding what needs to happen next.
At least we know that Benioff is paying attention, has a history to draw upon and, despite what he might think, a large pool of customers who genuinely care about the products they use and so do care about Salesforce. Those are all advantages which mean the moat Salesforce can build against competitors is far from under threat.
Community is a difficult topic for any organization. Technology companies have their own special challenges. The real temptation will be for Salesforce to ‘own’ the community with all the KPI nonsense that goes with it, rather than be guided by the community. Right now, Benioff sets the right tone by demonstrating that he is firmly in listening mode.
We shall closely watch developments on this topic. They may well fine the next era of Salesforce.
Image credit - via Salesforce and Stuart LauchlanDisclosure - SAP and Salesforce are premier partners at time of writingRead more on: CRM and customer experienceCustomer service managementSocial 