
Digital marketing is going through a grinder right now. The impact of analytics adds pressure to tie that analytics into sales results. You can’t feed the analytics engine without “engagement.” Content had taken center stage in the quest for attention, but as B2B companies are learning the hard way, not all content – or content strategies – are created equal.
We touch on these themes frequently at diginomica, centered on our digital and content marketing cornerstone page. A frequent topic is how enterprises can adapt digital media trends, whether its Facebook Live or email marketing (and no, we’re not touching Pokemon – yet.). Here’s my top selections from that page, along with a few choices from around the web.
Quick aside on how we curate: As part of diginomica’s spring facelift, we organized our content into 18 cornerstone topics. Each of our content areas has a real-life, human curator responsible for its well being, hand-picking the “curators picks” and making sure the content in the section is up to snuff.
18 cornerstone topics – all curated by actual people who know their stuff
You can browse all the topic areas by clicking on the menu items directly above. The eighteen topics stem from these three areas:

Digital enterprise – which includes real world use cases, and vertical focus in digital government, health care, retail and more.
Cloud apps & processes – goodness like HCM and the digital future of work, CRM and customer experience, Analytics planning and data analysis, and several more.
Technology disruptions – tech through the lens of business outcomes, from IoT robotics and AI to DevOps, NoSQL and the open source stack, And more…

One of the cornerstone topics I curate is digital and content marketing, which is part of cloud apps and processes. Here’s the criteria for my selections:
Today’s CMO is under duress. Whether it’s accountability for lead generation, or a need to justify digital budgets, the CMO has a higher profile – and more on the line. Digital marketing is forcing marketers to re-evaluate ad spending, reach discerning mobile users, and make sense of programmatic marketing. Content marketing is a new weapon in the battle for attention, but there are critical questions on content ROI, marketing analytics, and how to build opt-in communities. Social networks are powerful-but-volatile distribution channels that need a place in this mix. The page gives you a starting point for our diginomica team coverage.

Are you sitting comfortably? Use cases from great digital marketing storytellers
by: Chris Middleton
quotage: “As more and more organizations open themselves up via social platforms, the increased level of public scrutiny means that people can check whether an organization’s story, values, and behavior are all aligned. An organization’s story can’t be a smokescreen anymore, because sooner or later customers will start to tell their own stories about it, using the same social channels.”
why I picked it: The aforementioned quest for attention makes some B2B marketers lose their minds, chasing the lowest common clickbait denominator. Chris Middleton’s got a better way – earning attention through storytelling, and he’s got the use cases to prove it out. Liked the Thomson Reuters story about elevating a brand that customers touch frequently, but don’t know (enough) about.

Why is cross-channel attribution so elusive to marketers?
by: Barb Mosher Zinck
quotage: “Marketing is still stuck with data challenges. Accurate data collection and centralization continues to be the biggest problem marketers have. Think about all the different applications that provide data: marketing analytics, web analytics, marketing automation, sales automation, CRM, ERP, BI and more. Many marketers are not even sure the data they do have is accurate.”
why I picked it: For (almost) a year, Barb Mosher Zinck has added deep experience and a knack for the sticky questions to our digital marketing coverage. Ergo, this recent piece on the problem of lead attribution and new approaches/solutions trying to tackle this critical issue. Effective attribution can make the difference between a happy CMO and a CMO who tweets all day long while updating their LinkedIn profile.

Five brand manager ideas for Facebook Live
by: Den Howlett
quotage: “Facebook’s genius has been to integrate and make the instant streaming of live video ridiculously simple for mobile devices. Anyone who has been in video for any length of time will know this is normally an incredibly difficult and time-consuming exercise that requires broadcast equipment and hard wired ethernet connections to make anything work successfully.”
why I picked it: Den Howlett is the quintessential video early adopter. He collects video gear the way some people collect, well, Pokemon. So when he gets high on a new video medium, it’s worth paying attention. Also check his follow-up, Facebook Live – the video killer app for enterprise. I also penned a series for marketers on Facebook’s F8 announcements. Here’s one: How should enterprises navigate Facebook’s News Feed algorithm?

PepsiCo reaches out to front-end digital-age consumers, while focusing on back-end efficiencies
by: Stuart Lauchlan
quotage: “I’ve seen fewer references to rival PepsiCo, which is unfortunate as a primary strategic objective of the firm is to find ways to connect with digital-age consumers.”
why I picked it: B2B marketers can learn plenty from how leading consumer brands go after target audiences – in this case Pepsi, which Stuart argues is neglected with all the praise of arch-rival Coca-Cola.

The two non-negotiable principles of B2B content strategy
by: yours truly
quotage: “In recent talks with readers and clients, I’ve been reminded of a fundamental truth: B2B content is hard. Why? Because the two core principles of an effective content strategy are each hugely challenging:

A bedrock of content drawn from validated customer case studies.
Content created by experts at all levels in your organization.”

why I picked it: I think this was my best swing at the plate in articulating why B2B content marketing is such an elusive beast, why it matters, and what I consider the two main pillars of a B2B content strategy. For more context you may want to check my Content strategy takes a big shift – why I was wrong, and the sequel, Why UX has fundamentally changed content’s winners and losers.

Bonus content – At diginomica we also take a hard look at the media business, which can inform and/or wreck content strategy assumptions. Two recent standouts:

The dangers of machine-driven content publishing – Den’s skewering of machine-driven, page view tail-chasing.
Trump hasn’t earned a penny in media, it’s entertainment – lessons for enterprise – A debate between Den and I on entertainment versus earned media, as per my follow-on, The debate over brand zealots – with Joseph Jaffe.


Best of the web – I find that many organizations have great sign-up content, see Barb’s recent articles for some analysis and links to recent digital marketing studies. There isn’t one go-to digital marketing source for me, but a few keepers I turn to:

Copyblogger is still the best for grounding in content marketing fundamentals and achieving authority through content.
Marketo has done a really clever job of sending me a ton of marketing resources by email without getting me to unsubscribe, and I don’t subscribe to much. They are a diginomica premier partner but that’s not why I read them.
Mitch Joel’s Six Pixels of Separation is a real old school crafted podcast and IMO the best digital marketing podcast,with frank angles on many topics. Joel’s debates with Andrew Keen on the future of the Internet are always classics.
Influitive’s Advocate Marketing Playbook is essential, as are the concepts behind advocate marketing.

This is not a definitive list; it’s a crowded space with loads of content to wade through. If you have any faves across the web I missed, please note them in the comments, and stay tuned at diginomica for plenty more.
 
Image credit - Hand writing the text: Good - Better - Best © gustavofrazao - Fotolia.com.Disclosure - Marketo is a diginomica premier partner.Read more on: Content marketingDigital and content marketing 