
Diginomica’s curators now organize our content into 18 cornerstone topics, including “digital enterprise in the real world.” Here, we put digital hype to the test by documenting customer projects – the good parts, the tough parts, and the results.
I’m the curator of our digital enterprise in the real world page, which you can peruse and subscribe to as you see fit. For this post, I’m selecting recent use cases of merit. I’ll also include a couple good ones from elsewhere. But first, a quick word about our cornerstone pages:
18 cornerstone topics – all curated by actual people who (usually) know their stuff
You can browse all the topics by clicking on the menu items directly above. The eighteen topics stem from these three areas:

Digital enterprise – which includes real world use cases, and vertical focus in digital government, health care, retail and more.
Cloud apps & processes – goodness like HCM and the digital future of work, CRM and customer experience, Analytics planning and data analysis, and several more.
Technology disruptions – tech through the lens of business outcomes, from IoT robotics and AI to DevOps, NoSQL and the open source stack, And more…

Here’s why we stump for case studies:
The tech hype cycle is exhausting and of marginal use to buyers. Learning from the projects where tech is put to the real-world test is where you’ll find us. This page is a starting point to explore diginomica’s diverse industry use cases – where digital gets real.
And yes, we do write studies based on our partners’ customers (in which case, that relationship is disclosed). But we don’t play favorites – the diginomica gang is notorious for scouring customer stories at any show we arrive at. And if there aren’t customers present, we’re likely to get grouchy, or call it an opportunity missed.
The envelope, please – recent use case standouts
At Barclays, digital transformation begins with its people
by: Phil Wainewright
quotage: “Out of this was born the bank’s Digital Eagles program, which has now trained 16,000 out of its 45,000 staff to become digital ambassadors to the public at large. The purpose is to get staff comfortable with digital by encouraging them to develop knowledge and skills that they can pass on to others.”
why I picked it: digital change always seems to get hung up on skills and people. Here we learn how Barclays is addressing skill at scale. Also see: Phil’s AstraZeneca CIO Dave Smoley’s 6-point cloud toolkit.

John Lewis on security – ‘Single, bad, black swan events don’t happen out the blue’
by: Derek du Preez
quotage: “Stewart said that the big answer for John Lewis in solving that problem has been a “single pane of glass”. He said that two years ago to string together a view of the security relationship between a major incident and unsafe practices would involve looking and correlating across a number of different systems.”
why I picked it: enterprise security coverage is kind of like weather reports: it hits the news when something bad happens. Learning how to minimize/prevent breaches is a welcome change.

The Cloud Journey – lessons from cloud ERP for manufacturing customers
by: Brian Sommer
quotage: “When external help was required, some panelists relied more on other customers for tips/tricks/techniques than the vendor or external implementation partner. This observation has to be particularly disquieting to major implementers/integrators and could explain why one sees so many of the old-school integrators hanging out at on-premises ERP vendor events and not at cloud ERP shows.”
why I picked it: Brian’s been tracking the emergence of cloud manufacturing closely. Getting his views from a Plex event provides year-over-year context.

Take aways from the Spring 2016 events season and case study portfolio
by: Den Howlett
quotage: “But there is much more than back office work going on. Everything from infrastructure through to omni-channel to business model change to mobile to reporting, budgeting and planning is getting the change treatment. It seems to me there isn’t a single part of business that isn’t being reviewed for opportunities to improve. In the cases we have seen, the changes are beyond incremental, they are often radical in nature.”
why I picked it: Den hit an absurd amount of events this spring. His take on which digital issues have traction across events is a terrific antidote to event-specific hype festivals.

Zalando embraces ‘Radical Agility’ in its bold platform play
by: Jessica Twentyman
quotage: “But that’s not enough for the company’s management. According to them, Zalando’s future lies in being not just an online retailer, but also a fashion aggregator, providing a platform that ‘connects the fashion world’. In other words, Zalando plans to provide retailers, brands, logistics companies and app developers with the technology they need to connect to consumers.”
why I picked it: Jessica always brings a narrative hook and fresh ideas to her use cases. This one captures the move from digital player to platform that many companies will either trip on or miss. Check Jessica’s archives for plenty more.

A few more picks:

Janine Milne is our reigning queen of the HR use case. Here’s a recent Milne special: The Savoy serves up rewards to employees. If HR is your bailiwick, check Janine’s archives for more.
Stuart Lauchlan is a use case maestro, with a particular knack for retailers in the digital throes. Check JC Penney – combining art and science in omni-channel retail.
I’ve been known to add to an event organizer’s headaches with my pursuit of use cases. In this case a customer panel got the job done: The dos and don’ts of IoT – a customer panel shares Internet of Things progress.

Real world use cases from around the web
It’s pretty darn difficult to find good enterprise use cases elsewhere on the web (aside from vendor-commissioned case studies). Yes, there are plenty of CXO interviews, but a soup-to-nuts use case is a rare breed. Here are a couple:

ZDNet’s Larry Dignan rarely writes a detailed use case. But in April, he penned the best of the year to date, Why Dick’s Sporting Goods decided to play its own game in e-commerce.
Typically, The First Round Review doesn’t do customer use cases. Their focus is startup-oriented tips, but the practical, in-depth nature of their features earns them a look here. This piece, Shims, Jigs and Other Woodworking Concepts to Conquer Technical Debt, has some originality and flair, loaded with tips from The CTO of One Medical Group.

If you have a digital use case you think we should be covering, don’t hesitate to contact me. In the meantime, happy reading.
Image credit - Results © Mathias Rosenthal - Fotolia.com.Disclosure - Plex is a diginomica premier partner as of this writing.Read more on: Digital enterprise in the real worldFrictionless enterpriseUse cases 