
As we’ve seen in recent weeks, some ‘legacy’ retailers are struggling to achieve the necessary balance between their online and offline business models as they pursue an omni-channel strategy. Others have invested early and wisely and are now reaping the rewards. 
Into that latter category we can place US consumer electronics retailer BestBuy. As it celebrates its half-century in business, store sales have slowed down, but still play a crucial part in the overall strategy, but visits to the company website are up. During its most recent quarter, online sales were up 24% year-on-year, with the size of orders increasing as well. 
CEO Hubert Joly says there’s a clear priority for the firm which is to build on the multi-channel capabilities in order to drive existing business, but also to change the way that customers interact and engage with the retailer:

We intend to be the company that makes it easy for customers to learn about and enjoy the latest technology as they pursue their passions and take care of what is important to them in their lives. With our combination of digital, store and in-home assets, we feel we have a great opportunity to address key customer pain points, build stronger ongoing relationships with our customers and unleash growth opportunities.

He adds: 

In our online business, our 24% online comparable sales growth was driven by the continued improvements to our digital customer experience and enhanced dot-com capabilities. These include, for example, faster shipping, responsive design, a more streamlined checkout process, improved search functionality, better visibility for open box and clearance items and more relevant product recommendations. 
Also in our mobile app, we have implemented distilled reviews on over 40,000 SKUs. This means customers don’t have to wait through hundreds or sometimes thousands of reviews, but can instead read a quick summary of the pros and cons of the products. In addition, across platforms, we can show customers’ product that are available. Actually, we can show customers products that are available in the store closest to them and show which products are actually displayed in stores near them if they are interested in experiencing the product before they buy.

BestBuy’s looking at some innovative ways to put this philosophy into practice, including rolling out virtual reality tech. This is something that the firm’s been dabbling with already, says Joly:


In the entertainment category, we have been rolling out virtual reality merchandising. By theHolidays, we expect to be selling an expanded assortment of virtual reality products in the vast majority of our stores and more than 500 stores will be equipped with demo stations, so customers can try out this exciting new technology.  This is an exciting new technology. The impact this year is going to be not material on our performance. We certainly do expect [it] to be a destination for [us] and to have excitement with our customers. 

Online/offline evolution
On a broader stage, Joly says firms need to think about online retail in two ways: 

One is the channel itself and then the other [is the] digital experience and how it helps customers, because most of the visits on that site actually result in sales in the stores or visits to the stores and then completing the transaction online. So it’s quite intertwined. 

In practice, BestBuy’s online thinking has evolved over the four years that Joly has been CEO:


Our e-commerce focus has evolved from the phase of building foundations to a phase of driving innovations for our customers and we are excited about the customer experience improvements still in the pipeline yet for this year. In our stores, we are continuing to raise the bar and are seeing continued progress in our ability to deliver on our mission to help customers live their lives and pursue their passions with the help of technology.

What’s essential is that elusive balance between online and offline and how to factor in the retail real estate in the form of the stores. Joly argues: 

There is a way to think about it, which is there is growth online, which is clearly fast, but I think our stores have a very strong role to play. So this is – we don’t see it as a zero sum game. So I think that as we explore these growth opportunities, as we look at how to really help customers, we will see how we can best leverage each one of our assets.

Having a physical presence is a major advantage in an omni-channel retail market, he adds: 

Given the complexity of technology and the needs of our customers, our store is our key asset for us. The level of proficiency and engagement of our associates is continuing to increase as manifested by the significant increase of our net promoter scores. This is the result of a deliberate and systematic effort to lift the capabilities and performance of each individual associates. This effort includes investment in training and daily coaching with their heightened focus on product knowledge and selling skills.
Additionally, we are ensuring that our store general managers and assistant managers are staying in their stores longer, allowing them to be more effective at training, coaching and more broadly leading their teams. We are also improving our store associate retention rates, particularly across our sales roles. We are not done, but the progress is noteworthy and encouraging.

Joly cites the sales drive behind 4K TV sets as a great example of BestBuy’s omni-channel approach: 

The experience online, the experience in the store, our service capabilities, our ability to create a unique assortment and again working closely with key vendors helped make us a key destination and allow us to deliver a very strong customer experience leading to market share gains and great NPS scores. So, this is an illustration of when Best Buy has all of the functions working together, we can create – we can shape the outcome for ourselves, our customers and our vendors from a performance standpoint.

My take
BestBuy is a retailer that I only ever experience when visiting the US, thanks to its withdrawal from European markets. But its clear that the company has been putting the foundations in place for the omni-channel experience over the past few years and is now picking up the benefits of that. 
Using ‘sexy’ tech like 4K and VR to woo people into stores, combined with compelling online initiatives, such as free two day delivery on orders over $35, is a winning combination. The consumer electronics market is one particularly vulnerable to assault by Amazon. That being the case, BestBuy’s shoring up its defences well, but also devising some calculated offensive actions. 
Image credit - BestBuyRead more on: Retail e-commerce and the omni-channel 