
Shocked
Move beyond digital culture shock and create a corporate culture that uses technology to empower people to disrupt business models.
That’s the top line message from the Accenture Technology Vision 2016 report, entitled People First: The Primacy of People in a Digital Age.
Beyond a nice soundbite for the executive summary, what does that actually mean in practice?
It’s actually a pretty simple premise – the technology pace of change is now so fast that companies go into ‘shock’ at the very thought of trying to keep up.
This, of course, then has the knock-on effect of becoming a self-fulfilling prophecy – we’re scared we can’t keep up, we freeze, we fail to keep up. Bish, bosh, bang, Uber-ization!
To prevent this, you need to be people-first, an idea which Accenture calls ‘counter-intuitive’, although in reality it’s a variant on the ‘it’s not about the technology’ meme we heard repeatedly from the technologist CEOs and COOs at Davos last week.
Source : Accenture Technology Vision 2016
The Accenture study notes:
The rise of the millennial generation brings with it not just a new type of customer, but also a new kind of employee with very different outlooks and aspirations. This ‘born digital’ generation demands a world fashioned to its needs and new expectations about how work should be organized. Pervasive collaboration technologies are reconfiguring long- established norms of employment. The push toward freelance and portfolio careers is reshaping the workforce—how, when, and where.
The business is digital, so the organization, its people and its culture must now become digital too.
The report provides some interesting use case examples of organizations that have made this leap, such as Virgin America:
the only airline based in Silicon Valley, and it has learned to think like the disruptive tech businesses that surround it. It has experimented with everything from in-flight social networks to rethinking how to buy tickets. The company even went o far as to collaborate with its frequent flyers: 30,000 people signed a Change.org petition to give the airline two gates at Dallas Love Field (which it was subsequently allocated). Virgin returned the favor with cash, by offering stock options to frequent flyers before the company went public. Most impressive of all, the rewards to the company have been very real: 2014 revenue of almost $1.5 billion and a $306 million initial public offering (IPO).
Source : Accenture Technology Vision 2016
It also cites apparel e-tailer Zappos and its use of data:
They use it to make critical decisions about their customers— most notably, which are the customers they care about the most. Using a combination of their own and third-party data, Zappos’ marketing analytics team unearthed two key customer segments to find and nurture. The end result is still ads, but ads targeted at the right people. And to drive this data and consumer culture home, Zappos famously offers new hires $3,000 to leave after four weeks, effectively cutting loose anyone who is not inspired by the company’s obsessive customer focus.
And yes, there’s an Uber-ization example in there as well, courtesy of UberHEALTH in Boston:
With its existing network of cars and customers, and a new set of skilled workers—registered nurses—Uber has been able to provide on-demand delivery of flu shots and similar vaccinations. Neither hospitals nor major pharmacy chains in the United States would have ever previously seen Uber as a competitor.
Trending
There are also five major trends identifed by Accenture via a poll of 3,100 business and IT execs across 11 countries and 12 industry sectors. These are:
(1) Intelligent automation, whereby organizations embrace automation – powered by artificial intelligence (AI), robotics and augmented reality – to create a more productive relationship between people and machines. Some 70% of those polled by Accenture say they’re spending more on AI-related technology investments compared to two years ago, while 55% say they plan on using machine learning and embedded AI solutions heavily.

People First recommendation – adapt the enterprise’s organization, culture, skills, and experience to use AI.

(2) The Liquid Workforce, meaning technologically-enabled, change-ready environments that are able to adapt to meet changing digital demands. In such environments, being able to learn quickly or to ‘shift gears’ is seen as more valuable than deep domain expertise.

People First recommendation – Make training a core competency. Empower collaboration and new ideas. Manage a distributed workforce. Create an organization that is built to facilitate, not impede.

(3) The Platform Economy, with 81% of survey respondents stating that platform-based business models will become part of their organization’s core growth strategy within three years. Accenture predicts that platform business models represent the most profound disruptive change in the global macroeconomic environment since the Industrial Revolution.

People First recommendation – Appoint a C-level champion to lead a cross-functional team of technologists, business experts, and economists. This team should assess the range of opportunities to build platform business models, and prepare a presentation to the board of directors.

(4) Predictable disruption at a time when 81% of survey respondents report the emergence of fast-emerging digital ecosystems in their sectors. Forward-thinking firms will among those which can proactively predict these ecosystem trajectories and use that knowledge to gain competitive edge.

People First recommendation – Appoint a C-suite sponsor to oversee a team that is responsible for championing your new ecosystem and digital partnership strategies. Leverage external industry experts to provide fresh perspectives about growing digital ecosystems. Have your team develop innovative ideas for how the organization will leverage emerging digital ecosystems. Line up the necessary resources, stakeholders, and investments.

(5) Digital Trust as the cornerstone of the digital economy, a sentiment expressed by 83% of survey respondents. This means looking beyond issues of digital security – still part of the trust conversation – and into building digital ethics into the core business strategy.

People First recommendation – Identify an executive responsible for developing governance models, taxonomies, and principles-based codes. This role will also focus on technically challenging areas such as decision-making in autonomous systems and confront today’s assumptions of what informed consent is, how to do no harm, and what it means to be truly anonymous.

My take
As I noted at the top of this, this study mirrors quite a lot of the conversations that were taking place at Davos last week, as human beings relationship with technology was widely discussed. Inevitably a lot of this came in the form of the ‘bad robots coming to steal our jobs’ meme, but I thought that Erik Brynjolfsson, Director, MIT Initiative on the Digital Economy, summed the reality up well:
Technology is a tool. The biggest misconception I’ve heard here at Davos is the idea that technology is going to come for our jobs. The reality is that it is a tool. It’s a more powerful tool than we’ve ever had before, whether the tool is a hammer or Enterprise Resource Planning. So we have more power to shape that going forward.
One way you can use that technology is to automate jobs and eliminate existing tasks. Technology in many cases can be a good substitute for humans. But the bigger opportunity is in using technology as a complement, to enhance and augment human capabilities. The reality is that machines and humans have very different strengths and weaknesses. If we build on that, then we’re going to build systems that combine humans and machines in ways that could never have been done before.
He added:
There is a tendency to protect the existing jobs or, if you will, protect the past from the future. We should be protecting the future from the past. Technology can be used to create jobs or destroy jobs. The answer is not to hang on to what we have; it’s to increase the speed at which we develop the new jobs, the new opportunities. The economies and the companies that embrace that are the ones who are going to be most successful.
Read more on: Analytics planning and data analysisDigital skills and trainingDigital transformation - frictionless enterpriseFuture of work 