
When prioritizing significant IT projects, financial ROI is invariably the most important measure. Sometimes the return isn’t directly monetary, but rather in social benefits to customers, employees or the community. While much harder to directly quantify (although CDC has attempted to to do so), there isn’t a non-financial decision criteria more important than the implications for health and safety, a realm where companies in the food and drug supply chain bear unique responsibilities. IT-enabled improvements in logistics mean that defective products spread far and wide with unprecedented speed. Yet the same technology that provides logistical efficiency can be applied to enhance customer safety. The grocery business provides a perfect case study.
One of the unfortunate consequences of today’s complex, industrialized, globalized food production and distribution is that contaminated products often end up in buyer’s pantries before evidence of a problem ever manifests. By the time a product recall is issued, millions of affected items may be inside the retail distribution chain leading many customers to unknowingly eating tainted food. To put this in context, check this:
CDC estimates that 1 in 6 Americans get sick from contaminated foods or beverages and 3,000 die each year. The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) estimates that foodborne illnesses cost $15.6 billion each year.
Traditional methods of recall notification have been blunt instruments, often using mass media to get the message out. This shotgun approach means even those that hear of the recall and have purchased an affected product may not have packaging from the tainted SKUs or lot numbers. Still more people may be frightened into worrying about a health scare that doesn’t affect them. A far more efficient and effective system could be restricted to actively notifying only those that have purchased affected items.
Proposals for smart, data-driven product recall notifications first arose several years ago, however they are only now becoming common. They exploit the detailed collection and analysis of retail transactions in combination with customer tracking via loyalty cards to precisely targeted, potentially life-saving recall messaging.
Two recent incidents enlightened me to the safety benefits of connecting store loyalty card tracking and product recall lists with some clever data analysis. In the first case, my family received an automated phone call from Fred Meyer, a Kroger subsidiary popular in the Pacific Northwest and where we do most of our weekly shopping. The call provided detailed information about a packaged salad that had been recalled with information on how to find the affected lot numbers. Knowing that we regularly purchase that product, I checked out the one in our refrigerator, and sure enough, it was on the list.
The phone call seemed like more than a coincidence, but I was willing to chalk it up to the combination of our being regular shoppers that use a loyalty card, since the registration includes our phone number, and the availability of cheap robo-calling software; i.e., we were just recipients of a blast-o-gram to every card holder. A couple of weeks later, while checking out, the clerk mentioned that since we were using a loyalty card, there might be some recall information printed at the bottom of the receipt. Looking at it later, it included specific product descriptions and UPC codes for another item that we regularly buy. Once again, I investigated and we had the recalled item.
Talk about a run of bad luck!
As an IT analyst, I didn’t have to wait for the third time to see a trend.
Knowing that grocers record every item of every transaction along with one’s card ID (it’s how you end up with those uncannily useful coupons in the mail), it dawned on me that the store was correlating a lot of data to micro target customers that had purchased affected items.
I repeatedly reached out to the PR departments at Kroger and Fred Meyer to confirm details and did not get a response. However I suspect the system uses recalled UPC codes, inventory data (to get the lot number or sell- or use-by dates), recall lists and card IDs. It’s a brilliant application of the nexus of cheap storage, customer tracking/rewards programs and software like the Hadoop ecosystem designed to analyze enormous data sets.
While my personal experience was epiphanic, a little research shows that the idea of using customer data to track contaminated food has been around for about five years. Costco, the warehouse club that by definition has personal information for all of its customers, has long worked with authorities to help trace the origin of food-borne diseases by correlating the transaction histories of those reporting symptoms. According to this 2010 article by the American Public Health Association,
Investigating a recent outbreak of salmonella Montevideo, epidemiologists at the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention for the first time successfully used data from shopper cards to precisely pinpoint the product that had sickened consumers. … ‘We tried to use shopper cards in the past during outbreak investigations, but this was particularly successful to determine a specific brand of a product that was suspected to cause illness,’ said Laura Bettencourt, PhD, MPH, an Epidemic Intelligence Service officer at CDC.
During the outbreak investigation, many of the food-borne illness victims recalled purchasing an Italian-style salami, ‘but they could not remember the brand or the exact product name,” Bettencourt said. Because some of the consumers mentioned shopping at Costco, health officials from CDC and the Washington State Department of Health worked with the company to search through its purchasing records for a common thread. The data revealed that all of the shoppers had purchased salami manufactured by Rhode Island-based Daniele International Inc.
Costco initially worked the system in reverse: starting with individuals reporting food-related health problems and working backward to find the source. In contrast, my experience with Fred Meyer (a technique also used by Costco and others) was proactive: working with a known list of contaminated products and identifying only those individuals known to have purchased them. Both scenarios provide a powerful example of the life and death benefits of data analysis.
There may soon be legal ramifications for retailers that ignore their valuable customer data. In 2011, The Center for Science in the Public Interest filed a class action suit against Safeway for failing to notify one of its club card members of a Class 1 (the most dangerous risk category according to the USDA) product recall. The case is still pending after the court rejected Safeway’s motion to dismiss. However a report in January indicated that a settlement could be near.
My take
The ability to accumulate, store and analyze unprecedented amounts of data presents organizations with opportunities to both do well and do good.
The primary impetus for infrastructure and applications to support data-driven decisions is and will remain financial, whether to increase sales, improve service, or instigate new products. However, business leaders should also look for ways that data science can yield qualitative benefits by enhancing the safety, user experience and work conditions of customers and employees. While such applications are inherently hard to quantify financially, they can provide significant business benefits via improved loyalty, good will, corporate visibility and, as Safeway found out the hard way, legal cover.
There are of course numerous issues surrounding data privacy, data management and the like. These issues can only become murkier in the face of regulation. But in the end, it is hard to imagine consumers raising a stink when public health is at stake.
Image credit - story images, via CDC, featured image via the commonsRead more on: Analytics planning and data analysisHealthcare transformation 