
As computing continues its long-term move to the cloud, the technology that underpins it is evolving into new forms that are better adapted to the cloud environment. Some of this may seem like arcane technical detail, but businesses rely more and more on technology to remain competitive. It’s when the technical detail has a direct impact on business outcomes that it becomes interesting to us at diginomica.
There are currently big changes afoot in cloud platforms and infrastructure. Whereas the first generation of cloud computing was essentially a virtualized mirror-image of its on-premise equivalent, new forms are emerging that are entirely cloud-native, such as hyperconverged hardware architectures and API-driven, micro-services based software architectures. These new creations are faster, more adaptable and far less costly than their predecessors, and are now at a level of maturity that is ready for mainstream adoption. We have reached a critical juncture.
We touch on these topics frequently in our coverage at diginomica, centered on our cloud platforms and infrastructure cornerstone page. This is one of 18 cornerstone topics we introduced as part of diginomica’s spring facelift. Each of these content areas has a real-life, human curator responsible for its well being, hand-picking the ‘curators picks’ and making sure the content in the section hits the right notes — here are my top selections as curator for this topic.

Hyperconverged infrastructure will evolve into cloud building blocks
by Kurt Marko
excerpt — “Despite the superficial resemblance of products like HPE Hyper Converged System, Nutanix NX and VXRAIL to the type of high-density systems used at Google or Facebook, they’re typically used for mainstream IT tasks like virtual server consolidation, VDI or scale out shared storage, not cloud-native software stacks. While understandable given the still nascent state of enterprise private cloud implementation, it’s both unfortunate and likely to change since HCI is the (near) perfect platform for software-defined cloud infrastructure.”
why I picked it — Sometimes a topic bubbles up in our coverage before we fully realize how important it is. Hyperconverged infrastructure is one of those topics, and in this piece Kurt explains in some detail why it matters. Read it and you’ll understand why Kurt was so disappointed with last week’s VMworld conference. We have much more on this topic, including Kurt’s comprehensive overview of Nutanix’ ambitions as an enterprise platform, and Martin Banks interviewing Nutanix president Sudeesh Nair on creative destruction in the enterprise applications market.

Mashing it up – APIs and how the small bits are becoming ‘big’
by Martin Banks
excerpt — “The IT industry will very soon wake up to the idea that APIs really should now move into the domain of the business manager rather than the specialist developer, for they are the people actually at the coalface of what APIs are required, and why.”
why I picked it — Martin combines viewpoints from Tibco’s Rob Zazueta and MuleSoft founder Ross Mason to highlight the rising trend towards exposing micro-services APIs as a new approach that enables user-generated integration, and what it means for enterprise process automation. For an example of how this works in practice, read my write-up of Unilever’s API-led journey to adaptive integration and an earlier interview with Ross Mason on the API-led enterprise.

The race to the $10 billion cloud – Oracle lays down the gauntlet to Salesforce
by Stuart Lauchlan
excerpt — “We think we have some built in advantages being a strong player in SaaS and a strong player in PaaS and making it very [easy for] all of the customers who want to get their infrastructure as a service or their related infrastructure as a service from the same cloud supplier in the same data center.”
why I picked it — Stuart picks apart Oracle’s quarterly earnings call, highlighting the challenges and vulnerabilities behind the bluster. Who’s winning in the race to win dominance in the cloud? Clearly it’s Amazon today, not Oracle or Salesforce — but as the cloud chief at IBM, another would-be contender, recently pointed out, there’s still all to play for. We’ll keep watching.

Pega CEO Alan Trefler and his conflict with public cloud
by Derek du Preez
excerpt — “My belief is that a cloud architecture is absolutely critical and all of the Pega technology has been moved to run on a cloud architecture. But I don’t think that the word cloud stuck on other marketing materials automatically creates the sort of placebo based panacea that a lot of people talk in terms of. ”
why I picked it — Derek questions some dubious assertions by Pega’s CEO, who, like many from an on-premise background, isn’t ready to fully embrace a public cloud model. There are many sides to this debate — Infor takes more of a cloud-native approach but on the other hand, pureplay SaaS vendor ServiceNow prefers multi-instance over multi-tenant. As I wrote a while ago, vendors are at different stages of a journey.

Azure vs AWS – cloud wars move to the app building layer
by Phil Wainewright
excerpt — “There’s another dimension to this story in which both Microsoft and Salesforce could lose out to a new generation of applications being nurtured by AWS … AWS has recently started to champion a new way of building applications that doesn’t start with servers at all.”
why I picked it — Your choice of infrastructure should not be a decision that’s made in isolation. It should be determined by what will run on top of it — and that needs some careful thought, because the applications themselves are evolving too. At one extreme is Amazon’s bet on serverless apps. At the other extreme are legacy apps ported to a devops cloud and even mainframe apps running unchanged on containers. As Brian Sommer advises on application software upgrades, take nothing for granted and be sure that what you’re getting will stay fresh as this evolution continues.

Bonus content — Here’s a sample of other themes that look set to recur in future coverage:

EU and US indulge in Privacy Shield self-congratulations in Brussels, but privacy activists say ‘See you in court’ — data protection is an ongoing issue when considering cloud providers, with Brexit adding extra questions.
Do GPU optimized databases threaten the hegemony of Oracle, Splunk and Hadoop? — new processor technologies are emerging that could have unexpected impacts on application performance and capabilities.
Inside BlockCypher’s plans to become the “AWS of blockchains” — distributed ledgers look set to become an important infrastructure component as the technology matures.
Being human – Watson boots up a new future for IBM in cloud robotics  — artificial intelligence as a cloud service has a lot of potential.

And of course we’ll continue to feature informative use case stories — one of my favorites this year is Trainline’s journey of migration from Exadata to AWS. If you have stories you’d like to share, please post a comment or get in touch — and stay tuned at diginomica for plenty more.
Image credit - Exchange cityscape with green environment © alphaspirit - Fotolia.comDisclosure - Infor, Oracle and Salesforce are diginomica premier partners at time of writing. Infor, Nutanix, Pega, ServiceNow and VMware contributed travel costs for our writers to attend their events. Read more on: Cloud platforms - infrastructure and architecture 