
In early July, rumors started to circulate that Bill McDermott, CEO SAP had sustained a serious injury. Details were scant but it wasn’t long before the ‘inside baseball’ rumor mill got into full swing.
At the time, I fielded a number of inquiries but had nothing to say. My view on these issues is simple: whatever has happened, it is not a matter for speculation or gossip. The only thing that matters is to wish the person concerned a speedy recovery and leave them to do so in private. In truth, some of the rumors were scandalous to the point of disgust the only effect of which is to reduce reputations and wipe out trust. Participation in such scurrilous talk diminishes all of us. I want no part of it.
Time went by and nothing was said by SAP. For my part it was business as usual because whatever else you might say about SAP, they have a VERY deep bench of experienced executives who are perfectly capable of fielding questions demanding board level attention.
Today, the nature of what happened became public knowledge. This from Larry Dignan at ZDNet:
According to the German newspaper Wirtschafts Woche, McDermott fell down a flight of stairs in July carrying a water glass. He nearly bled to death from his injuries.
Later in the day, McDermott took an unusual step and posted his story on Facebook. I say unusual because I’ve never seen something like this handled in this manner. He said:
In early July, I was visiting my father on his 76th birthday. Unfortunately during my stay, I slipped and fell while holding a glass of water, and the injuries caused by falling on the broken glass were significant. I suffered facial fractures, severe lacerations, and extensive damage to my eye.

After returning home from extensive surgery and a week’s worth of recovery time in the hospital, I had numerous additional procedures to repair the facial injuries and multiple surgeries to attempt to regain sight in my eye. Unfortunately, despite doing everything possible, the eye could not be saved and was removed earlier this week. After a 6 – 8 week healing period, I will be fitted with a prosthetic eye. Although this was not the outcome I had hoped for, I feel grateful, optimistic and hopeful.
McDermott goes on to talk about his gratitude, optimism and hope for the future. It’s good stuff. He says this incident changes nothing and that:
Work has always energized me, and today, I’m more driven than ever to fulfill my duties and promises as SAP’s CEO.
Those are brave words. I don’t know if I could say the same but they bring back memories of an event where McDermott had to appear virtually due to a death in the family. He looked gaunt as you might expect but you had to admire his bravery in delivering a message at an extraordinarily difficult time.
The Facebook post is swamped with good wishes and I had  nothing specific to add other than “+1. Take care dude.” McDermott’s wry reply brought a smile to my face. It is shown at the top of this story. It is a personal statement behind which there is a past earnings call joke. McDermott replied to every one who had something to say.
Great leaders need to be fluent in many roles. I think we have all just witnessed one of the keys to that greatness
CYA soon Bill.

Read more on: Social 