
The UK government’s Chief Commercial Officer (CCO) Bill Crothers has announced that he will be stepping down from his position, following a search for a new candidate and a period of transition. He has described the announcement as a “sad day” but added that he is looking forward to “new challenges” in the next stage of his career.
However, while the search gets underway for a replacement it’s worth asking the question: what do we need from the next CCO and the future of the Crown Commercial Service? But more on that later…
Crothers started his civil service career in the Home Office where he later became Group Commercial Director. In addition to this role, Bill became a Crown Representative before becoming Government’s Chief Procurement Officer and later, Government Chief Commercial Officer, both based in the Cabinet Office. Bill led the formation of the Crown Commercial Service (CCS) in April 2014, and took additional responsibility as executive Chairman of the new CCS.
Prior to his roles in Whitehall, Crothers spent 21 years working at Accenture, where he made Partner in 1995.
The government has said that the decision to step down lies with Crothers himself, despite some speculation that he has been pressured out since his ally Francis Maude moved on from being Minister at the Cabinet Office.
It added that Crothers will continue to act as an advisor on improving Whitehall’s commercial capability after his departure and help work on the government’s most complex deals. But the press release announcing the move also notes that Crothers will go on to take “similar advisory roles in the private sector”.
Bill Crothers has been an incredibly divisive figure in Whitehall, with not everyone agreeing with his aggressive approach and management style. In particular there has been conflicts between him and those working for the Government Digital Service.
 One source even described him as a “bully” not too long ago, so I’m sure there will be some sighs of relief at his departure, particularly from those working on the digital side of the Cabinet Office.
However, personal politics aside, it can’t be denied that Crothers has played a significant role in making huge amounts of savings for the public sector and taxpayers, which is what he was brought in to do. He certainly filled the brief.
For instance, the Crown Commercial Service’s first annual report and accounts recently revealed that it had made savings of £5.9 billion over the last year. Not an insignificant sum, given the aggressive period of austerity currently happening in the UK.
Cabinet Secretary and Head of the Civil Service Jeremy Heywood said:
The civil service has significantly improved its commercial skills over the past 5 years. Bill has played a vital role in helping us recognise the scale of the capability challenge and taking important first steps to tackle it. I want to thank him for these efforts, and for the expertise he has brought to saving money for the taxpayer in commercial negotiations.
Whilst Chief Executive of the Civil Service, John Manzoni, added:
Bill has contributed hugely to driving commercial common sense into everything we do. His unstinting energy in assisting officials across Whitehall to reach the right commercial deal, drive maximum value for money for the taxpayer, and to build commercial skills across government, will be missed.
Bill Crothers commented:
I’ve hugely enjoyed leading the Commercial Function in its set-up stage, and I’m very proud of the improvements we’ve already seen in government’s commercial capability. Now is therefore the right time for me to change role and let someone new lead the implementation of the next phase.
He also sent the following tweets:

I am looking forward to new challenges in the next stage of my career, but also to continuing to provide commercial advice to govt in future
— Bill Crothers (@BillCrothersCCO) July 30, 2015

A sad day for me ……. Next stage though. And a slow and positive transition.
— Bill Crothers (@BillCrothersCCO) July 30, 2015

What next?
The question now is: who will replace Crothers? And what do we want and need her or him to achieve? I spotted a tweet from Mark Thompson, a lecturer at Cambridge University and someone that has a heavy influence in Whitehall, which gets to the crux of the issue:

Urgently need to link commercial reform agenda to digital – this has not happened to date https://t.co/wv9B6LOd3q
— mark thompson (@markthompson1) July 30, 2015
Up until now, the Crown Commercial Service has primarily focused on working on better managing the government’s existing supplier relationships and building up commercial capabilities – which needed serious attention. No-one is denying that.
The shocking lack of ability over the years to make sensible commercial decisions has meant poor deals have been signed, money has been lost and the resulting systems have been terrible in a number of instances.
However, as things begin to gain momentum within the Government Digital Service and the whole digital agenda continues to grow, where there is a shift in focus from ‘traditional’ IT and supplier relationships
Bill Crothers
towards using commodity cloud products and in-house digital builds, what is the role of the Crown Commercial Service?
The two, as Thompson notes, need to be linked and their priorities need to be aligned. At the moment, by and large, it feels like two very different agendas – with only a couple of exceptions.
My take
Divisiveness can play a part and can certainly have its benefits in many instances. The savings Crothers achieved point to that. He’s obviously incredibly good at what he does. However, as things move forward and if the Cabinet Office thinks that the Government Digital Service and the Crown Commercial Service both have a role in the future of Whitehall, then perhaps someone with a strong digital focus would be a good choice for a replacement…
Read more on: Digital government and public services

