
Cloud analytics company Birst has today announced the release of Birst 6 – a platform that unifies the company’s strategy towards creating automated, networked BI in the enterprise.
We’ve been following Birst closely over the past couple of years, where the company has been talking about the challenges that businesses face in connecting the dots between traditional analytics tools, desktop visualisation tools and more modern open source technologies, such as Hadoop.
Birst argues, correctly in my mind, that enterprises have found themselves in a situation where they are doing analytics in a disjointed, disparate fashion. Products have been bought by teams across the organisation, data silos and lakes have been created, and there isn’t a networked fabric that brings this all together in a coherent way.
This not only reduces the productivity of technical experts in the enterprise, such as data scientists, but it also makes the task of analytics impenetrable for the average business user.
Birst 6 aims to fix this – by enabling business users to not only act in isolation, but as part of a networked organisation, that uses machine learning and automation to make tasks simple.
I got the chance to speak to Southard Jones, VP of product strategy at Birst, about the latest release, where he spoke of the benefits of simple, networked BI. Jones said:
I’ll use the analogy of the way we used to manage our contact list in GoldMine or even Outlook, compared to using LinkedIn. Why would you use something [like GoldMine or Outlook] to manage my contact list when it’s so much more powerful that when I add a contact I can see their contacts and what their interests are on LinkedIn? Or how they can influence me or how I can influence them? That’s the power of having a connected contact list.
Connected is a key theme of what we are trying to do here. Make analytics a part of a network, that’s the most critical way that we think Birst is different.
Making it useful to the average business user. Not putting data scientists out of a job, but rather increasing the productivity of data scientists. Spending less time doing the administrative work, but spending time doing real, true, predictive analytics.
Birst Connected Data Prep
The first key feature of Birst 6 rests on the idea that most self-service data prep tools and desktop virtualisation products are mainly aimed at technical employees that understand and know how to manipulate data. Also, these tools are often used in isolation, creating silos that don’t talk to each other.
Birst 6’s approach centres on three ideas: Connect, Prep and Relate.
The connect element allows business users, with little understanding of how data integration or migration works, to pull up data that they find useful. And to do this easily and quickly. Not only this, but Birst will use machine learning to tell a user what are the most important bits. Jones explained:
Connect allows an end user to reach out to a data source and connect with one click. I don’t need to know what a RESTful API is, I don’t need to know there is a difference between a transactional API and an analytics API. I don’t need to know anything, I just need to know I put my data in Salesforce, I know my login for that, and Birst is going to tell me the most commonly used tables. Using machine learning to help an average business user to know what to click.
Secondly, Prep also helps these same business users to prepare that data. Cleansing, merging and refining data is a dark art that even the most savvy users will sometimes struggle with. Birst hopes to make this easier by tapping into insights across the organisation and providing useful, visual demonstrations of what to do. Jones said:
I have a column in Marketo – I don’t know how to do a transformation, or a split column, or whatever crazy scripting I need to do – I just want to click on a button and have it walk me through how to do it. A visual way to transform data. This is a connected approach to Prep, I can pull information about what other people have done in, I can read things, I can edit steps, it’s faster and easier. And we are going to give you instant feedback, leveraging our in-memory engine.
Finally, the Relate feature is aimed at automatically providing users networked insights that they may not have been able to, or known how to, achieve previously. This is key to the networked data idea, where teams can share and reuse previously isolated data insights. Jone said:
This is about enabling that end user to relate the leads in Marketo to the opportunities in Salesforce. But it goes beyond that. What if I’m doing those, but I also want to know how that relates to our revenue? I don’t know how to pull data from NetSuite, I don’t even have a login. I should be able to relate it to the analytics – the people in finance have already prepared the data – and they have a revenue set of analytics. I can just network my data to theirs.
Machine learning
Machine learning is something that Birst has been using for close to a decade now – understandably, it’s central to predictive analytics. However, Birst 6 aims to utilise this further by making life simpler for both the casual business user and the data scientist. Jones explained:
We are exposing machine learning to average business users. We are doing that by understanding what are the common things that people have challenges with getting from data to insight, fast. Birst will automatically build dashboards and charts for you based on what’s happening on the data underneath. Giving users faster insights.
The next piece is the BI team that is creating models and pushing them out to users – the way that modelling is done today is that a group of data scientists run various models against datasets and come up with a model that they feel, then that model gets used in production. For example, for insights into what products to cross-sell in a call centre.
Then as people in the call centre are recommending products, more data comes in and that model should be retrained. This is painful for data scientists. It’s a lot of administrative work. Not only that, but there might be more models that are a better fit. They don’t want to go back and rerun those models. Birst automates all that process.
The challenges
As noted above, the release of Birst 6 marks somewhat of a turning point for Birst. It has been talking up the capabilities of its approach to networked BI and has spoken at length about the challenges facing organisations that continue to live in silos. The release of Birst 6 should allow the company to go to market and say that it has the tool to solve all these problems. However, making analytics simple isn’t an easy task. Jones said:
The hardest part was really assuring that this was built for that 26 year old marketing manager. Removing clicks, asking every last question, how can we make this more straight forward, how can we make them get the insights faster – there is a lot of time and energy built into the product to make sure we make it successful for those folks. And making it a modern, enjoyable experience.
Also, when you think about making connected data prep not a one off, siloed experience – that’s actually quite hard. If I just had to do it one time, I don’t have to worry about what happens if I go back half way through my lineage step and remove a step – if you remove a step, what’s the downstream impact? That’s hard stuff to figure out. We need to make sure that we prompt them with those questions, that’s a hard, logical exercise that requires deductive reasoning. It wasn’t about writing a million lines of code, it was about making it a wonderful experience.
My take
I like Birst’s pitch – time and time again I come across enterprises that are not only struggling to get to grips with their data, but don’t have the money or time to invest in complex environments that only a lucky few can understand. Silos exist everywhere and if Birst can work as the fabric to connect all the dots, that makes it compelling. That being said, companies have been investing in data tools for years and the idea that they might have to invest in yet another could be a difficult pill to swallow. However, as we know, data is what will differentiate your business. So getting that right is essential.
Image credit - Connected modern world concept © James Thew - Fotolia.comRead more on: Analytics planning and data analysis 