
Christy Wyatt, Good Technology
It’s just like when two people in your circle who’ve spent the past few years bickering suddenly turn up arm-in-arm to announce they’re engaged.
Today smartphone pioneer BlackBerry announced it is buying mobile security provider Good Technology for $425 million. It’s the first time the two companies have made news together without one of them picking holes in the other’s technology stack or marketing spiel.
But all that was just the rough-and-tumble of competition in a healthy market, Good Technology’s CEO Christy Wyatt insisted when we spoke by phone today.
I’ve also said many positive things about BlackBerry. We’re in a very competitive market, we’ve both looked at mobility for enterprise with many of the same customers and we have many of the same expectations as to what enterprise mobility means.
In the cool light of day, you look at the assets, you look at what customers you have. We know the market around us is accelerating. This just made a tremendous amount of sense.
From BlackBerry’s point of view, it consolidates and accelerates the company’s strategy to move away from its past as a secure smartphone maker to focus on software products for enterprise mobility management (EMM), the term usually given to the market in which the two companies now play. Good adds useful strengths in the iOS market, where BlackBerry has been weakest.
Meanwhile Good Technology gains BlackBerry’s broad expertise and larger market reach, as Wyatt explained.
On their side they have an incredible amount of depth in management capability and service delivery capabilities, global reach, and partnerships with mobile providers.
Our focus is on a very robust platform and building your mobility strategy across platforms.
I think our customer bases are very complementary. The opportunity to give the CIO a common view across their mobile estate within the enterprise could be incredibly compelling.
My view of this is taking strong assets from both of us that are very complementary and putting them together to make sense for customers.
Financial clout
Blackberry also brings welcome financial clout. When I first interviewed Good’s CEO in June last year, the company had recently filed papers for an IPO and there was every reason to expect a strong valuation. VMware had bought fast-growing enterprise mobility player AirWatch for $1.5 billion earlier that year, while another player, MobileIron, was on its way to a Nasdaq IPO that briefly valued it in excess of $800 millon.
But then the gloss started to fade from the EMM sector. MobileIron’s stock price has drifted down persistently after hitting an early high of $12 to below $4 this month. Rumors have persisted that AirWatch is not performing as well for VMware as had been hoped at the time of the acquisition. Good Technology raised a further $80 million from investors in the fall but reportedly laid off staff at the turn of the year.
While the $425 million agreed today is much less than the valuations being bandied around a year-and-a-half ago, it’s an indication of how difficult an IPO would have been for Good. But Wyatt insisted that the acquisition should not be seen as a sign of weakness. She told me Good’s business continues to grow strongly, citing IDC figures as external validation.
It’s absolutely a fast growing market. I think you’re seeing some shaking out of midmarket versus enterprise players.
This is at a stage where there are big companies that need to solve big problems. Smartphones and tablets are outselling PCs today and they are going to become the primary enterprise computing platform.
Our vision has always been to be a global provider of enterprise mobility to the enterprise. An IPO is just one way of raising capital. Our focus has always been on supporting customers and growing the company. With this acquisition, I couldn’t think of a better way to accelerate growth and serve our customers.
My take
Whenever industry players combine, there’s always a suspicion that it’s a sign of a contracting market. But in this case, the larger of the two partners has already shrunk significantly and it makes sense for BlackBerry to now double down on its software play by acquiring technologies that will help it expand its appeal.
The cultural fit is better than may at first appear, too. Good Technology has always played on being a more modern version of what BlackBerry first established in mobile security. The two companies are perhaps far more alike than they ever liked to admit.
Image credit: Christy Wyatt portrait © Getty Images, provided by Good Technology.
Read more on: Mobile 