
John Chen’s not done with handsets yet
Everything in life is about the timing and sometimes the timing just sucks.
If you’re John Chen, CEO of Blackberry, and you’re pitching a technology deal with Royal Bank of Scotland (RBS) as a great example of how you’re extending your enterprise footprint, then having to do this as the bank reels from its second major IT failure in recent years perhaps isn’t the best timing ever.
On the other hand, it gives you a chance to position your company’s offerings as a critical element in overhauling that IT. But it might also lead to speculation that there’s some work needing doing on your customer reference program if that’s your main port of call.
Whatever the case, Chen told Wall Street investors:
RBS is a competitive displacement of MobileIron and a few other casualties. The other people haven’t lobbed anything to us so we won’t payback.
RBS is an important win for us as it established BES [Blackberry Enterprise Service] as the corporate standard for mobile management. This is a corporate wide effort including for all their BYOD policies across all platforms, such as iOS and Android, as well as BlackBerry.We believe RBS chose us because of our superior cross-platform security.
RBS is at least a company willing to be associated with Blackberry. During the mobile firm’s post results quarterly conference call with analysts yesterday, there seemed to be a fair few others that didn’t want their name in the ring. For example, Chen boasted about a new licensing deal with Cisco, before adding that there is another one:
with another major technology provider whose name they would like to keep off the radar, I guess.
On customer wins, he added:
We actually have a few more other key customer wins, switching away from these competitors. But we have not obtained permission to use their names on the call publicly.
In which case it might be better not to mention their existence at all as this sort of ‘can’t tell you, just believe us’ teasing is a red rag to a bull when it comes to market watchers.
War on Gartner
Chen himself acknowledged that the firm has perhaps suffered from lack of reference customers willing to stick their corporate necks out. Asked about
Gartner’s recent low ranking of the firm’s EMM [Enterprise Mobilty Management] offerings in its latest Magic Quadrant, Chen nodded to the fact that the analyst firm had cited lack of customer references as a factor:

Source: Gartner EMM Magic Quadrant 2015
I think we have a lot more installations and licenses then a lot of the competitors supposed to be in the Magic Quadrant. We have much broader set of technologies and improvements. One of the reasons I mentioned RBS, it was important for RBS to grant us the permission to use the name publicly and they were willing to take reference call on BYOD and stuff. So what Gartner has been saying is that we weren’t able to point to anybody that would speak on our behalf.
A lot of our customers are in highly regulated industries that are not willing for us to use their name, especially in government agencies.
But I think with the RBS situation and other names that I have mentioned, that Gartner should do their check and find out that we actually are quite competitive and are winning and in a lot of cases are winning against our competitors.
It’s a fair point up to a point. But then again, maybe Blackberry needs to devote a bit more time itself to its own customer reference efforts? Overall, Chen said, BlackBerry had 2,600 enterprise customer wins in the quarter and around 40% were new customers who had not already used previous BES products. There must be more of them willing to speak up in support, surely?
As for the firm’s numbers, some highlights:

The company posted a first-quarter adjusted loss of $28 million.
Revenue fell to $658 million from $966 million a year ago.
Software revenue was $137 million, up from $37 million in the previous quarter.
Software and technology licensing represented 21% of revenue.
Software and technology licensing grew 150% on a year-over-year basis.
Hardware represented 40% of revenue.
Service revenue was 38% of revenue.

Chen says he wants software sales to contribute about $600 million of annual revenue by the end of BlackBerry’s fiscal year next March. But to the despair of some on Wall Street, he won’t be giving up on the handset business any time soon:
I don’t want to give up the hardware business. I think there’s a shot at still making money in it.
The handset business is not only reputational, but an entry point to security. We have a lot of know how and patents that at least allow us to have that dream.
But he admitted yesterday at the company’s annual shareholder meeting:
I’m always asked, ‘why are we in the handset business?
And he’s yet to answer that one entirely convincingly.
My take
No sign of a sustainable turnaround yet.
And that customer reference program needs some urgent attention.
Read more on: MobileSecurity 