
Gobble gobble
Cyber Monday starts on Friday. And Black Friday’s on Thursday. Or it is if you’re Walmart and you’re trying to get a head start on the competition in what looks to be the most aggressively-fought holiday season so far in online retail. 
While Walmart used to focus its Black Friday sales efforts in-store before moving online for a week of online offers from Cyber Monday, everything’s being pulled forward and out of order this year. walmart.com will kick off online Black Friday offers at noon Eastern Time on Thanksgiving Day itself, with stores then opening up at 6pm Eastern. Then the Cyber Monday sales will begin in earnest on Black Friday. 
Got that? All a bit ‘wibbly wobbly timey wimey’ maybe, but indicative of how important getting that online lead on rival retailers is now seen to be.  Essentially Amazon changed the rules and there’s no room to play by the old ones. 
According to the National Retail Federation (NRF), the Thanksgiving weekend remains a pivotal battleground for retailers, with a predicted 137.4 million US shoppers expected to chase bargains this year, up from 135.8 million last year.  If that’s correct, then the NRF reckons that the sector will see a 3.6% bounce in spending, taking the total paid out to nearly $656 billion over the weekend. 
Others aren’t so sure, arguing that the early starts for sales, particularly online, means that Black Friday and Cyber Monday are no longer such significant dates in the calendar. In an age of  ‘pre-Black Friday’ sales, how special is the big day itself anymore? 
Given that so many retailers are this year planning to get underway on Thanksgiving Day, a study from retail discount tracking website offers.com makes for interesting reading. That found that 53% of those polled – a sample of just over 1000 US shoppers – claimed that they wouldn’t be shopping on Thanksgiving itself this year.  If they’re telling the truth, then that’s 8% more than made the same boast last year. 
That said, the bargain hunters will be back in force on Black Friday itself, with 66% of respondents stating that they’ll be opening up their wallets and purses then, while 69% expect to do so on Cyber Monday. On Black Friday, shopping activity will be evenly split between online and offline, whereas 54% of shoppers on Cyber Monday will do so online.
The offers.com study also provides some comfort for Walmart in its attempts to hold its own against Amazon. While holiday shoppers choose Amazon over Walmart (57.4% over 33.2%), Walmart actually narrowly beats the online pureplay in terms of Black Friday intentions (74% v 72%). 
Big test
That being the case, the holiday season is going to be a big test of Walmart’s e-commerce capabilities, following some significant overhauls over the past year. The firm boasts that it now carries 23 million items online up from 8 million a year ago. There are signs that this effort is paying off, with e-commerce sales up 23% year-on-year in the firm’s recent third quarter numbers. 
The firm recently purchased e-commerce pureplay jet.com for $3 billion, installing its founder Marc Lore as head of the $14 billion a year Walmart online business. This acquisition and appointment are critical, argues Walmart CEO Doug McMillon: 

One of the reasons Jet.com makes sense for Walmart is the common ground we share with basket economics. Walmart’s advantage has always been in providing the lowest prices on a basket of goods, and Jet has created a unique way to deliver the lowest cost basket online. When customers build a bigger basket online, the economics work in their favor and in ours.
Marc has hit the ground running since the acquisition was finalized. We immediately set up teams to accelerate our integration efforts and we’re working hard to leverage our strengths, such as optimizing our combined fulfillment networks, utilizing our scale in areas like shipping, sharing our assortment and leveraging the strengths of our marketing teams.


While Walmart digs in for the season, according to offers.com, the top five stores on Black Friday are likely to be Apple, Best Buy, Macy’s, JC Penney and Kmart. 
At Best Buy, CEO Hubert Joly takes a philosophical view of Black Friday itself: 

I think what until the game is played it’s hard to know, but we do see a combination of a bit of spreading out, but also peaks and valleys being higher and steeper as the consumer has been trained to shop when the prices are more promotional, so I don’t think that there is a material chance here.

That said, the retailer, cited by offers.com study respondents as the top destination for electronics purchasing over the holiday season, has put in the ground work to capitalize on any spending uptick: 

As our marketing tagline, Holiday Gifting Made Easy, states, our goal is to make holiday shopping effortless for customers. To win holiday and deliver on this promise, we have created an exciting assortment of great and competitively priced products, and we have mobilized our assets, including our leading-edge digital capabilities, fast and free shipping across the entire site during holiday, and of course our knowledgeable Blue Shirts and Geek Squad agents who are here to provide compelling in-store experiences and in-home services.
From a product standpoint, I think what’s exciting this year is that there’s a broad range of exciting categories across what I would characterize as some of our more traditional product categories like, for example, TVs and computing. The new TVs are just extraordinary and in computing our teams have done a great job as well as these emerging categories around connected home, around wearable, around drones, around virtual reality, there’s many reasons to come and check our products. I have to disclose I’m going to buy a new drone. I bought one last year but I’m going to buy a new one. This is exciting.

My take
Black Friday is a phrase with which most non-US consumers were unfamiliar until a few years ago, but which is now a permanent fixture on the retail calendar. To those of us outside the US, there isn’t the turkey and pumpkin pie eating bit in the middle of it all as as focal point and as such the spreading out of the bargain-hunting season back into this week and earlier doesn’t have the same significance.
I confess I’ve indulged this year in pre-Black Friday bargains from Amazon, but find it hard to distinguish these from the sort of bargains I’d usually expect to find anyway. There’s just a convenient label to stick on them to encourage me to look a bit more closely.  So is Black Friday really all that much of a big deal these days? 
You can ask the same question outside of the US. In the UK, the comparable point in the retail calendar would be the Boxing Day sales, but again most of these now start before Christmas rather than on the day after Christmas. Is there anything special in the Boxing Day sales anymore? 
Against such questions, the offers.com study is an interesting set of findings, if inevitably based on a limited sample set. But then you can take your pick of any one of a hundred and one similar studies out there at the moment. 
From my perspective, I’m bracing myself for a rush of press releases on Tuesday next week from vendors breathlessly offering their commentaries on the success/failure of various retailers. (Hint – thanks, but almost certainly, no thanks!). 
Image credit - Freeimages.com Read more on: Retail e-commerce and the omni-channel 