
John Chen
You can’t say he didn’t give it a shot. In fact, John Chen can probably be accused of sticking with handset manufacturing for several quarters longer than was sensible. But yesterday the BlackBerry CEO bowed to the inevitable and called it quits. 
After almost two decades, BlackBerry will halt all internal hardware development and outsource it instead to various partners, with BlackBerry picking up royalties on units sold. Chen confirmed: 

We are announcing a new strategic direction in our mobility solutions business, focused on developing and licensing of our security device software as well as the BlackBerry brand. As part of this strategy, we have decided to discontinue all the handset hardware development, only hardware, and to leverage third-party partners to provide that function. 

He added: 

There are important benefits for BlackBerry with this approach. A, we focus all of our efforts on where we can deliver differentiation in software and security and by the way this plays into our strength and it’s aligned with where the market is going. B, partners will bring us the hardware portfolio with competitive hardware specs going forward. C, this will also leverage partners and third parties where scale is critical. This obviously includes distribution, manufacturing, logistics, and repair. We believe this will lead to expanded market access, increased unit volume, and higher profit margins.

The decision may have been a long time coming, but few can have been surprised. BlackBerry sold 400,000 devices in its fiscal second quarter, down from 500,000 in the first quarter and 600,000 the quarter before that.
The timing for the decision is right, argued Chen, with total sofware and services growth up 111% year-on-year: 

When I first started at BlackBerry, I laid out a strategy based on three key principles. N umber one, repairing the balance sheets and return to possibility; number two, investing in growth areas such as enterprise software, IoT, connected cars; and number three, creating new business model through licensing both our technology and our intellectual property. Coming out of Q2, I feel that we are reaching a good inflection point where our financial picture is stable and our pivot to software taking hold.

There was better news coming from other areas of BlackBerry’s business, including its Internet of Things and Connected Cars arms. Caravan Transport Group became the first customer live in production on BlackBerry Radar, with 500 units installed on their trucks today and plans to roll out more units across their fleet of 1,500 vehicles. Meanwhile Hama Automotive became the first paying customers in connected cars.
Enterprise core for Apple
Meanwhile the shift in the balance of power in the handset market could be seen yesterday as Deloitte announced a tie-up with Apple to push the latter’s mobile tech into the enterprise. The services giant has set up a dedicated Apple practice with more than 5,000 consultants and advisors. The dedicated Deloitte/Apple practice will be known as EnterpriseNext and will focus on over 20 vertical industries with a remit to : 

Create EnterpriseNext Value Maps for iOS to help customers discover the highest impact possibilities for iPhone and iPad within their industries, align their mobile opportunities and prioritize digital resources.
Deliver EnterpriseNext Workshops for iOS to quickly take ideas from prototype to custom-built iOS solutions.
Deploy iOS architects, designers and engineers housed within Deloitte Digital Studios around the world — to help produce native apps that integrate seamlessly with existing business platforms including ERP, CRM, analytics and HR.

Deloitte eats its own dog food here, according to CEO Punit Renjen, who says that his workforce uses more than 100,000 iOS devices. He said: 

We know that iOS is the best mobile platform for business because we’ve experienced the benefit ourselves with over 100,000 iOS devices in use by Deloitte’s workforce, running 75 custom apps.  Our dedicated Apple practice will give global businesses the expertise and resources they need to empower their mobile workforce to take advantage of the powerful ecosystem iOS, iPhone and iPad offer, and help them achieve their ambitions, while driving efficiency and productivity.

My take
Sales of the iPhone declined for the first time this year and it’s clear that Apple’s decided the best way to boost enterprise sales is to piggy-back on a corporate-trusted services partner. This latest deal comes after enterprise tie-ups with IBM, Cisco and SAP. 
Apple CEO Tim Cook made no bones about filling the enterprise void that BlackBerry’s latest move might create, noting: 

I think their sales have been fairly low for a while. We are very focused on the opportunity. 

As for BlackBerry, well, it’s the end of an era, but as is so often the case, the prime mover in any marketplace can often become one of the highest profile casualties of other vendors innovation. See, Sony Walkman and the Apple iPod as a case in point. I had a BlackBerry once upon a time, but my loyalties shifted to the iPhone a long time back. 
Chen’s made the right decision, even if it took him too long to come round to it. 
Image credit - Apple/BlackberryRead more on: Best of Governing identity privacy and securityMobile 