
Serguei Beloussov
No sooner said than done! Following on from my colleague Jon Reed’s recent piece about how Blockchain technology could/should find a real value-add home in the world’s enterprises, along comes Acronis Notary as a real, live example of what is possible.
OK, to be fair, it hasn’t officially arrived yet as a purchasable product, but it is already undergoing some beta testing with some large financial services businesses.
Serguei Beloussov, Acronis CEO and serial entrepreneur, concurred with Jon’s assessment entirely, agreeing that taking one step sideways to view Blockchain as a more generalised distributed log technology, rather than a specific distributed ledger technology, opened a huge range of opportunities for enterprises to exploit:

Yes, viewing it as a log of all transactions fits what many companies want to achieve in a wide range of applications. They want to ensure that the log is not modified, and Blockchain provides a way to time and date stamp a transaction with a unique signature which means the log entry cannot be changed.
That is why we are calling it Acronis Notary. It can notarise every transaction in a way that prevents fraud. It creates distributed trust amongst all the parties to a transaction as there is no central authority controlling authentication.

Acronis has been building a growing reputation in the world of data protection tools and services, particularly for cloud users, so getting into Blockchain technology is a natural extension of its activities. Notary has been in development for about a year now, and the early beta testers are to be found amongst the first market the company is targeting – financial services. Belloussov, however, does see it having many applications outside of that silo:

Blockchain is like the Internet. It will change the world. I see it creating, and meeting, new needs in enterprises by providing the way to solve them. It will be like with social media, which no one would have thought of without the Internet being there already. Blockchain is highly distributed, so it can be many things at the same time, so it is not just a ledger. There are already lots of things being created around it.

Indeed, Blockchain’s most famous offspring so far, Bitcoins, would not exist if Blockchain had not appeared.
For Belloussov, the key trick is to understand that with Blockchain, many things that cannot be notarised today, or can only be notarised by painfully slow manual methods that are impractical for business purposes, will become not just possible but the accepted way that business is conducted. And such transactions will cost very small fractions of a cent to perform, making the cost of doing it so marginal as to be no impediment at all.
One example he outlined as a possibility is being able to establish chains of events which then kick off a series of defined transactions. As an example of how this would work, just think about this piece you are reading right now. 
I have written it and so would expect to be paid for it at an agreed rate. But there are other people in the chain between the public exposure of my erudition and wisdom, and you actually reading it. There are the individuals involved in editing and layout of the piece; the people at the ISP ensuring that the IT resources are working correctly so it can be delivered to you as reader; the primary Internet service providers who deliver to anyone, anywhere, be that the guy who lives next door or an Antarctic research station. 
All deserve their slice of the pie and Blockchain can be used to establish a transaction chain that ensures all parties are paid at the same time, automatically.

This means truly collaborative businesses now become possible, and the more digitalised they are the easier it will become.

In a moment of whimsy, he let such possibilities develop for a while:

There are already companies that are run by programs rather than people, and I can imagine the USA operating as a collaborative company that is run by IBM Watson.

Tosh?
Fanciful tosh? Well….. fanciful, yes maybe, but tosh? No, not any longer, and that is the potential Blockchain now brings to the enterprise party.
Such collaborative businesses will, in his view, become the norm, basing increasing amounts of their interactions with each other as chains of events that are established as Blockchains. These will fix all the business processes into an agreed form that cannot be tampered with or inconveniently ‘adjusted’ in any unauthorised form. And the means and processes of authorisation and authentication can be part of the process as well.
This will also have a significant effect on both business regulation and compliance monitoring, as Belloussov pointed out:

It would be too extreme to say it would remove the need for regulatory authorities, but it will change their role. They will, I feel, have more power at the next level of abstraction above the details of process steps.

This is most likely to be in setting out and policing the rules by which collaborative businesses actually collaborate, defining what is allowable as part of a Blockchain chain of events.
That will be an incredibly important task for, while Blockchain has brought forth Bitcoins as a financial instrument of exchange, Belloussov sees no reason at all why it cannot now also bring forth the Virtual Dollar/Pound/Euro or any other currency as the basis of trade between collaborative businesses.
Despite his enthusiasm for the potential Blockchain now provides and his expectations for Acronis Notary, Belloussov is still understandably cautious, if only because some aspects of the Blockchain story remain unanswered:

It is strange that Blockchain appears now. With the Internet the original need for it was clear – military communications. But Blockchain has appeared out of nowhere, for no apparent reason. And no one knows who created it, or why.
It does really look as though it can’t be hacked in any meaningful way. But being hackable would actually be one answer to its sudden appearance. It would appear to be the perfect secure system, but I am naturally still suspicious.

My take
It is obviously early days, and many businesses will obviously be conservative and risk-averse when it comes to taking up the potential of Blockchain. But this one does look to have the potential of being mightily disruptive to business, while at the same time changing many of the rules for the way businesses are conducted. For a start, the days of ‘the late payer’ could be numbered, which might please many small businesses, and get right up the noses of many large enterprise accounts departments. 
Image credit - Acronis Read more on: Financial services and fintechGoverning identity privacy and securityIoT robotics and AIRetail e-commerce and the omni-channel 