
There are 137 different types of blood cancer, all with different names, different symptoms and different challenges – and the recently renamed Bloodwise is on a mission to beat them all.
The UK-based charity, previously Leukaemia & Lymphoma Research, underwent its change of identity in September 2015, in response to feedback from a major two-year research project into what blood cancer patients needed from it.
That research showed that the old name didn’t represent the whole community that the charity supports – for example, myeloma (the biggest blood cancer killer) didn’t get a mention. It no longer reflected what the charity does. It was hard to say and spell. In other words, the name was an obstacle to raising awareness, raising funds and widening access to the charity’s support services.
The name change was timed for September 2015, in order to coincide with Blood Cancer Awareness Month. It got off to a deafening start using Thunderclap, a service that uses the social media accounts of everyone who subscribes to a particular campaign to simultaneously ‘broadcast’ a single campaign message. In Bloodwise’s case, its #wearebloodwise campaign got the support of over 2,500 social media users, to reach more than 13 million others. Among those supporters were national treasure Stephen Fry and Outlander actor Sam Heughan.
But what Bloodwise also needed was a way to measure the success and impact of the renaming campaign. For this, it turned to social listening provider, Crimson Hexagon, as Owen Bowden, insights and analysis manager at Bloodwise, explains:
We spoke to three or four competitors of Crimson Hexagon, but what it came down to, for us, was categorisation. We wanted to understand different conversations – conversations about patients, conversations about policy, conversations about fundraising. There are subtle differences in all of these and, with some of the keyword-based tools we looked at, it would have been incredibly difficult, I think, to create a set of rules that could distinguish between them. What Crimson offered was an algorithmic way to understand different conversations and a way to train the system to categorise them automatically, which was really attractive to us.
With Crimson Hexagon in place, Bloodwise was able to track social media usage of its old name throughout 2015. This showed how mentions of Leukaemia & Lymphoma Research began to decrease after the rename went into action in September. Conversely, it also tracked mentions of Bloodwise, which began to increase steadily during August and spiked with the September launch date. A second large spike in mentions was observed in December 2015, with the charity’s ‘Christmas with the Stars’ fundraising event at the Royal Albert Hall.
Understanding social conversations
But beyond providing insight into the prevalence of its new name in social conversation, Bloodwise is also using Crimson Hexagon as a long-term tracker of public perception – which is where categorisation comes into play. After all, as Bowden points out, it’s not enough to simply count mentions. Instead, he’s looking to dig deeper into what nuanced conversations about Bloodwise in particular and blood cancer in general actually mean.
For me, it’s about what conversations are happening, why they are happening and what that means for us an organisation. So I tend to use Crimson Hexagon to perform ‘deep dives’ on a project basis. Analysing celebrity supporters is one example of this: I’ve been looking at how many of our conversations are driven by key celebrity supporters, the nature of those conversations and how celebrities’ audiences respond to what they say about us online.
Owen Bowden, insights and analysis manager at Bloodwise
Another way categorisation is proving beneficial is in identifying specialist audiences: Bloodwise is able to discern between patients, for example, and fundraisers, and build a more complete profile of different audience types, what they like to talk about and what other interests they may have. In this way, the charity hopes to be able to devise more targeted communications. Says Bowden:
We’ve been quite brand-focused so far, concentrating mostly on brand mentions – and that’s down to the rename. But I see a lot of opportunity here in not just analysing brand prevalence, but also types of conversations and types of people having those conversations.
Looking forward, there’ll be a big push to get other Bloodwise employees involved in using Crimson Hexagon, he says.
While I use the tools for my own analysis project-by-project, our social media manager is using it day-to-day, to see what’s happening on social media and respond where appropriate. And I think there’s an opportunity here to spread Crimson Hexagon to other parts of the organisation that it doesn’t touch just yet; for example, there’s a clear case for the media and PR team to use it more. Maybe we could be using it more in marketing research. As use of the tools spread, I think we’ll see far more use cases, as business users begin to generate their own questions that they want answering.
Image credit - Images via BloodwiseRead more on: Analytics planning and data analysisUse cases 