
In February, Bloomberg published its Jobs Skills Report 2016. The report’s interactive features are solid. But the content is a baffling mixture of exceptional depth on the one hand, and contextual shortcomings on the other.
The report has use to business school graduates and the employers that hire them. The data is compiled from Bloomberg’s annual survey of recruiters who work with MBA (Master’s in Business Administration) talent. The report doubles as a skills breakdown and a means of ranking business programs. The data is sourced from 1,251 job recruiters at 547 companies.
Bloomberg excluded some responses to focus on industries where a critical mass of recruiters operate. The end result: a skills needs breakdown of 11 industries, including financial services, technology, consulting and manufacturing.
An interactive report – but where are the skills definitions?
If you want to know the skills needs per industry, just scroll through and select your visual. You can see which business schools address which skills on a per-industry basis. Or you can compare schools based on how they excel in certain skills/industries.
So what’s the problem?
Well, let’s start by looking at the cross-industry view of skills in demand:

Image from The Bloomberg Job Skills Report 2016
Unless I am missing something, I cannot find the definitions of any of these skills in the published report. Terms like “communication skills” are too broad/vague for insight. Surely everyone in business school has basic ability to write and speak one-to-one. But what about presenting in front of groups? Working in multi-cultural teams?
Not taking the time to define these skills does young applicants a disservice. I hope the report’s authors plan to share that, but for now, we’re on our own to define these terms.
Why is the ability to “work collaboratively” more common than “communication skills”? Is is possible to work collaboratively without communication skills? I’d argue that collaboration skills are harder to find in young people than communication skills, only because collaboration implies the know-how of certain tools that provide structure to communication for achieving a deliverable, not just chatting by the water cooler.
If communication skills include conflict resolution and coordinating diverse teams, then that’s a more sophisticated skill. If it includes multi-lingual abilities, then that’s another notch up. But we are only left to guess.
I did find an unrelated piece on 8 critical careers skills for 2016 that offers specifics on vaguely-defined skills. For example, their definition of communication skills:
Oral and written communication skills are vital in the workplace, but the CED survey found that writing skills are particularly important. No matter what type of position you hold, it’s likely you’ll provide some sort of input on written reports, as well as make contact with colleagues and customers via professional email messages. You should also expect to contribute during meetings and team presentations.
That’s exactly the kind of detail/guidance Bloomberg should have provided. Communication skills are part of an umbrella of “soft skills” that are poorly defined. This piece from last July, Why Applicants Should Consider A School’s Soft Skills Training, provides more soft skills definitions. Soft skills mentioned include: ability to work in diverse teams, leadership abilities, and communication skills.
Citing a GMAC 2015 Corporate Recruiters Survey Report, the author notes that eighty-nine percent of recruiters in the survey said that communications skills are a “critical factor” when selecting whom to interview, second only to “Proven ability to perform”. That means those skills finished ahead of technical and quantitative skills. The article cites an MBA who credits his “group projects and communication coursework that had him giving speeches and writing in a professional manner”.  (He landed an investment banking job in New York City).
My take – and a few tips for graduates
In The 2016 enterprise skills debate – specialist or generalist?, I took a crack at an enterprise soft skills list that brings in technology, design, and agile methods:

knowledge of user experience design
SaaS delivery know-how and value proposition (elasticity, multi-tenancy, resource pooling, deployment models, etc)
agile/interative software delivery approaches
experience with embedded analytics and visual reporting tools
expertise in collaborative tools/workflow
vertical industry know-how, including the configuration of cloud-based templates and guided configuration techniques

This list might point you towards new learning on design thinking, user experience, project management and analytics that will serve you well – you can find online courses in all of these areas. On the technology front, you may not need to code, but it wouldn’t hurt to give it a shot. Getting involved in open source projects will add collaborative skills you won’t get in an MBA classroom. If you know how to bring projects to fruition, or at least to prototype, with a lean team and cloud tools, that will give you a leg up.
And don’t dismiss internships and field study. The Bloomberg report classifies “work experience” as “less common” and “less desired.” I won’t question the numbers but I question the definition. Was “work experience” referring to any type of on-the-job experience, or relevant field experience in the exact industry employers are recruiting in? Something is amiss: relevant work experience in your field is incredibly valuable, especially if your peers don’t have that experience.
“Entrepreneurship” and “global mindset” are listed as “more common, less desired” skills. That befuddles me. If a global mindset is combined with multi-lingual abilities, you’ll find a place. “Communication skills” are blandly listed in this survey without any acknowledgement that different cultures have different communication norms (for example, assertiveness can be perceived as rude in some settings). If you already work with diverse teams, and know how to work across cultural boundaries, that’s an advantage – whether this survey says so or not.
As for entrepreneurship, I find it surprising that employers don’t value such skills, at least in this data. Perhaps the survey definition was limited to the notion of running startups or independent business units. An entrepreneurial approach will serve you well in almost any capacity. The ability to sell ideas to your superiors, to initiate and run projects based on business outcomes – those are invaluable skills whether you ever work in a startup or not.
You’ll need an entrepreneurial mindset to navigate today’s workforce, where 9 to 5 jobs feel like liferafts, and the real shakers and movers build their own networks and make their own career moves. I feel strongly enough about this I wrote a book about it – you may enjoy the (free) audiobook rendition on iTunes.
The Bloomberg jobs report has much to offer those who want to drill into industry needs and evaluate business schools. But just like any other data set, there’s room for interpretation – even more so given the absence of definitions. But that shouldn’t stop us from debating the implications, and filling in the gaps.
Image credit - multipurpose businessman © aleksicze - Fotolia.com.Read more on: Digital skills and trainingFuture of work 