

Industrial Revolution
There was a large elephant in the room of the Convention Center at the Aria Resort and Casino in Las Vegas as BMC Software used its Engage 2016 conference to explore some of the many possibilities that can come the way of business through digital transformation. 
The company is not alone in calling this the ‘Fourth Industrial Revolution’, but that elephant has me wondering if it might be better to call it the the first (or possibly second if you want to include the impact and influence of all types of religion) Societal Revolution.
That elephant is the alter ego of automation: what happens with all the people? and the elephant is growing because the messages that make up the digital transformation and automation story are exceedingly attractive. They make sense…..or at least they do up to a point. What is more, BMC has a rich and comprehensive version of the story to tell – and tells it well.
Indeed, to great cheers from the delegates, Robin Purohit, Group President of the Enterprise Solutions Organisation talked through the drivers behind the development of the company’s technology and how every business is now a technology business because of their IT dependencies. 
He suggested that means the IT department will find itself at the heart of the on-going needs of the business for more innovation and development. It was as though they had not yet thought through the possibility – nay, probability – that theirs would be amongst the jobs automated out of existence. 
Day-to-day IT management is becoming increasingly automated and, as Bloor Research analyst, David Norfolk, recently pointed out: 

Applications development itself is ripe for automation, after all it is based on logic so is an obvious target.

This is where the idea of Societal, rather than Industrial, Revolution comes into play. IT has been a force of change within many business sectors for many years, and has been the creator, and destroyer, of jobs for all of that time. But now the combination of automation, artificial intelligence, machine learning, big data, analytics and the low cost ubiquity of both applications and the hardware needed to run it all, threatens to change the overall employment market more drastically and rapidly than any form of re-balancing could hope to cope with.
Not all negatives
BMC is, however, well aware of the potential of negative change. Jason Andrew, the company’s Senior Vice President for Enterprise Systems Organisation sales across the Americas, indicated that he related strongly to the Societal Revolution motif, though he was more focused on how automation and digital transformation could bring benefits, even in the world of work, saying: 

Many of the people at this conference are in jobs that did not exist five years ago, and in five year’s time they may no longer exist, but new jobs will come along.  For example, the move to DevOps means there is a need get people to think about moving stuff from pre-production to production very quickly and efficiently. Traditionally the software business has been bad at that. This is an example of the new type of job that developers can do – real life testing of apps as they are put into production. With the DevOps movement this is going to be even more important because many of those new apps are, in effect, going to be tested in live, production mode.

He also stressed that it is all-but impossible to predict what type of jobs might be created by digital transformation as it changes the way businesses and service providers operate, often fundamentally, a point made by CEO Bob Beauchamp, during his opening keynote:

Many of the leaders of major enterprises know their businesses will get disrupted at some time in the future. Uber will be Uber-ed and Amazon will be Amazon-ed. There is no industry and role that won’t be affected by digitalisation. The growth of AI capabilities and machine learning means that every industry will be disrupted by entrepreneurs, and the next three years more of it than the last 50 years. Whatever your infrastructure is today it will be all different in three years time.

Brave new world
There was something slightly worrying about what sometimes seemed like a glorious celebration of a coming Brave New World, where automation stretches across much of business and manufacturing, farming, mining and most other industry sectors. And the one part that was not being said is what are the social implications. 
Of course there is a serious debate to be had as to how much responsibility any of the major IT players will carry in providing solutions, but they are all, to varying degrees, going to be the driving forces in some major social, structural changes, as Beauchamp pointed out.
He referred, for example, to how the mining giant, Rio Tinto, had moved to largely autonomous mining machinery, with consequent significant loss of jobs, and now had just 400 people, primarily involved in Big Data analytics, to run 35 mines.
But digital transformation still the vital goal 
Despite such potential negatives, the cause of digital transformation is still of vital importance to most businesses if they are to survive over the next five to 10 years, and BMC is managing to put itself into a place where it is one of the primary `go-to’ sources of the tools and applications that enterprise users are likely to need.
In terms of those tools and applications this year’s Engage  largely featured developments of recently introduced products. There was one new application however that does demonstrate how the company is moving beyond tools for developers and IT managements alone and into the end user space of business analysts and managers.
This is the Innovation Suite, which is currently still in beta testing but is due to become available around November. This is built around an application development and building environment, the Studio, that some might describe as akin to ‘Microsoft’s Visual Basic on acid’, in that it uses the same approach of drag and drop process functions that are then linked on screen according to the logic of the process. 
There are a number of basic modules available with the Suite, but it also includes a Software Development Kit for building new functional modules. The intention is that business analysts and managers will be able to work with Studio to build the applications they require, providing the shortest possible innovation route between idea and implementation.
The Suite also includes a Library of connectors and components, RESTful APIs for building collaborations with external services, and some self-learning educational content.
The Library can also be extended by users dipping into the BMC App-Store that is already being grown. In this way, business users should, over time, be able to find niche functional modules that fit their own requirements. This is expected to grow as small software vendors and start developing applications for the enterprise marketplace.
There has been a major extension to Digital Enterprise Management, which was introduced last Fall. This has been extended with seven new initiatives to help enterprises get a head start in digital transformation. These cover agile application delivery, building digital workplaces, automating big data, achieving service management excellence, operating with multi-sourced cloud environments, building SecOps channels between security and operations teams, and the optimization of core IT systems.
Control-M, the application workload automation platform, has had its Automation API extended beyond the ability to work with Hadoop to allow it to support a range of other platforms and applications. It also now provides self-service programatic interfaces to developers to build what BMC is calling ‘jobs-as-code’. This enables integration between workflow-scheduling artefacts  and the preferred tool used to automate application release and deployment.
My take
This is not an attack on BMC for lack of a ‘social heart’ in societal side of digital transformation. After all the company does acknowledge the issues exist and are important. But being one of the first to address the fundamental changes the digital transformation will bring, it is also the first to allow such issues to be raised and discussed in context. It is well-placed to generate real traction in this marketplace, which means it is unfortunately placed to be the touchstone for the potential social downside 
Image credit - industrialrevolution.org.ukRead more on: DevOps NoSQL and the open source stackDigital enterprise in the real worldIoT robotics and AI 