
Digital transformation will have significant impact on the way that enterprises are managed, and the agility with which they can respond to changes in their marketplaces. But it is likely to have far wider implications, for the IT vendors and society in general, many of which are hard to predict. The guessing game is well under way now, however.
Balancing the beneficial aspects of digital transformation against some still unclear potential negatives is something that most enterprises will have to confront over the next couple of years, and some of the issues emerged at the recent BMC Engage conference in Las Vegas. That balance became the focus of discussions I had with Jason Andrew, Senior Vice President of Enterprise Solutions sales in the Americas for BMC (and until recently the VP/General Manager of EMEA). Andrew is the one leading the team trying to sell these benefits into the enterprise marketplace, and is therefore becoming more aware of some of the social and cultural implications involved in that process.
A salesman calls…
In fact, some of that potentially negative impact can be found in BMC itself, and almost certainly in the majority of IT vendors now ramping up heavy sales pressure on the digital transformation front. This could be seen in a brief chat with BMC’s CEO Bob Beauchamp, where I asked what small-`c’ conservatism was to be found amongst enterprise customers when it came to digital transformation. His response was surprising, and refreshingly honest:
The customers get it, but right now it is arguably our sales people that don’t get it. They are still inclined to talk to technical people about technical subjects.
This is refreshing honesty because Beauchamp is the first to acknowledge that digital transformation is having not only profound effect on BMC, but that this effect has to be addressed and gone through first before it can really address all the issues of its customers. There is a strong suspicion at the back of my mind that many IT vendors selling digital transformation have a mindset that those same transformations do not apply to them.
This may even be the case in terms of technology adoption. But that is not the real issue here, as Andrew readily acknowledged:
Bob is probably right, but he’s generalising about the age-old problem of cultural change they have to go through. That is 1,000 times harder than picking the right product for a customer. The technology is the technology, but it’s how people change and adapt to the acceptance of how the technology works. The culture for my guys has been to say `let me talk to you about what my solution does for you’. But the issues are much bigger now, the wider issues of change – and change management – that is now coming along with digital transformation. But we can’t just walk in and say, ‘Let me change your culture’.
Socially revolting
That does mean real change for not just IT vendor sales people, but enterprise managements as well. He cited a presentation at the conference by an IT recruiter talking about new job profiles in IT. He listed three key assets now required, with the most important being, ‘Have they done a digital transformation?’ Indeed, having led one is currently a vital advantage – experience of the ‘new’ is always valuable. Next is can they translate data into information, and third is do they understand the impact of the technology on the business:
The smart executives get it. They do a top down direction of cultural transformation and they use the technology to help mark the course for that change, not the other way around. We are not only transforming our own company but also our own culture, and that includes our sales people.
Cultural, social, change across the board is therefore now an inevitability for all businesses, and some of it should be good, though much of it is still unpredictable. For example, the wider availability of much richer information about many factors in life, including ourselves, may bring as yet unpredicted cultural and social change, as Andrew himself speculated:
This can be thought of as a social revolution at least as much as an industrial one, and its impacts will go beyond just business itself. There are social impacts, especially on areas such as human nature. What might be the impact on individuals of having their genetic structure not just available to them but fully analysed? How might that change their behaviour? What about people who are feeling stress, or depression and what can be done for them?
A benefit could be the way the technology can provide new tools and ways of exploiting information. For example, you break your ankle and instead of going to A&E you have a smartphone that can x-ray, send the result to a specialist, get a diagnosis, and get a design for a cast that can be 3D printed at home. It may sound far-fetched now, but such options are coming available.
He also sees potential benefits in the ‘uberisation’ of services and lives. He pointed to cases where adolescents – often picky eaters – now use services where they can choose a lunch online, have it cooked and delivered, and it will be cheaper than the parents driving to the supermarket to buy the ingredients:
Developing something new, or making the sales team more productive is not the way to grow. You’ve got to fix the problems the client is having and understand the changes that are involved. If I try and sell automation to a customer I will usually be hitting my head against a brick wall. But I sell them self-service, and they realise that is about change management which leads to a need to automate, then they will embrace that conversation.
All of these come from digitally transforming a business – and it can be an established one as easily as a start-up. But by the same token there are negatives that stem from such transformations, and while it is too early to predict their impact with too much certainty, it does seem fair to suggest that not everything will be sweetness and light once one looks past the basic impact on businesses as just `businesses’. The cultural and social impacts may be significant.
AI – putting middle management to the sword?
It is the `perfect storm’ building up around Artificial Intelligence, machine learning, IoT, mobility in all its guises, real big data analytics, and the availability of all that through cloud delivery and collaboration, that leads in one certain direction – increasing levels of automation.
And this time it will not just be in manufacturing, it will also be appearing – potentially rampaging through – the myriad ranks of middle management. Anywhere where structured, regulated, repeated business processes need to be undertaken, the potential for it to be automated is now very high. As diginomica contributor Chris Middleton recently observed elsewhere, if it is possible to describe your job, it is ripe for automation. That is one of the heartlands of digital transformation.
That means real change in jobs – many will go, and some will be replaced by other jobs. And the question is what jobs and how many? Andrew says:
Most of the people at this conference are in jobs that didn’t exist five years ago, and probably won’t exist in five years’ time. Yes, there is a negative social side, and if you dig deep enough into IT there has probably been a negative social side from the very beginning. There was an impact from the early 60s.
There currently is, within the vendor community, a good deal of faith in the idea that new jobs will continue to emerge, but the question remains for as to whether there will be enough of them, and whether the will be more than fleeting in duration.
For example, Andrew pointed to the importance of the DevOps movement and the fact that many of the apps produced will, in effect, be tested in live mode, so there is going to be a strong need for people with developer experience to play a new role here. The downside of this is that even BMC may short circuit that opportunity with its new Innovation Suite which, while initially targeting developers, has a longer term goal of building repositories of functional applets that can be used by Business Executives themselves.
So part of the ‘below the line’ sales agenda for BMC – indeed any IT vendor selling digital transformation as a readjustment of customers’ mindsets rather than as a bunch of technology with which to transition – is accepting a role in helping customers advance their levels of maturity. This can include helping them to move forward and remove some of the underlying complexity in their organisations.
It, as Andrew observes, still common that business users have a poor handle on their infrastructures and IT resources: many will be well past their sell-by date. This is where the upgraded version of BMC’s Discovery can play a part because it provides the tools needed to identify the legacy hardware and software that is no longer making a real contribution to a business:
A typical business these days will have around 30% of their infrastructure that they don’t even know about. In many businesses there will be unexpected compliance issues on what systems are used for what tasks, or they have aggressive depreciation schedules. There is also a need to know what the dependencies are between systems when tracking down problems or vulnerabilities. That way users can triage problems and understand them. A server hitting 100% utilisation can be OK, you can even want that to happen. But if it stays a 100% and there are other issues, they can be triaged together so the real problem can be identified and sorted.
My take
This is just scraping the surface of the mesh of issues that surround digital transformation across the board. Every business – vendor and user – will need to think long and hard about them if they are to make sense both of them and their impact on their business. Failure to do that will simply present those businesses with the proverbial ‘dog’s breakfast’.
Image credit - Freeimages.com Read more on: Digital enterprise in the real worldFuture of workIoT robotics and AI 