

Working with enterprises that are setting out on the digital transformation process is highlighting another subtle, but fundamental, change in the relationship between vendor and customer.
Traditionally, the vendors have had large, fixed packages of applications functionality on offer coupled with the ability to help customers bend their businesses to fit what that package can provide. Now it is often the case that it is the customers that have the clearer idea of what they want to achieve, but are struggling with the ways in which they might achieve it.
This means vendors are having to learn new tricks if they are to succeed in working with customers on that digital transformation journey, and these tricks involve more than just providing the technology that makes the physical transition easier or, indeed, possible.
Some of that new thinking came up in a discussion with Eric Blum, BMC’s Vice-President, Digital Enterprise Architecture, at the company’s recent Engage conference in Las Vegas.
As part of the company’s own development through a digital transformation process, coupled with an extensive study of its 17,500 customers, it has already earmarked the sub-divisions of technology that map onto the key sectors of interest, and the key players within enterprises that hold that interest. For example, according to Blum, BMC sees CEOs as the group most focussed on achieving a digital workplace, while it is finance and marketing that have the closest affinity to Big Data and analytics: 

We have identified six, possibly seven, areas so far, with some others coming in, that are the initiatives that are at the top of the digital transformation agenda. We have realised that a lot of our customers are telling us that they don’t quite know where they need to be and how they can actually get there in terms of re-engineering their IT and supporting the business digital agenda. But they do know where they want to be in terms of business.

Exploiting the IT in the shadows
One of the key early issues here is the now widespread use of ‘shadow IT’. It is fair to say that, with many enterprises, the staff are already far more digitalised – or at least ready for digitalisation in terms of personal equipment – than their employers are. This is a term Blum hates, preferring to call it BU (Business Unique) compute. The result, however, is something enterprises can exploit if they can accommodate it quickly and efficiently:

That’s where we’ve done a lot of work to come up with best practices for how can we help to fast track that with pre-defined integration that enable managements to work with the common digital use cases. We have so far identified 24 well-defined IT management use cases to support the digital operation. There will be more, but we have a good foundation with 24.

Blum’s team is also getting directly involved with customers’ cultural issues that result from digital transformation. This is also being formalised through the company’s experiences with those customers, taking engineered use cases as a core part of what he calls the Design Thinking Process. This also includes a novel, humanizing approach to designing new business solutions:

We’ve put the idea of the persona right at the centre of the Thinking Process. To do that you have to define the Personas. At BMC we’ve done a kind of role-play where the personas get a name, so we know what Maria is doing and what her background is. The same for what John is doing, and other players in a business process. We have the names of these guys so that when they, say, meet with a customer, here are the key personas who will support the process through the digital workplace.

So the idea is simple enough, the personas are talked through how they would make a business process work quickly and effectively. Only then is there consideration of what technology might be required.
This, he suggests, achieves some interesting results. For example, many enterprises start out by assuming BMC will present the typical, prescriptive technological solution, but end up talking through the processes involved and creating the new ways of making them happen so that they suit their particular needs. It is a model that can also be used effectively at any point in the process, from C-level execs down to any line worker:

So we have completely reformulated our engagement model with our customers. We’ve developed prospective documents in specific industries, we’ve developed a new architecture in regards to best practices, we’ve developed the personas, and we are sharing all that with the customers so we can help them to accelerate their change. And they not only welcome it, they actually expect no less.

Getting with the program
Part of that process also includes seeking out and working with change agents, people understand both the issues and the need to change rather than the need to resist change. This, of course, is the territory of human nature and depends on whether the community within an enterprise sees it as an opportunity or a threat, says Blum:

It can also be a career opportunity for them. In our world, enterprise architecture is going to be key and it is interesting that according to McKinsey, enterprise architecture is expected to be one of the top eight jobs five years from now. So if someone is in system administration and wants to elevate to Enterprise Architecture they are going to move to something that’s one of most demanding jobs in the industry. People get that.

This work also plays a part in the development of new products and tools within BMC.
The process generates specific innovations with all of the customers, all of which get fast track access to everything because the products platform has been adapted so that they can use the products much faster:

The way we’ve integrated products is not a solid framework but it’s something that is very loosely coupled, so that we can actually upgrade one thing without upgrading the entire platform. So for example I can upgrade my own IT without upgrading the rest of the platform. I have a new Portal user interface but all the rest stays the same. It’s very flexible and that’s key. We have to be agile.

When the customer says value they mean what? 
For quite some time after the initial engagement by BMC sales staff the company used value based selling models, setting out to prove the value of the products, especially in terms of reducing the cost of IT. That has now changed to what Blum calls a journey based on use case examples where the value is found by the customer. Here is his example:

If you think about HR in a digital workplace, how do we reduce the cost of IT for employing someone in an enterprise that employs, say, 10,000 contractors in and out in a year. If the time taken to get them up and running, and fully productive, from 4 hours to 2 hours we would help them to save 20,000 hours of work.
It is absolutely critical to understand where the customers are and what they want. I think what is most interesting is to which level they have understood that the technology is the business and the business is technology. That’s new. I think we are yet to have so many people to really understand that. This is by far the most profound revolution that we’ve experience as citizens. 
So I would like to see happen before we engage with a customer it is to have the CIO actually have some meetings with people to realise the deep impact on everybody’s lives, and what could be their role in making IT become a digital shared service centre. In providing infrastructure for the business you need to innovate faster and better and for them to be able to relate to that.

As a parting shot, he gave hope to all those IT people who see any form of digitalisation as a threat and the invasion ground for the millennials. Moving a business down the road to digital transformation is not just an important role, it is also a place where experience counts for something:

I have people, architects in IT, all very experienced guys and they’re as excited as I am. I have guys who are 55 so not that young, not millennials, but those guys are on fire and they’re enjoying it. It’s pretty cool to see people who are very experienced really energised and thinking, yeh, we are going to be doing something really unique.

My take
A different perspective on the way digital transformation is changing so many points of interaction between the vendors and their customers. 
Image credit - Freeimages.com Read more on: Cloud platforms - infrastructure and architectureCollaboration sharing and digital productivityDevOps NoSQL and the open source stackIoT robotics and AIThe new professional and IT as a service 