
Cloud content management platform Box has prospered over the years by breaking down barriers to collaboration. It has made files shareable simply by logging in via the web browser or mobile app from any device, anywhere — while preserving compliance with stringent enterprise governance and security policies.
But one crucial barrier has always remained. That need to jump into the browser or app to access the file has left a less-than-seamless experience when working on a traditional PC or Mac. Other services that let users access files direct from the desktop file system, such as Microsoft OneDrive and most notably Dropbox, have had an edge in convenience and ease-of-use. For all the superior governance and security features that Box has offered to keep enterprise customers sweet, this simple, intuitive access has helped Dropbox gain significant ground among business users.
Dropbox killer
Today that all changes. The launch of Box Drive in public beta gives Box a Dropbox killer in the enterprise market. At last, files stored in Box are available via the local file system on a network drive, without having to hop into a browser window or fire up a separate application. Even better, Box does this without downloading files to the local machine, avoiding security issues and space constraints faced by other methods.
The big advantage of letting cloud files appear as part of the local file system is that it means users don’t have to change their workflow at all. They can carry on accessing files the same way they’ve always done. The same is true of legacy applications, even those that have never heard of the Internet, and which would be too much trouble to rewrite to use a cloud API.
Unlike its competitors, Box has implemented this file system access without physically storing a local copy of the file. This is a significant advantage, claims Rand Wacker, VP of Product Marketing, who briefed diginomica in advance of today’s news:
Traditional sync products rely on taking a subset of files in the cloud and having them available locally. It’s not uncommon to have network drives with terabytes of data available — and downloading to local drives increases security risks.
The ability to access files when not connected to the network will be added once the service comes out of beta, he adds.
The announcement is a public beta. We’ve been testing this with a lot of customers in beta for a long time. We view this as quite stable enough for people to use for these online-only use cases.
When we go to GA [general availability] we’ll be adding the ability to highlight files for offline use. Today we’re wholly replacing network files, and when we go GA we’ll be able to replace some of those offline sync use cases as well.
One-click access
For the moment, Box is highlighting the advantages of having one-click access to cloud-based files from the desktop, says Wacker, because it preserves all of Box’s additional functionality, such as search and support for rich media objects, including fast-forward in video files and 360-degree viewing:
You can, from the desktop, click one keystroke and search all of your content in Box and open it immediately. If you see a file in Box Drive, you can right-click it and copy a link to that file, drop it into a message or an email, or open it up on Box.com. It’s very easy to share something.
Rich media objects can be right-clicked and opened up in the Box web app. To be able to view a 3D model on a desktop can be really awesome.
Enterprises that use VDI (virtual desktop infrastructure) to deliver the desktop environment from a server will also be able to use Box Drive, having access to all of the same functionality. These capabilities make Box’s offering distinctive, says Wacker.
What’s truly unique about Box Drive is it’s the only one of these tools that thinks of itself as a network drive, designed for the cloud …
We’re really focused on broader cloud content management. Sync and share is fairly limiting. Drive is a good example of moving well beyond simple sync into much bigger use cases.
Box believes the new offering will encourage more enterprises to move network file storage to the cloud, and is citing customers that have already saved millions by eliminating on-premise file storage.
From the business perspective, a huge number of customers are trying to shift their IT infrastructure to the cloud for cost savings, operational efficiency and security reasons. It’s much easier to move those files up into Box, where we’re maintaining the security rules for our customer. It streamlines what they’re doing and it really saves them a lot of money.
My take
This is an important move by Box which significantly extends the reach of its offering and increases its appeal in the enterprise cloud files market.
Image credit - via BoxRead more on: Collaboration sharing and digital productivityInfrastructure 