
Aaron Levie, Box
Some days you can’t get a break from Wall Street. Box just reported better-than-expected financials with a 20% year-on-year revenue increase to hit $140.5 million, and added 3,000 paying business customers over the past three months – but saw its stock price tumble on the results announcement.
Box now has 59.9 million registered users, 10.4 million of whom are now paying for the service. Now whether you’re a glass half full or glass half empty sort of person, that’s either a positive increase or still far too many people using the free offering for investors liking.
CEO Aaron Levie maintains that the sound strategy for the firm is to continue growing the number of users:
I think the number one focus is still market share, bringing as much data into the platform as possible and ensuring that we have as many seats within our customers as possible, as well as the ability to sell as many of these add-ons to our customers as possible. Both of those have the impact of growing in terms of contract value size, but not necessarily the massive focus on just price-per-seat, although add-on product obviously drive up price receipts.
But right now, the focus is definitely on ensuring that Box is deployed as broadly as possible within customers. So we have as many seats as possible and then that customers are buying more and more of those add-on products, which will have the net effect of on an apples-to-apples basis increase in the price-per-seat.
But he is quick to point out that the value of paying deals being signed is increasing:
Our focus is on driving deeper, more strategic relationships with our customers, resulting in higher growth and big deals. In Q1, we closed 35 deals over $100,000 versus 26 a year ago, four deals of $500,000 versus two a year ago and one deal over $1 million in line with a year ago. Importantly, our new products continue to drive growth with new products attached to two-thirds of our six-figure deals.
Governance booster
In pursuit of multi-product deals, Levie pointed to Box Governance as now featuring in over half of those six-figure deals to become “our most popular add-on product line”. There’s also traction with the Box Zones offering, allowing global organisations to store data in chosen geographic areas.
Both of these offerings have been given a boost with the arrival of GDPR, notes Levie:
With these regulatory changes in an ever evolving security landscape, the demands for security and compliance in the cloud will only continue to grow. Products like Box Governance and Zones or KeySafe for encryption help protect information keeping our customers secure and compliant in nearly every industry, while driving the success of our multi-product strategy. In addition to helping our customers with GDPR readiness, our support for regulations and compliance such as GxP, HIPAA, FedRAMP and European Binding Corporate Rules continue to be significant differentiators for Box.
He adds that customers are having compliance and governance conversations more and more:
We have been certainly having GDPR-esque conversations with our customers really for the last couple of quarters now. So, we have seen kind of good awareness and traction on the sales front because of that. We were coincidentally in London last week, which is obviously when GDPR went into effect. We announced our multi-zones data residency solution, which is not required for customers to be GDPR compliant, but certainly continues to increase the strength of the customers’ ability to stay and commit to GDPR compliance. So, we are seeing pretty good tailwinds from just the conversation momentum standpoint.
It’s also a good chance for pitching to potential and existing customers that it’s an opportunity to re-examine their tech stacks:
We think it’s going to cause customers to have to reevaluate their existing or legacy IT architectures. In general, when you zoom out for GDPR into just the broad set of cybersecurity region-specific regulatory as well as global privacy and industry-specific compliance requirements, all of these things act as tailwinds for causing customers to need to modernize their architecture…we think this sets us up really nicely where the more [that] customers need to build a modern IT architecture for managing, securing and ensuring the compliance around their content, the more that’s going to inevitably lead customers to moving to cloud content management and Box specifically.
My take
Box continues to play a long game and to invest sensibly in governance-centric offerings. The dip in the share price yesterday might well be another example of short-termism among the Wall Street community, but Box’s share price is up 50% over the past year, so the direction of travel looks restored after a bumpy post-IPO period.
Image credit - BoxRead more on: Collaboration sharing and digital productivityData privacyGoverning identity privacy and securityProductivityRegulationSocial 