
Box’s first post-IPO earnings call was a messy affair. The company reported a non-GAAP net loss of $1.65 per share for the quarter. Initial reports said that analysts were expecting $1.17 so a wide miss you might think. And the shares were pounded, falling more than 16% in after hours trading. But hang on a moment. It wasn’t what it seems.
According to a CNBC report, Aaron Levie, Box CEO said that consensus was based upon a wrong share count and that the correct anticipated loss should have been $1.99. On that basis, Levie claimed the company had done rather better than expected. See below for the Box investor relations Twitter account report.
Some analyst consensus for $Box non-GAAP EPS for Q4’15 had wrong share count; FactSet had estimate of -$1.99; at -$1.65, Box beat by $0.34.
— Box IR (@BoxIncIR) March 11, 2015
Levie tried to laugh it off on Twitter: 

That awkward moment when the calculation for your consensus EPS uses the wrong share count (for your first earnings call). #funtimes
— Aaron Levie (@levie) March 11, 2015


Levie also said that the un-named analysts who got it wrong were contacted prior to the earnings call with the correct information. Messy? You bet. What about the real results then?
Box continues to post huge losses when compared to revenue. It is at this point that I diverge from colleagues who say I get too hung up on GAAP versus non-GAAP earnings. Sorry folks but there are accounting standards out there and even though they are far from perfect, they’re the best we’ve got. Non-GAAP measures are just another way of massaging the numbers to look better than they really are. They’re a fiction. So on to reality.
Revenue in the quarter was $62.6 million, up 61% compared to the previous year. Net loss was $46.7 million, up from $43.3 million year over year. The full year numbers are $216.4 million and $182 million respectively. Cash burned in the quarter was $15.6 million and $84.9 million in the year. Included in the quarter’s results was a one time charge of $2.9 million related to the settlement of a legal dispute.
Forward guidance for FY16 is revenue of $281-285 million versus consensus of $276.9 million. Even so, the non-GAAP operating loss is still expected to equal 50-52% of FY16 revenue. If all comes out as expected then this will be a significant improvement on the 79.5% operating loss in the year just finished.
Box ended the year with 45,000 paying customers, up slightly from 44,000 at the end of the previous quarter. Box claims to have captured 22% of the Global 2000 and is now reporting enterprise wide deals with the likes of Astra Zeneca and General Electric.
My take

Regardless of how you frame it, investor communications were poor. While others on Twitter came to Box defense, allowing a consensus that is incorrectly calculated to remain the currency used in assessing results, even when a correction has been communicated prior to the earnings call is plain bad practice.
The shift to enterprise wide deals is welcomed but has a sting in the tail. While Box will get the best margins out of small and departmental deals, enterprise wide deals add significant bulk, but are discounted.
The company is pointing towards a widening between billings and revenue as it continues to pursue enterprise wide deals but this in turn means that Box does not expect to become cash flow positive for another two years. Without more detail on the expected burn rate, it is difficult to assess how this will impact the company but with more than $300 million in cash on hand and shrinking GAAP losses, Box is well protected for the forseeable future.
The main problem for this observer remains around the fundamental business model. Box is ensuring it meets the demands of heavily regulated industries but that comes at a cost that is difficult to pass on.
I still don’t see a compelling reason to choose Box over others in what is already a highly competitive market. But then when you can count some of the best known brands as customers at the enterprise level then that can quickly change.

Read more on: Collaboration sharing and digital productivity 