
Aaron Levie, Box
There was much for Wall Street to find to be happy with in Box’s latest numbers, not least another quarter of positive free cash flow and $117.2 million revenue, beating analyst expectations.
Add to that, more than 74,000 paying customers, including new or expanded deployments with McDonald’s and the United States Forest Service, and proof points that the firm’s growing partner ecosystem is delivering the push to expand Box’s enterprise footprint.
For CEO Aaron Levie, fiscal 2018 is about two main objectives – new cloud content management products and platform capabilities and international expansion. On the product innovation front, he points to a stat that around 60% of deals valued at more than $100,000 have included one or more of new Box offerings, such as the KeySafe, Zones, Governance and Platform products.
The new products and their extended functional capabilities are providing the opportunity to pitch Box as a credible legacy Enteprise Content Management systems option, he argues:
We are seeing increasing momentum from customers looking to move to Box and retire the legacy content management solutions over time. For example, in North America, a large financial services institution selected Box as their cloud content management platform for all of their unstructured data. We will be replacing Documentum, migrating more than 10,000 SharePoint sites to Box and we will integrate with a variety of existing on-premises and cloud applications. The legacy ECM category is a multibillion dollar market annually and we are steadily adding the technology, partners and capabilities to transform this space and move it to the cloud.
What’s now emerging, according to the company, is a typical Box use case of a new customer coming on board with a view to usiing Box for end user collaboration and content management, but then finding themselves shutting down the likes of Documentum and OpenText and using Box as an enterprise-wide system of record. That expansion across the enterprise is something that Levie is keen to play up:
It’s something that we certainly are trying to drive through the business. We have incredible examples, companies like General Electric and Coca-Cola and many others, where Box is really seen more as enterprisewide content management and collaboration platform within both the employee base as well as powering some of the more critical business processes. At the same time, we benefit from the fact that Box can be deployed, unlike some enterprisewide SaaS companies where we can be deployed for specific departments or groups within an organizations.
So on one hand, we have this huge benefit where a marketing team can start using Box and then over time we can expand that to the entire customer base or the entire employee base or can start being used up by the sales team and then over time expand to the entire organization.
Who you know
A crucial factor here though is who the ‘sponsor’ is for the initial Box deployment, he adds:
I think the single biggest thing that describes the difference between environments that are just using us in some set of departments versus companywide, is really our relationship and our strategic position within the sort of senior IT leadership of the organization all the way up to the CIO. Where we have great CIO sponsorship and where we have great IT leadership sponsorship, we tend to see that they think of Box as really an enterprisewide solution and system of record.
So, getting that senior IT buy-in is critical for growth. To that end, Box has been expanding its partner ecosystem, allying itself with the likes of Microsoft and IBM. Most recently Facebook became the latest partner, making Box available as a content management platform within its Workplace offering.
But it’s the IBM partnership that has provided the most successful template for partnerships that support the international growth ambitions, says Levie:
We have been incredibly happy and found the IBM partnership to be very effective and successful in terms of growing especially in markets where we don’t have people on the ground or the same level of relationship with a client as IBM. IBM is a little bit different, in that there is so much technology that we are either embedding into or codeveloping with them. But we are taking the template of success that we saw with IBM and trying to bring that to other major strategic partners in different regions all around the world.
Overall across the international markets that we are serving, we are seeing just really, really exciting opportunities ahead. When we look at Germany, when we look at Australia, when we look at Canada, Japan, broadly throughout Europe, we are seeing a lot of interest and excitement around Box. And so I think you will see us have these sort of regionally specific partners that do help us sort of accelerate growth in these regions as appropriate.
The latest example is a tie-up with Fujitsu which Box hopes will open up the Japanese market. Levie explains:
There are a lot of similarities in terms of how we are going to execute and go-to-market with Fujitsu to IBM. I would also note that in Japan, we already have a lot of success with our channel ecosystem broadly. It’s a very channel oriented environment. The very core was that we go-to-market within Japan largely through channel partners with our own set of individuals as sort of experts in the sales process. I think we would expect to see Fujitsu as just one of the largest Japanese partners that we work with in going to market over time.
My take
A decent quarter for Box which now seems a more confident beast than it did in the early days following its IPO. On the basis that it’s who you know as well as what you know, the partnership ecosystem development bodes well. Levie reckons that profitability and a $1 billion annual revenue run rate is achievable by 2021. That’s a way out yet of course, but I’d be less inclined to bet against it today than I would have been a year or so ago.
Image credit - TwitterRead more on: Cloud platforms - infrastructure and architectureCollaboration sharing and digital productivity 