
I’ve frequently bitched about the amount of noise in the social media related space. I’ve gone as far as saying Facebook advertising is click fraud. Then Vijay Vijayasankar pointed us to an Ad Contrarian piece that shows what for some will be surprising results:
1. E-commerce in 2014 accounted for 6.5 percent of total retail sales.
2. 96% of video viewing is currently done on a television. 4% is done on a web device.
3. In Europe and the US, people would not care if 92% of brands disappeared.
4. The rate of engagement among a brand’s fans with a Facebook post is 7 in 10,000. For Twitter it is 3 in 10,000.
5. Fewer than one person in a thousand clicks on a standard banner ad.
6. Over half the display ads paid for by marketers are unviewable.
7. Less than 1% of retail buying is done on a mobile device. 
8. Only 44% of traffic on the web is human.
9. One bot-net can generate 1 billion fraudulent digital ad impressions a day.
10. Half of all U.S online advertising – $10 billion a year – may be lost to fraud.
That set off s firestorm of comments, during which it became clear that people readily confuse brands and products while other wondered whether the figures are skewed. One example:
For an FMCG company, digital is almost certainly a massive waste of time and money. However for UK supermarkets, for example, the ones who didn’t get online at an early stage are really suffering now. 75% of UK adults now do some sort of grocery shopping online* (although the majority of sales by volume are still done in stores).
Aaaah – we’re back to our old favorite: context. But then what about this?
Since there are MANY success stories of much higher Facebook and Twitter engagement, the correct analysis of your stat isn’t that FB and Twitter don’t work. It’s that we need to do better advertising there.
OK – so ads suck. We all know that but umm…I’m not quite connecting the dots here. How about this from the more florid commenters?
You’re talking shit.
Pretty much every product from Unilever could be replaced by another, better offering overnight from another company. I don’t know about the US, but in the UK, supermarkets are doing a very good job of selling people their own-brand products instead of the branded ones.
There are own brands in the US but they don’t always look like own brands because some are dressed up as something else. Some, not all, are very good value. However, when it comes to food shopping, the US is a mess. No consistency of labeling, no apparent standards, plenty of confusing ‘stuff’ going on. This in the land that invented the ad driven consumer? Or so we’re told.
As with so many things in this changing world, reality hasn’t caught up with the gazillion voices yelling ‘social everything’ and I don’t care what anyone says – Silicon Valley and Madison Avenue are not the centers of the universe. They’re bubbles.
But then we live in a world where a two minute video of a guy whizzing up peanuts into peanut butter gets just shy of 462,000+ views. Go figure.
So what about technology coming to the rescue? So far that seems to have been a fail. While Facebook and Twitter may be the digital platforms du jour, I don’t see anything especially remarkable in what they’re bringing to the table. Do you?

Read more on: CRM and customer experiencee-commerceFrictionless enterprise 