
As the reality of the EU referendum result begins to sink in, we are beginning to think more carefully about the potential impact of Brexit on the UK public services technology market in the short to longer term.
One of the most considered reports I’ve read on the result comes from analyst firm TechMarketView, which analyses the most likely impact up until 2020.
Whilst we at diginomica have been fairly optimistic about the progress of digital transformation in Whitehall and the broader public sector – with more resources being allocated to digital projects, greater attention being paid to citizen outcomes, and SMEs getting a fairer shot at winning contracts – the report highlights how Brexit could have a huge impact on efforts thus far.
And given the uncertainty in the markets, the need for central government to instil confidence and for public servants to focus their attention on Brexit negotiations, it’s possible that up until 2020 the British government will be taking steps backwards in its route to transformation.
Why? Because the scale of transformation needed requires some risk taking. And unfortunately, given the instability in the markets, Whitehall is likely to revert to its comfort zone zone and the well known ‘status quo’.
The short term
Since the referendum, the two main political parties in the UK have been thrown into chaos, with leadership challenges likely to be the main focus up until September at least. Then there is the question of when Article 50 – the process by which a country notifies the EU that it wishes to leave the organisation – will be invoked. And once that process has begun, this is very much uncharted territory. How do we actually exit? If we exit at all?
TechMarketView notes that the referendum vote was merely the first step in what is set to be a “drawn out saga” and that the next couple of years will be filled with “immense uncertainty”.
There is a higher likelihood that the UK will face another recession in the next 12 months, and as the report notes, for the next two years at least, there will be “reduced investment by businesses, slowing of economic growth, and increasing potential for job losses”.
Not only this, but there is likely to be a large hole in public sector finances as a result. And whilst TechMarketView admits that this increased pressure on budgets could force public sector organisations to invest in technologies that will either help them bring down costs or reduce demand on services – this is unlikely. It notes:
More likely, we will see public sector organisations paralysed by uncertainty. UK Government is, on the whole, characterised by its risk adversity, in an uncertain environment, we can see this being exacerbated.
In addition, the focus in Whitehall on the Brexit agenda is likely result in a drain on resources. And as we know, attracting resources of any kind in the public sector is extremely difficult. Not to mention digital resource. The report reads:
Though Cabinet Secretary and Head of the Civil Service, Jeremy Heywood, has sought to calm fears by saying that the civil service will remain committed to the delivery of public services “as usual”, the truth is that much civil service attention will be diverted away from civil service reform.
Instead, many man-hours will be spent guiding the public sector through a change of leadership and political direction.
And who are likely to be the winners in the short term? TechMarketView believes that the management consultants will largely win out in the short term, which is something that will be painful to hear for many reformers in government. TechMarketView says that it has already seen an increase in enquiries from public sector organisations on what Brexit means for them.
What’s worse is that projects that may have been started to try and do things differently could be put on hold. The report states:
We are also likely to see public sector organisations sticking with the status quo, as they will be reluctant to embark on new contracts, programmes or contracts while faced with an uncertain future.
We would not be surprised to see contract extension announcements hitting our screens. Meanwhile, in such an uncertain situation, with ‘new’ projects put on hold (at least for the short term), the losers are likely to be the innovators, i.e. those companies pitching modern technologies with little track record. And of course, public sector organisations will be looking for the guarantee of a short-term return on any investment.
The medium term

As political parties pick their respective leaders and we have a better idea of what sort of government will be leading Britain through the storm, it is likely that between 2017 and 2018 there will be “some certainty”.
However, this doesn’t equate to stability. Given that it is likely to take at least two years to separate ourselves from the EU institution – if Brexit actually goes ahead – it is also likely that we will see a significant contraction in the economy, a decline in investment, rising unemployment and falling tax revenues.
TechMarketView says that if it is taking a “glass half full view”, there is a possibility that the Chancellor of the Exchequer could make the decision to prop up the UK economy by increasing public spending. It notes that when the 2008/09 recession hit, whilst the UK private sector software and IT services market declined by 4%, the same public sector market grew by 4%. This was largely driven by public sector outsourcing.
But that’s the positive view. It still doesn’t look like good news, according to TechMarketView. The report reads:
Our view is that UK Government continues to fear ICT and, in particular, large scale ICT programmes, which are deemed risky based on previous experience. It is hard to believe that public sector organisations will embark on large scale digital transformation projects at a time when the future will still not be crystal clear.
There will also be solid reasons for not continuing with some major programmes, like the replacement of Defra’s CAP system or the Digital Tax Account system, as any new rules and regulations would make them obsolete.
Not only this, but it is likely that resource and skills allocation could suffer. TechMarketView said:
Moreover, we should consider the skills and capabilities required to take forward the digital transformation agenda. Already, the lack of skills has been highlighted by Government and industry as holding back progression.
On the Government side of the fence, with contracts being disaggregated, commercial and contract management skills have become more necessary than ever. Yet, we envisage civil servants with those types of skills being diverted to negotiations related to the EU and to the new regulations that will come to pass, as the UK Government struggles to find experienced negotiators.
The other set of skills that has been hard to come by is digital skills. Government has been trying to establish an internal skills pool, while in the private sector, companies are fighting over the most sought after, e.g. Scrum Masters or OpenStack specialists. Yet, an EU exit could have a negative impact on the already limited pool of talent through so-called ‘brain drain’, as movement of skilled people across the EU becomes more difficult.
We are often told that the Tier 2 job visa system does not always work effectively, as it is a lengthy process (that can be off-putting) and, importantly, the criteria has not always kept up with the skills required in the SITS market at the time.
So who are the winners and losers? In the medium term TechMarkeView says that it does not expect the UK government to be easily able to retain its own in-house pool of digital specialists. Skilled people will command high salaries that the public sector will struggle to meet.
The report notes that in this situation, the winners will be those companies that can attract the right skills or those who can home-grow their own talent.
Not only this, but given the potential lack of skills in the UK, TechMarketView says that we may see UK government more willing to offshore IT services.
The long term
Finally, TechMarketView assesses the impact of Brexit after 2019. This is where it says that it has “the most optimism”. This is largely because as regulations are put in place for areas such as security, justice, agriculture, fisheries and more, there are likely to be a whole new set of systems required to support the new ways of working. And this will require investment.
Suppliers, however, may still face issues when bidding for contracts that are coming out of stringent budgets. And although the Treasury has said that it is no longer aiming for a budget surplus by 2020, which was a key promise in the government manifesto, TechMarketView still believes that spending will remain constrained. It notes:
Take the NHS as an example. One theory is that as the NHS and social services will find it more difficult to attract non-UK labour, resourcing will become more expensive. Other increased expenses may include things like importing drugs. When this is taken into account, there will be less money for other projects, including SITS-related projects.
Meanwhile, the winners in the long term are likely to be those with application development skills, which are likely to find “substantial opportunities”. However, it’s likely to be the large SIs that will be the main beneficiaries of Brexit.
My take
A good analysis from TechMarketView. But the key word for the next few years is: uncertainty.
Image credit - Images sourced via Fotolia Read more on: Digital government and public services

