
In the first part of this report, a techUK debate on the impact of Brexit on the tech sector was decidedly glass-half-empty when it came to topics such as immigration and data protection. In this concluding part, things get a bit more glass-half-full. 
Against a backdrop of earlier gloom and despondency, the final member of the techUK debate panel did pitch more of a Keep Calm and Carry On message.
Tudor Aw, Technology Sector Head at KPMG, said he believed 80-90% of his firm’s clients had said they were in the Remain camp, although the end result suggested a few “shy Leavers” among their numbers. Whatever the case, this seems to have a knock-on effect:
Most of them had Brexit on their radars as a token risk. It was quite a jovial conversation, some lunches and so on. But the feeling was really one of, ‘It’s not really going to happen’.
That meant a horrible wake-up call on the morning of 24 June when the Leave victory was declared. But while there were howls of anguish and frantic armageddon peddling all round, the tech sector didn’t melt down into handwringing, said Aw:
The tech sector moved from hearing the result to acceptance and then on to business-as-usual. We haven’t seen too many panic stations or crisis meetings. We’re seeing clients doing impact analysis – are we going to have a Norwegian or Swiss type of relationship.
A lot of clients are looking at the opportunities [from Brexit]. Thank goodness they have reacted like this. We are in danger of talking ourselves into a crisis. Let’s make decisions for the right reason, not on an emotional reaction.
Reasons to be cheerful
There are reasons to be cheerful from the point of view of the UK as an investment location, he added:
The tech sector has a record of being to withstand things. There are lot of core attributes that will still exist post-Brexit. There’s relatively good infrastructure, especially if you’re on the M4 corridor. There’s access to an ecosytem of advisors, lenders, venture capital. We have legal system that works. We still have first class universities. All of that is still in place and still important. It’s easy to say ‘we’ll lift and and drop [business] into Frankfurt, but native-speaking English makes a difference.
Aw also made the point that the tech sector delivers essential services and products and as such is likely to be more robust than some others:
There is only so much you can cut and not invest. You need to reinvest. Technology is a strategic enabler, from cloud to smart connected devices. You can’t afford to sit back and let your competitors invest. So the tech sector is not going to go off and become moribund.
Instead of getting into lots of hand-wringing, let’s think about raising the profile of the tech sector. Rather than worrying about lost industries, like coal and manufacturing, let’s focus on the key industry of the future. Let’s not just have tech talked about, but have it front and center.
That includes as part of any industrial policy to emerge from a May government as well holding “government’s feet to the fire” over any points-based immigration system. On the subject of immigration, Aw again wanted to focus on the opportunities as well as the challenges:
It’s not as if Brexit is taking away a fantastic immigration system. We have an opportunity with Brexit as a burning platform to completely re-engineer this. The challenges exist today, but now we have an opportunity to get people coming together around this.
That principle extends wider, he added:
On terms of government intervention and state aid, there are restrictions in the EU, but this is an area that we can now explore to provide more opportunity. A lot of bureaucracy is driven by EU rules; we have an opportunity to see if we can free that up.
The industrial dynamics are changing. The jobs of yesterday are not going to be the jobs of tomorrow.
My take
While very interesting, I can’t say this was the most motivating debate I’ve ever seen, with three of the four expert panelists in varying degrees of ‘we’re all off to hell in a handcart’ mentality.
As Aw alluded to, this is a kind of gestalt gloom that needs to be shaken off as quickly as possible. If Brexit means Brexit, as Prime Minister May insists it does, then there are practicalities that need to be addressed collectively and collaboratively, just as techUK’s five action points state.
I noted earlier in the week that the initial hysteria around the Brexit vote has begun to give way to more reasoned analysis and a realisation that the sky is still up there and not tumbling around our ears just yet. Over the next few days, the new government will take shape, with the Brexit negotiation responsibilities certain to be the most keenly observed. Once there’s more clarity around that, then it will be time for the tech sector to step up to the plate and help shape what happens next.
In the meantime, to quote another Prime Minister, Winston Churchill, we need to KBO – keep buggering on!
Image credit - Author's OwnRead more on: Cloud platforms - infrastructure and architectureDigital government and public servicesGoverning identity privacy and securityHCM and the digital future of work

