
Sir Amyas Morse KCB
The National Audit Office’s (NAO) Comptroller and Auditor General, Sir Amyas Morse KCB, gave a speech this week that could cause some concern for those involved in major technology projects in Whitehall.
Speaking at the Institute for Government, Morse warned that the result of the EU referendum has put pressure on the Civil Service’s already stretched resources and that the government should consider what major projects it could put on hold.
He also warned about the digital skills gap at the centre of the Whitehall’s transformation, stating that it would cost hundreds of millions of pounds to fill the gap – at a time when government departments are being asked to do with more with less.
A quick look at the government’s major project portfolio suggests that at least 25% of the projects are some sort of technology transformation – including the likes of the high profile, but very troubled, Universal Credit. Morse said:
We must start by not pretending that the civil service can deliver whatever minsters throw at it. The civil service is over-committed. Our work gives us ample evidence of this.
For example we often see, as we have seen with HS2 and Universal Credit, costs rising and timetables being extended. The civil service needs to stop doing things that are not mission critical.
To decide what to stop or delay, Government must get much better at prioritising its activities and projects. That means working out which initiatives use lots of resources but are only really ‘nice to have’, and deprioritising those activities.
Digital disrupted?
Morse went on to add that the major projects portfolio is “enormous” and that in September last year it had a whole life value of £405 billion. The Infrastructure and Projects Authority suggests that between 70% and 80% of these projects are ‘transformation’ projects and have a large digital element.
Whitehall has seen a huge push towards digital activity in recent years, following the formation of the Government Digital Service (GDS) and the restructure of digital teams within individual departments. Digital strategies have been drawn up and GDS is pushing ahead with its Government-as-a-Platform agenda.
However, the civil service is having to deliver on all these priorities during a time of austerity and cutbacks, when as of December last year headcount was down nearly one fifth since 2010.
Morse said that a “go for it heroic effort is prized at the expense of a clearly thought out strategic prioritisation”.
He added that the major projects portfolio has gotten out of hand as Ministers look to make their mark during a relatively short term (less than five years) and civil servants spend too much time aiming to please during this time, instead of pushing back. Morse said:
This means that projects go ahead when departments don’t have the spare resources to take them on. And often without knowing the private sector’s capacity to play their part.
He also went on to say that departments are unlikely to reduce their commitments under their own steam, but that it needs to be part of a wider, overarching and “imposed” approach.
Skills
Much of this comes down to the challenge around skills and resourcing the civil service. Morse said that government needs to acknowledge that things are “more complicated” than they used to be and that the activities of government are far more interdependent and technical than they used to be.
He added that to get these projects right, departments need three things: skills, money and time. Three things that Whitehall is distinctly lacking in recent years. Mores said:
When it comes to skills, today’s civil service needs people who can carry out highly technical projects with large digital and behaviour change components.
People with these skills have a cost and the government needs to ensure there are enough such people in the market place and in the government’s commissioning function, and that the balance between them is right.
That’s of course in addition to people with project and portfolio management skills. And where there are capability gaps, the government needs to have a clear idea of those gaps.
In 2015, we did some work to look at digital skills across government. The ‘digital capability gap’ in people terms means that government needs to find around 2,800 staff with the digital skills to undertake its digital change projects over the next five years.
If government managed to employ all of the digital specialists required as permanent civil servants, it would cost £213 million to fill the gap. And it would be roughly double that in contract labour.
Morse added that timescales are also increasingly unrealistic, as optimism bias has crept into project planning.
He said that because of these points, if government is committed, then it needs to lighten the load. This can be done by not adding projects, or “cancelling existing ones”.
Brexit
Finally, Morse went on to say that the situation is ever more urgent due to the result of the EU referendum. He said that a Brexit introduces a completely new layer of unknowns and requirements, and that it can be fairly described as an ‘abnormal change’.
Morse noted that he has already seen the beginnings of existing activities being “denuded of capability” as civil servants are pulled away to Brexit related activities.
However, Morse isn’t just talking of the recent discussions around demand for trade negotiators. His concerns stretch much further with regards to additional work for departments.
For instance, every department will need to do a stock take of its interactions with the EU. He said:
Add to that our massive major projects portfolio, and my experience of watching the public sector at close quarters tells me the system could come to a halt under its own weight.
Let’s use this historic juncture to change the way we manage government and plan on a holistic basis so that Ministers and civil servants can look across the whole of government activities and decide what is essential and what is not.
This is crucial for achieving value for money.
My take
Although the comptroller and auditor general doesn’t have any official remit to enforce project cancellations on government, his department’s insights into the way government is run means his words of warning should be taken seriously.
The problem is – what do you cancel? As he rightly pointed out during his speech, especially on the digital side of things, so many of the projects are interdependent. For example, HMRC’s transformation activities are directly linked to Universal Credit.
There’s also the problem of ‘standing still’ – cancelling projects could mean falling behind even further over the next five years.
Will the government listen? The next few weeks will be very telling.
Image credit - Image sourced via NAO YouTube channelRead more on: Digital government and public services

