
Davis and Barnier
A step forward, but not there yet – the UK and the European Union (EU) have managed to agree on a “large part” of the terms and conditions that can deliver an “orderly withdrawal” version of Brexit.
There’s some positive aspects for the tech sector in terms of freedom of movement, seen as critical to securing essential skills post-Brexit. But there’s an echoing silence when it comes to the free flow of data that will concern tech firms within the UK and beyond.
The UK Brexit Minister David Davis and the European Commission’s Michel Barnier staged a press conference this morning (Monday) after a long weekend of negotiations, during which both parties made some concessions.
Agreement on the rights of EU citizens in the UK has been reached with a concession from the UK that EU citizens arriving in the country during the transition period, ending 31st December 2020, will have the same rights and guarantees as those in situ prior to Brexit.
Meanwhile the EC has agreed that the UK will be able to negotiate trade deals during the transition period, beginning March next year, while remaining part of the Single Market and Customs Union.
Davis said:
The deal we struck today…should give us confidence that a deal good for the United Kingdom and the EU is closer than ever before,
The agreement must be approved by EU leaders meeting at the European Council summit on the 22nd and 23rd of this month. Barnier said:
A decisive step remains a step. We are not at the end of the road…but this decisive step will be presented by me on Friday.
Tech concerns
Antony Walker, CEO of UK tech trade association techUK, gave a qualified welcome to the agreement, calling it a “welcome step to give businesses the certainty they need”, adding:
The joint agreement today is a positive step, but there is a huge amount of work to do to minimise the disruptive impact of Brexit and to give tech companies the confidence to keep investing in the UK.
He was supportive of the freedom of movement concession:
Talent is a key driver of a successful UK tech sector and EU citizens are at the heart of that. We therefore strongly support the ability for EU citizens to continue to come to the UK to take up jobs in the tech industry and drive innovation and growth here in the UK.
But Walker warned neither side can be complacent as there are outstanding concerns, most notably around the data transfer issueL
The tech sector will however be concerned that there remains no formal agreement around the ongoing ability to deliver the free flow of data during the transition period. It needs to be clear that the UK is not a ‘third country’ when it comes to free flow of data during the transition. Delivering a close ongoing relationship that allows data to flow freely, and giving the Information Commission a role in shaping future changes to data protection rules, must be a top priority between now and the final agreement in October.
While the compromise agreement is not likely to please Hard Brexiters, it’s thought likely that the Leave camp in the UK Parliament will be able to live with the deal. The main opposition Labour Party’s Brexit spokesman Keir Starmer gave the agreement his qualified approval:
It is welcome that they have finally struck a deal on transition and now the government must prioritise negotiating a final agreement that protects jobs, the economy and guarantees there will be no hard border in Northern Ireland.
That said, the question of the border between Northern Ireland and the Republic of Ireland remains stubbornly unresolved.
It also remains unclear how the UK will get the necessary systems in place for life after Brexit in 21 month transition period. Over the weekend, The Sunday Times newspaper revealed that a secret report was presented to senior UK cabinet ministers last week, warning that the needed new customs system will not be ready in time.
My take
A step in some kind of direction – at last – but there’s a hell of a long way to go yet. And the troubling tech-related questions remain as loudly unaddressed as ever.
Image credit - YouTubeRead more on: Data privacyDigital skills and trainingRegulation 