
It’s the end of the year – silly season time. So it makes perfect sense that the Minister for Brexit has just won a court case against the Prime Minister over excessive data retention powers, a case he helped to bring, but has since pulled his name from.
After yesterday’s speculation about the long-term future of the Privacy Shield after challenges in the European Union courts, the highest of these has just dealt a body-blow to the UK government’s so-called Snoopers Charter.
The European Court of Justice (ECJ) has ruled that that “general and indiscriminate retention” of emails and electronic communications is illegal. Only targeted interception of traffic and location data in order to combat serious crime is justified.
In its ruling, the court said:
With respect to retention, the retained data, taken as a whole, is liable to allow very precise conclusions to be drawn concerning the private lives of the persons whose data has been retained.
The interference by national legislation that provides for the retention of traffic data and location data with that right must therefore be considered to be particularly serious. The fact that the data is retained without the users of electronic communications services being informed of the fact is likely to cause the persons concerned to feel that their private lives are the subject of constant surveillance. Consequently, only the objective of fighting serious crime is capable of justifying such interference.
Legislation prescribing a general and indiscriminate retention of data does not require there to be any relationship between the data which must be retained and a threat to public security and is not restricted to, inter alia, providing for retention of data pertaining to a particular time period and/or geographical area and/or a group of persons likely to be involved in a serious crime.
Such national legislation therefore exceeds the limits of what is strictly necessary and cannot be considered to be justified within a democratic society, as required by the directive, read in the light of the charter.
Ironically the ruling’s origins lie in part with a legal challenge brought by, among others, David Davis MP, then a backbench MP, but now Minister for Brexit in Prime Minister Theresa May’s administration. After Brexit, the ECJ will no longer have judicial authority over the UK. Davis removed his name from the legal challenge after joining May’s Cabinet.
May herself was a staunch proponent of the UK Investigatory Powers Act when she was Home Secretary.
Powers
The IPA replaces the Data Retention and Investigatory Powers Act (DRIPA), introduced as a temporary emergency law which expires on 31 December. The legal challenge was brought against DRIPA, but its findings throw major elements of its replacement into question.
Privacy activist group Liberty argues that the IPA has in fact increased the powers of DRIPA without any additional safeguards being out in place:
Under [the IPA], the state now also has access to every person’s internet use – every website visited or app used – which service providers must generate and store for 12 months.
This creates vast databases of deeply sensitive and revealing personal information which – at a time when companies and governments are under increasingly frequent attack from hackers – creates a goldmine for criminals and foreign spies.
This data can be accessed by dozens of public authorities with no need for suspicion of criminality or prior sign-off from a judge or other independent official. These include the NHS, Department for Work and Pensions and Gambling Commission.
The Investigatory Powers Act has also legalised other unprecedented bulk spying powers – including bulk hacking, interception of phone calls and emails on an industrial scale and collection of huge databases containing sensitive information on millions of people – which could integrate records such as Oyster card logs and Facebook back-ups.
Martha Spurrier, Liberty’s Director, said:
The Government must now make urgent changes to the Investigatory Powers Act to comply with this. This is the first serious post-referendum test for our Government’s commitment to protecting human rights and the rule of law. The UK may have voted to leave the EU – but we didn’t vote to abandon our rights and freedoms.
There are implications for the tech industry in the ruling from a data protection perspective and these reach beyond the UK into the rest of the EU and across the Atlantic to the US, where President-Elect Donald Trump has made it clear that he favors beefing up mass data collection and surveillance. Robert Bownes, Director of Communications at data science company Profusion, comments:
The UK, EU and US governments are re-writing the rulebook for data protection. However, there has not been enough input from the tech community. We’ve seen with previous attempts at legislation in this area that lawmakers generally do not have a good grasp of just how quickly technology moves and all the possible ramifications of new developments. The result has been laws that soon become obsolete or have a lot of unintended consequences – the Snooper’s Charter could tick both these boxes.
“On one hand the UK and US seem hell bent on eroding the privacy rights of users, the sparse data protection currently afforded, and putting a greater burden on businesses to capture and share user data with security services. While on the other hand, the ECJ, with the support of most European governments, take the polar opposite view and are trying to do more to boost the rights of individuals online.
That said, the ECJ’s ruling could have little impact once the UK leaves the EU. Post-Brexit the UK may be free to pursue even more draconian data measures. This is bad news for consumers, businesses and could have a chilling effect on the UK’s booming tech industry.
My take
Embarrassing for the Prime Minister and inevitably an annoying additional distraction from Brexit. There was a lot to be concerned about how the IPA was pushed through Parliament with what critics would argue was a lack of appropriate scrutiny from legislators. With the Trump administration likely to escalate data collection activities and the EU authorities equally reluctant to do so, the UK finds itself, not for the first time, stuck between the two.
Image credit - freeimages.com Read more on: Digital government and public servicesGoverning identity privacy and security

