
Fisheye view of XChange 16 auditorium
If you want proof that digital transformation is much more than a simple technology upgrade, look no further than your nearest shopping mall. The retail industry is eager for its store assistants to become as digitally connected as their customers. But as many retailers have found, that’s a lot harder to achieve in practice than it might seem in theory.
This month’s Demandware Xchange conference in Berlin provided a forum for global and European retailers to pool their experiences of implementing digital commerce using the vendor’s cloud-based products (soon to become the Salesforce Commerce Cloud once the agreed $2.8 million acquisition closes in a week’s time).
Several speakers recounted how their first attempts at digitizing the in-store customer experience had gone awry. Getting it right has been a matter of trial and error, not only testing out different device formats and applications, but most of all building up the confidence of staff in using the technology.
Anne-Marie Blaire, chief digital officer at Grupo Cortefiel, Spain’s third-largest retail brand, points out that you can’t even assume people will know how to open the browser, let alone operate the app:
The associates in the store weren’t trained to be technology people. You can’t just give them a device.
While an office worker might be able to teach themselves on the job, it’s different when there’s a customer standing there in front of you. Store associates will want to feel confident using the technology so that they don’t end up looking foolish in front of customers. But they will make the effort to learn if they see that having much faster ways of accessing information helps them do a better job, she says.
You have to ask yourself, what’s the best way to let the person there help the person that’s in front of them?
Deckers seeks engagement
At Californian lifestyle brand Deckers, best known for its Ugg footwear, it took several tries to find the right in-store technology for its digital point-of-sale solution, says Daniel Petta, senior retail operations director for Europe.
If it doesn’t work well, associates just put it on the shelf.
The first deployment, which used a kiosk-style fixed device with a Bluetooth connection to the checkout, didn’t last long because of connectivity issues. That was quickly replaced with iPads combined with a plug-in wireless point-of-sale device. Customers found this chip-and-pin device more familiar when purchasing, while associates found the portable tablet was more convenient than having to bring customers to a fixed device, says Petta.
It’s better to have an engaging conversation around an iPad away from the fray.
The roll-out was accompanied by a training program that helped get staff engaged with the initiative. The extension of an ‘endless aisle’ capability will also encourage adoption, says Petta. As well as being able to see the same information about stock availability that customers can find online, associates will have extra visibility in the in-store app, such as end-of-range stock that’s already been shipped to outlet stores. That will give associates a further incentive to use the device to help customers find what they’re looking for, Petta believes.
Lacoste goes global
Upmarket fashion brand Lacoste went back to the drawing board several times when it first rolled out digital commerce to stores, says digital retail project manager Olivier Poeil. A 2014 pilot at the brand’s flagship store in London’s Regent Street found them enthusiastic but asking basic questions such as, where should they leave the device when not using it and when to recharge it?
Second time around, the digital team tried a different device format, with the tablet packaged with a printer and installed as a fixed kiosk. The application was refactored to match the website navigation more closely, and the team paid more attention to change management, providing training and explaining the benefits of using the device. Again, store associates were enthusiastic and one store increased revenue 4%. But there were still drawbacks, with issues arising on routine maintenance and upgrades.
The third try was in US, but this time the project brought in people from stores at the design stage as part of an integrated design team. Rather than a limited pilot, the aim was a rapid, global roll-out.
The device chosen was a Windows tablet, delivered in a retail jacket that includes a barcode scanner and credit card swipe. Using Windows has several advantages. IT can manage the devices remotely using standard tools. The digital app can also run on the Windows PCs already used in stores as the existing point-of-sale system. If needed, the existing Cegid POS software can run on the tablet.
There was an even bigger focus on training for this roll-out, leading with store managers. There is a specific incentive program focused on goals for using the digital app. It’s now been deployed in the US and Canada and will be introduced to France by the end of the year.
My take
There are enough examples here for a clear pattern to emerge — retailers are deploying the technology first without giving enough thought to how it will actually fit into the daily routines of people in the stores and help them serve customers better. Grupo Cortefiel’s Blaire set the right priorities for bridging retail’s digital divide when she observed:
It’s the fundamentals that matter. The pretty little things that fly by are great, but we have to be awesome retailers at the core.
As I observed recently when discussing critical faultlines in retail transformation, integrating digital channels with physical stores is “one of the most glaring chasms” for retailers to cross. There’s clearly a lot of work that needs to be done at the technology level to bridge that chasm, but it’s no good building the bridge without thinking about how people are going to get across it.
When Barclays Bank first set out to become a leading digital retailer, it too made the same mistake. Dave Shepherd, the bank’s head of frontline help, recalls:
We put iPads and wifi into every bank and we were going to be most digital bank in the UK. [We found] they weren’t being used. It was that human reality of not being comfortable with digital.
As I recently described, that spurred its Digital Eagles program, in which staff are encouraged to develop digital knowledge and skills that they can pass on to customers and to the wider community. It’s an extreme example, which is perhaps less plugged into the bank’s back-end systems than it ought to be, but it underlines the people aspect that’s so important in digital transformation initiatives.
When preparing to bring digital commerce into stores, retailers must pay attention to practicalities of how the in-store devices are going to be used, and they must make sure staff get enough training to feel confident using them. That surely means it’s sensible to bring store managers into the design team, as Lacoste finally did when preparing its global rollout. What seems to make sense to a developer will often turn out to be crazy once examined with knowledge of how things actually work in a busy retail outlet.
Being ready to test different approaches and adapt to feedback is equally important. Many retailers at the Berlin show were excited about the advent of Apple Pay and the ability to embed this simpler payment method into their digital commerce systems. There will be many more changes in the way consumers buy over the coming months and years, so in-store systems must be ready to adapt to those changes. Keeping staff updated and engaged becomes an ongoing imperative.
Remember too that the retailers attending this event were a cross-sample of the early adopters. The majority of retailers are yet to embark on their journey across that digital divide. Their store associates are still using archaic point-of-sale systems that were designed before the iPhone existed, while attempting to serve customers who can call up real-time pricing, availability and product specs in front of them on their smartphones.
Image credit - Feature image - Old-fashioned cash register showing No Sale © DutchScenery - Fotolia.com; XChange 16 via DemandwareDisclosure - Salesforce is a diginomica premier partner at the time of writing. Demandware funded the author's travel to attend its conference in Berlin. Read more on: CRM and customer experienceDigital transformation - frictionless enterpriseRetail e-commerce and the omni-channelUse cases 