
I recently had an opportunity to speak with Peter Loop, associate VP and principal technology architect at EdgeVerve, an Infosys company that includes the Finacle banking solution within its product portfolio. While Finacle has enjoyed good success (it is deployed in 84 countries), the company is firmly attuned to both understanding and developing solutions based upon blockchain technology. That will perhaps surprise some who consider Infosys the company, as one of the leading Indian outsourcers but not much more.
Loop comes from a strong technology background having served at Microsoft, Intel and SAP before joining Infosys. In all those roles he worked as an advanced systems technologist. That variety of experience allows Loop to bring a different set of disciplines to technology problems and is reflected in the way that EdgeVerve has established both academic links in Ireland and product based research at places like Level39 in London. EdgeVerve has spent the last two years building a competency that includes a core group of 50 developers among an Infosys community of 600 people working and thinking about various blockchain initiatives. The academic unit will have a staff of 95 when fully operational. Make no mistake, this is a significant undertaking.
How does this help Finacle?
We’re looking at this in terms of how we can help a core banking system, not necessarily replace the core banking system, but how can it interact and connect with other systems to surface value.
Is this not a relatively defensive play rather than one that is out and out innovation oriented? Loop has some sympathy with that sentiment but is clear that there has to be a lot more than simply trying to find ways to put a blockchain on everything and then rebranding that as some sort of technology advance.
I like to think of blockchain as the new version of database technology, but it is also a messaging system and it really applies when you have a network of people who are also peer owners or part of a supply chain process. We’re focused on those supply chains in finance. Trade finance types of scenario for example are where we see value.
I asked for his view of experimentation as outlined by Narry Singh in which it seems to me at least, there’s a lot of speculative experimentation without necessarily a clear sense of direction.
I think that’s probably an over-positioning. I think we have to embrace failure or the ability to fail. I think some of that happens, but that approach makes it sound like most investment is really because you want to invest for activity as opposed to get something done. I don’t think that’s exactly right, either.
That remark allowed us to pivot the conversation to the products Finacle is building.
We went for simplicity. We are able to launch a blockchain in five minutes. We are able to put new people on it very, very quickly. We can make it cloud-based or we can make it deployable on-premise. At this point, we’re trying to make sure that we can experiment quickly and get to a minimal, viable product quickly to make things work as opposed to, make sure there’s a lot of movements with various consortiums and communities all trying to come up with the ultimate answer. I think you can get a pretty good understanding from something that we can turn out relatively quickly as opposed to having the ultimate answer and associated delays. That’s saying we’re embracing an agile approach to this because there are a lot of new rules in what we’re establishing and we have to figure out what works and doesn’t work.
But that sounds a tad lofty to me. On the one hand wanting to experiment but then on the other building a framework. Surely that will depend upon many parties agreeing what the framework should look like and contain and won’t that hinder product development?
Let me be clear. We’re not out in the framework business. We have to start with a framework but that’s not the end game at all. We’re going to be using the framework to help our customers build, develop and co-innovate product. We want stuff we can cook into our payment hub, stuff we can offer to our trade finance customers. This comes back to the supply chain finance type of applications.
So what does this look like? Loop says we should think about this as comprising administration and operational functions. There is an administration and monitoring module that works as a permissions based ledger. This is one step removed from the purity of bitcoin/blockchain but is considered essential to build trust inside the chain. The monitoring piece uses analytics for discovery purposes inside the blockchain.
One unique feature is that the Finacle blockchain does not include or need a cryptocurrency per se. This allows Finacle to be asset-neutral, which in turn would allow for the representation of any asset inside a complex transaction. Here I am thinking of derivative instruments where one asset (example property) might be backed by another asset class (gold futures) and on throughout the chain of transactions that make up the security settlement path. In the past, it was almost impossible to understand what derivatives consisted of and so made valuation at any point in time virtually impossible.
The way Loop described it to me, the Finacle blockchain provides instant and full visibility from start to finish. That of course is the purpose of the blockchain but Finacle takes this several steps further, imagining a full trade settlement and payment system established in any way the parties and counterparties are prepared to agree. All of that can be achieved programmatically which in turn removes transaction friction. But then what about the legal side?
There’s a lot of argument here. Does that replace lawyers? What’s the wiggle room? You can’t reverse a transaction, but my supposition is that if you can reduce the wiggle room in the transaction chain, you increase the transparency by being able to look into that. Now you may need big data analysis, you may need some other tools to make it clear to you, but all of that data that constitutes the transactions entirety is there, traceable, and accessible provided you have the right keys and the right information to look at that information.
This sounds fine in theory but what’s happening among Finacle customers?
We are working on a couple of scenarios similar to what you’re discussing, with some of the banks that we’re working with, so we’ll see how that works out, but analytics is a big part of that, being able to look at that is a big part of it, being able to express the contracts in very finite terms becomes a part of it. For analytics, we’ve made the whole thing API driven so it’s very easy to extend or add to. In some scenarios, the analytics we’re considering might solely focus in network performance to ensure things like SLAs are met. Follow on information for example where payments are made might be useful. Thinking further out, we might want to apply machine learning to discover new ways to be more efficient in transaction handling.
I wanted to come back to the question of identity. There’s been a good amount of confusion in this area and I wondered where the permissions ledge fits in:
Let’s talk about the permission ledger world. It is a way also with this cryptographic security to provide an identity for people. This isn’t anonymous money, it’s possible to generate some very powerful, ‘know your customer’ scenarios through identity management where you can be sharing information between the person establishing your identity, people needing to use your identity, and yourself personally. One of the scenarios we’re working on is between a bank and a telco, where the bank is establishing who this person is and the telco is taking advantage of that information rather than doing the delineated check for themselves.
But identity is a many headed beast so how does that get hashed out?
Who is the certifier that an identity is real? Is it the government? Well, it is for some things. Is it the bank? It is for some other things. If you were the person establishing that identity, how do you share it with other groups? There are several companies working on identity management solutions that you could cryptographically prove who someone is and then let other people consume that data so that you’re not going through the typical ‘know your customer’ issue which keeps rearing its head across departments in many institutions. That’s definitely a valuable service.
As we came to the end of our conversation I got the sense that EdgeVerve is working hard to be at the center of what’s happening next rather than as the reactor to circumstances as they unfold. That explains to me the importance placed on the academic unit and the implicit need to work towards standards that operate across financial value chains. That has not been easy in the past. Think for example how a US check is represented with account and routing numbers while in Europe, checks have all but died out, replaced by IBAN as the identifying method.
As Loop will readily acknowledge, the blockchain business is a fast moving and unstable environment where fresh ideas are popping up on an almost daily basis. But by sticking to what serves customers and leveraging its geographical reach, my sense is that EdgeVerve has a good shot at being at the forefront of bringing far greater efficiency to trade payments processing.
For more on the thinking around blockchain at Finacle, check out this blog series.
Image credit - via Pexels (no image credit required)Disclosure - EdgeVerve is not a direct partner with diginomica but Infosys is a premier partner at time of writing. Read more on: FintechGoverning identity privacy and security 