

Using spreadsheets as a case management tool was not working. Reporting was incredibly clumsy, taking far too long and we wanted something that was going to speed up that operation.

That was the situation at BrightHouse, according to Louise Levy, employee relations manager at the UK weekly payment retailer.  Luckily for Levy, she joined in October 2015, a month or so after the retailer had curtailed its spreadsheet habit and started using Software Europe’s cloud-based ER Tracker to manage employee relation cases, such as absence and grievances.
BrightHouse is a large company, employing roughly 3,300 employees across 300 stores across the UK and operating in an industry with a healthy staff churn. So it was hard to keep on top of the employee relations case load using spreadsheets alone.
There are seven types of employee cases the department deals with, including conduct, grievances, performance, sickness and absence. Each of those areas has a number of different stages to them. For example, the procedure for sickness would be notifying the employee about sickness benefit, followed by a welfare meeting.
ER Tracker is set up to prompt staff when letters need to be sent or other actions need to be taken at each of these stages. That helps the four-strong department to deal with its work load far more efficiently and ensure they don’t miss any important legal requirements. Levy says:

It’s a busy department and everything is centralized. When we receive information about something taking place, we log it as a case. As part of our SLAs, we need to send the letters we send out confirming hearing dates and so on take place within certain time frames.

Having this centralized means there’s far more visibility across the team. If employees contact the department when their case handler is away, it’s easy for one of the rest of the team to access the case details and see what stage the case is at. It also enables Levy to have a far clearer picture of the case load the department is dealing with:

I, as a manager here, can see at a glance exactly what the girls are working on, what stage anything is on at any one time.

It also provides Levy with far more visibility to look for trends across the regions of the company:

Each region might have 10 or 12 stores within it and that’s headed up by a regional manager and we can report that level of granular detail.  So, if we discover there are more performance cases in the Manchester area, does that mean the performance wasn’t good in that area or that the regional manager is managing his team better? If forces you to make decisions based on the analysis of the data.

Making life easier
But for Levy, even more important than visibility is the reporting aspect that makes her job so much easier. 
If her director of HR asks her to run a report on the number of sickness cases they have in the last six months in the northern region then she instantly has access to all the information. Levy adds:

If I was working from spreadsheets it would be an absolute nightmare – I wouldn’t even know where to start – you’d have to be in and out of different spreadsheets month by month and count them up.

Not surprising then, that it would take someone four hours to put together the weekly report to the business every Friday morning.  The same report now takes just half an hour to compile.
Which all means, of course, that staff have more time to focus on the cases themselves.
Although mobile access was not a driver for choosing ER Tracker – in fact the company had recently centralized its employee relations – this may be something that is used in the future, says Levy:

There is talk about field HR business partners being able to access on a read-only basis certain areas of the system, but it’s just being talked about at the moment. 

Levy also hopes that the ability to flag cases high, medium and low risk will be included in future versions of the cloud-based system.
Although the benefits have been immense, it did take Levy and the team to while to get used to the system: 

When I first started I’d never used anything like this before and I when started using it and I just couldn’t get my head round it and found it difficult.

But those initial difficulties quickly evaporated as the team mastered the system. Now, says Levy:

We couldn’t be without it now. To go back to spreadsheets now would not be a good idea.

Image credit - Freeimages.com Read more on: HCM and the digital future of work 