
While people are key assets in any firm, people are absolutely essential to professional service organizations. But, software vendors seem to focus their automation efforts on many of the easy-to-quantify and easy-to-solve service problems and not the ones that separate great service groups from abysmal ones.
There are now abundant solutions to help automate many aspects of service groups. There are professional services applications (PSA) to help schedule resources, for example people to projects, time reporting, expense reporting, etc. There are also service management tools to indicate how well these people are being utilized and what amounts to bill customers.
It’s what’s not there that profoundly bugs me. I can’t seem to find solutions that see service professionals as ASSETS of a company. I see lots of solutions where people are viewed as a cost of delivery or expense item. I don’t see systems or management practices that see people as something you want to nurture, develop and enhance over time as you would other classes of asset.

Where are the applications that alert top executives for the following conditions:

Are people being asked to ghost hours? Ghosting occurs when someone is told to only charge ‘X’ hours for a task when the real time requirement may be substantially more. This often happens when a sales person, who has never implemented a software solution, tells the customer that the work will only take ‘X’ hours and prices the deal accordingly. Because the sales person doesn’t implement what they sell, they don’t care. Instead, they place a lot of pressure on project managers and staff people to realize impossible targets. So, what do those responsible for delivering the service do? They work a lot of extra hours without any additional pay or recognition. Ghosting is a reprehensible practice and rare are the mechanisms to prevent it from occurring. When ghosting is allowed, it sends a signal to service professionals that sales people, commissions and revenue are more important than they are. Management teams that permit this are saying “we don’t care if you have no personal life, never go home, and, work night and day – just bill only what we told you to book.” And they wonder why they have a retention problem.
Where’s the connection between the sales plans and the hiring and training plans? I frequently hear of firms where Sales is projecting a 20% year over year increase in deal revenue but, somehow, service headcount is supposed to remain flat. This stupidity is a recipe for disaster. Rare is the situation where a firm can just flip a switch and a new service person can be found, recruited, oriented and trained on the company’s solutions in a manner of minutes or days. Anyone who thinks this is possible is either a wide-eyed dreamer or just plain delusional. Yet, time and again, I see firms wait until after the aggressive sales forecast becomes a looming reality to clamor for more highly trained, experienced service professionals. Who gets left holding the bag? Not sales. No, it’s the service people.
Who is measuring the potential attrition of these service professionals? In firms where services are close to 100% of total revenues (think big consultancies, accounting firms or integrators), attrition reflects poorly on all executives. Attrition/retention is carefully and continuously monitored. Special travel programs, work/professional balance initiatives, mandatory training events, etc. are everywhere. It’s in the firms when services are a byproduct of the sale of something bigger (like hardware, software licenses, etc.) that potential attrition often ignored. Where are the software applications to help these firms and their leaders see what’s really going to kill their bottom line?
Where are the career and leadership progression tools that all service groups should have? In some firms, the top executive slots are filled by non-services executives. How does someone in one of these firms ever get to the big table? They don’t. Their diminished role is to serve customers only. Their careers just don’t matter.

I recently challenged a top executive at a major application software firm about rumblings regarding attrition problems I heard their services group was experiencing. Reflexively, he expressed disbelief that his firm would have any issues.
When I pressed the point about their ever growing sales forecasts but flat services headcount, he said that they’re trying to shift more of their services work to their services partners. When I asked about how they know if the time estimates quoted by sales were realistic, the conversation took an interesting turn. “Isn’t that a problem for most software companies? We’re no different,” he stated. I replied “But your firm makes software for service firms. Shouldn’t you be leading the space with best practices?”
10 problems
His discomfort with my questions was palpable. That services organization is in trouble. According to my sources:

Services attrition is high
Morale among the service providers is bad and worsening
The number of clients/service provider continues to climb but the number of hours in a day hasn’t changed
Key resources are seriously overcommitted to numerous potential projects
Customers aren’t getting the people they think they’ll be getting on projects
Recruiting is having a hard time finding replacement talent let alone acquire new additional personnel to handle future growth
Scheduled training for existing service professionals is getting deferred in favor of clearing service backlog – This is triggering additional resentment within the service team
Training for new hires is haphazard and impacting service delivery and customer satisfaction
Training for new functionality in the vendors application suite is either non-existent or awaiting development. Yet, somehow, service people are expected to know these new products, implement them and train customers on their use and functionality.
Service professionals don’t have anyone looking after their interests on the Executive Committee (or if they do, that individual is complacent in doing so).

So, some of you are probably thinking: But, Brian, shouldn’t these things belong in a Talent Management or Human Capital system? Sure, there’s some merit to that idea but I’ve yet to see the HR system that was designed from the get-go for the world of services. Yes, you’ll find employee engagement and retention analytics in many Human Capital solutions today but what there is may be quite disjointed and incomplete.
Action steps
To do it right, service firms need a solution that:

Measures the ‘assets’ service people bring into their employer and how these appreciate or depreciate over time.
Penalizes sales and management when they undertake practices (e.g., ghosting, cancelling training, deferring a person’s scheduled vacations, etc.) that materially affect people’s lives, careers and tenure with the firm.
Analyze and look for potential staffing problems LONG before sales commits people to client projects
Aligns sales and delivery plans, headcounts, etc.

I believe the creation of such applications might not be that tough. But, changing the executive mindsets and corporate culture in some professional services firms re: services will be the real challenge. How tough that will be is the subject of another article.
Illustrations via Brian Sommer
Image credit: Talent card with colorful background with defocused lights © Olivier Le Moal – Fotolia.com

Read more on: Future of workTalent managementThe new professional and IT as a service 