
This month, Brussels Airlines has welcomed 98 new flight attendants to its cabin crew team, the company announced last week. And this year, for the first time, the airline’s total headcount has nudged past 4,000 employees.
For HR talent manager Diane Cauwenberghs, the pressure is on to get all new recruits on board and up to speed as quickly as possible.
To tackle the challenge, Brussels Airlines has implemented employee onboarding software from Dutch company Talmundo. Based in The Hague and founded in 2012 by former HR executive Stijn De Groef, Talmundo has so far raised €1.8 million in two rounds, the most recent (for €1.3m) in January this year.
Software-as-a-Service provider Talmundo may be a relative newcomer in the HR software market, but its message that new hires simply don’t get what they need from current onboarding processes clearly resonates at large companies such as ArcelorMittal, Sanofi, Staples and BNP Paribas, all Talmundo customers.
According to Talmundo’s research, new recruits at many organizations feel that onboarding processes fail to provide them with the basics: clear information on roles, responsibilities and expectations; details of training programmes; sufficient input from managers; an overview of company structure and so on. The company’s software aims to fill these gaps.
Off to a flying start
Brussels Airlines is a good win for Talmundo. The airline, after all, is part of the Eurowings Group, which in turn is owned by the Lufthansa Group, home of Lufthansa, Swiss and Austrian Airlines.
This project to implement Talmundo is the first that Brussels Airlines has carried out with its sister company Eurowings Aviation, where Talmundo will assist in the onboarding of 500 new cabin attendants. Clearly, there’s potential for Talmundo to spread to other parts of the Lufthansa Group.
For now, the primary focus at Brussels Airlines is providing the best onboarding experience it can – and one that starts as early as possible, adds Cauwenberghs. First impressions count, she says, and onboarding is a good opportunity for the airline to showcase its employer values from the start:
Starting a new job is exciting and can be stressful. Having this smooth and efficient process in place will help new employees feel welcome and more comfortable. Additionally, it can drastically improve the performance, fit and readiness of every person who takes on a new role at Brussels Airlines.
We really want to start engaging with a new recruit right from the time they accept a job offer. That’s important, because at that point, they’ve had good news, they’re on a high, they’re gung-ho and looking forward to starting. But what’s difficult [for them] is if they then get radio silence between accepting an offer and their start day.
Using Talmundo, she says, Brussels Airlines can provide upfront information about the company, its culture, the nine-week training programme for cabin crew (where appropriate), a virtual tour of the workplace and so on. But at the same time that it’s delivering a consistent experience and message, it will use Talmundo to tailor communications to give them a personal feel.
Chatbot advantage
Another big attraction of Talmundo, and one that Brussels Airlines has put into action, is its AI-powered chatbot, built to respond to recent hires’ most frequently asked questions about their new jobs and workplaces. Says Cauwenberghs:
For cabin crew, for example, we often get questions about training, formal documentation and about what will be expected of them in the first weeks. What’s going to happen to them? That’s important, because they have six weeks of safety training, three weeks of commercial training and it’s only then that the practical part of the job starts.
And there are very practical questions, too: where do they park their car, where do they report for work? They have a lot of questions about what to expect and now that information is very easily available to them, without HR having to deal with phone calls or spend hours on email. We can focus our resources on what really makes the difference, what is productive for us as a company and not on the transactional aspects that accompany an on-boarding process.
That’s going to be important as the hunt for new staff continues at Brussels Airlines. It’s currently on the look-out for 50 new pilots, among other roles. Cauwenberghs and her team need to be confident they are spending the limited time they have in the best ways possible:
We need to further professionalize our ways of working and be able to onboard new people efficiently. The key to that is maximizing the time we spend on communicating individually with each new recruit, rather than data input, manual processes and the duplication of information.
Image credit - Belgium AirlinesRead more on: Digital enterprise in the real worldFuture of workHCM and the digital future of workHR admin and payrollTalent management 