
For the post-Brexit tech entrepreneurs in the UK, there was some good news and a lot of bad news to come out of Chancellor Phillips Hammond’s first Budget statement yesterday.
The good news is that while the Chancellor remains intent on overhauling the tax reporting regime, he’s recognised that the changes are going to place an additional burden on smaller businesses and has granted a stay of execution on those. The Chancellor declared:
In a digital age, it is right that we develop a digital tax system. But in response to concerns about the timetable expressed by business organisations, and by several of my RHFs including the Chairman of the Treasury Select Committee. I have decided that for businesses with turnover below the VAT registration threshold I will delay by one year the introduction of quarterly reporting at a cost to the Exchequer of £280 million.
But he added that the changes are coming in some form:
Business Rates raise £25 billion per year – all of which, by 2020, will be going to fund local government. So we cannot abolish them, as some have suggested. But, it is certainly true, in the medium term that we have to find a better way of taxing the digital part of the economy. the part that does not use bricks and mortar.
Of more alarm to small business and to sole trader contractors, already under pressure from changes to IR35 legislation, was the changes to National Insurance payments, pitched as part of a wider drive to create a level-playing field between the self-employed and the PAYE employed.
Conscious presumably of being a Tory Chancellor introducing what was immediately seized upon as an enterprise discouraging measure, with National Insurance Contributions for the self-employed rising to to 10% next year and 11% in 2019,Hammond was at pains to try to justify the move:
As our economy responds to the challenges of globalisation, shifts in demographics, and the emergence of new technologies we have seen a dramatic increase in the number of people working as self-employed or through their own companies. Indeed, many of our most highly-paid professionals work through Limited Liability Partnerships and are treated as self-employed. There are many good reasons for choosing to be self-employed or working through a company.
He insisted:
I will always encourage and support the entrepreneurs and the innovators who are the lifeblood of our economy. People should have choices about how they work, but those choices should not be driven primarily by differences in tax treatment. Alongside the gap between employees and the self-employed there is a parallel unfairness in the treatment of those working through their own companies.
Britain has the most competitive corporate tax regime in the G7, and we are determined to make Britain the most attractive place to start and grow a business. But to do that, we must ensure that our corporate tax regime does not encourage people across the economy to form companies simply to reduce tax liabilities, pushing the burden of financing our public services onto others.
The gap in total tax and NICs between an employed worker and one who has set up his own company will normally be greater even than the gap with the self-employed, and there are several perfectly legal ways in which that gap can be made bigger still.
This is not fair. And it’s not affordable.
Push back
But the Federation of Small Businesses was having none of this:
The National Insurance rise should be seen for what it is – a £1 billion tax hike on those who set themselves up in business. This undermines the Government’s own mission for the UK to be the best place to start and grow a business, and it drives up the cost of doing business. Future growth of the UK’s 4.8 million-strong self-employed population is now at risk. Increasing this tax burden, effectively funded by a reduction in corporation tax over the same period, is the wrong way to go…
The genuinely self-employed are fundamentally different to employees – they are the risk takers that spearhead growth and productivity in our economy. They need help and support from Government given the spiralling costs of doing business, not additional tax burdens.
Elsewhere, there was some reheating of previous announcements around the digital economy as well as a bit more meat on the bones of the Industry Strategy. The Chancellor picked out:

£300 million to support the brightest and the best research talent, including support for 1000 new PhD places and fellowships, focused on STEM subjects.
£270 million “to keep the UK at the forefront of disruptive technologies like biotech, robotic systems and driverless vehicles”
£16 million for a new 5G mobile technology hub.
£200 million for local projects to leverage private sector investment in full-fibre broadband networks.

The Internet Services Providers Association (ISPA) saw the last point as positive, but added:
As we have previously argued, Government should use a range of policy measures to support ongoing broadband rollout and investment by the market. Most importantly, Government should prioritise the removal of barriers that add significant administrative costs to our members. The commitment to consult on a new proposed review of business rates revaluation is welcome, but it is important that Government does this is in an open, evidence-based manner.
From a public sector supplier perspective, there was praise for the additional spend on training and education. Simon Hansford, CEO at UKCloud, said:
As Brexit looms large on the horizon, it’s encouraging to see continued investment in technology, with £270 million being set aside to help position the UK at the forefront of disruptive technologies.  Equally reassuring is the acknowledgement from Government of the need to create a highly-skilled workforce, ensuring the UK can compete in global markets.  To this end, the Chancellor’s announcement that £300 million will be allocated to supporting research talent, including 1,000 PhD places in STEM subjects is to be welcomed.
Meanwhile Andy Lawson, Senior Vice President, EMEA, Salesforce, said:
Last week, the government announced its Digital Strategy and previously it’s Modern Industrial Strategy, both with a strong focus on skills.  It’s absolutely critical that this focus on skills gains momentum. The private sector also has a role to play to help address the digital skills issue from all angles. The entire digital sector has a responsibility and a big interest in arming both the current and future generation with the skills needed to drive the UK’s digital economy forward.
 My take
The headlines in the mainstream media this morning made clear widespread disapproval of Hammond’s measures in regard to the self-employed, particularly from normally Tory-supporting newspapers. From a personal point of view, as a self-employed individual, I find it baffling that a political party that is supposedly intent on encouraging enterprise and entrepreneurialism, seems intent on stifling just that.
This ‘levelling the playing field’ line won’t fly until the Chancellor explains to contractors and sole traders who’s about to pick up their sick pay, maternity leave, holiday allowance etc, all elements that the self-employed have to carry themselves. That’s a matter of personal choice, of course, but let’s not kid ourselves that there’s anything ‘level’ until that imbalance is addressed (which it won’t be).
From a public sector perspective, at a time when government needs to get skilled up again after decades of outsourcing, anything that makes being a sole trader contractor is bad news. The clamping down on IR35 status had already prompted fears of IT freelancers deciding that public sector work was more trouble than it was worth. It strikes me that despite Hammond’s declaration that he’s out to support entrepreneurs and small traders, the real winners here will be the outsourcing firms who find their existing contracts extended because there’s no-one able or willing to pick up the work in-house.
Image credit - BBCDisclosure - At time of writing, Salesforce and UKCloud are premier partners of diginomica/government Read more on: Digital government and public services

