
Satya Nadella
While the world had an uneasy chortle at the potty-mouthed outpourings from Microsoft’s Tay chat bot this week, company CEO Satya Nadella was opening up a wider conversation about the relationship between technology and society overall. 
Opening the Build 2016 conference in San Francisco, Nadella’s near-philosophical debate stood in stark contrast to the hardcore sales pitches of his predecessor in the role. Nadella laid out his agenda, stating: 

There is a much more mainstream dialog to have about the role of technology in our society, and it is the right time to have it, because tech is so mainstream. It is embedded in our industries and in our economies. So we have these profound questions and issues in front of us. Is technology driving economic growth for everyone or is economic growth stalled in spite of technological spend?
Is technology empowering people or is it displacing us? Is technology helping us preserve our enduring values such as privacy or is it compromising it? These are the issues that are being discussed, and they’re the right issues for us to have a broad dialogue, not just in one company, not just in our industry, but as a society.

Big questions to be thrown at an audience of developers first thing in the morning perhaps, but the tone of the address echoes the recent trend among digital thought-leaders to pitch ethical and political messages to customers, such as Apple CEO Tim Cook’s stand on privacy and Salesforce CEO Marc Benioff’s rallying around LGBTI and equality issues, both internally and externally at the company. 
Ultimately Nadella is upbeat and defines himself as an optimist: 

We as a company are optimistic about what technology can do for us. I believe technology can, in fact, drive economic growth all over the world. I believe technology can empower us in our daily lives. I believe technology can be used to preserve our enduring values.
We do, however, have to make choices how we go about building technology. We need to make design choices, economic choices, and social choices that ensure that the way we build technology, the way we use technology helps us make progress as a society.

Holo-future
Among the technology innovations cited in the opening keynote was Microsoft’s HoloLens, pitched by Alex Kipman, Technical Fellow in Microsoft’s Operating System Group, as the result of: 

Dreaming about holographic experiences that eventually become pilots, and ultimately become real experiences deployed in production that change the way we work, communicate, learn and play.

Kipman updated a proof of concept from last year’s Build event which looked at how HoloLens could be used to improve how medical students learn. That’s now gone into production, as Dr Pamela Davis, Dean of Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine, highlighted when talking about the role of the holographic tech in building what she called a “state-of-the-future health education campus’. Davis explained: 

Within this building, our students will learn using the most forward-looking educational programs. HoloLens is a key part of this. Now, last year, we showed a few things that we thought might be possible with HoloLens. Since October, we’ve had a small team of three computer programmers turning our ideas into reality. 

She illustrated her point by showing examples of HoloLens being used to take students ‘inside’ the body to improve their understanding of the nervous system, for example. She said: 

Being untethered and able to walk around 3D holographic content gives our students a real advantage. Students have commented that a 15-minute session with HoloLens could have saved them dozens of hours in the cadaveric lab. When we have only four short years to train them, this is invaluable.

That’s the sort of example of using innovative tech to empower individuals and organizations that Nadella wants to flag up as being for the greater good: 

We want to build intelligence that augments human abilities and experiences. Ultimately it’s not going to be about man-versus-machine. It is going to be about man with machines; each of us excel at very different things. The fact that we have creativity, empathy, emotion and judgment that can then be mixed with fast computation, the ability to reason over large amounts of data and do pattern recognition fast. It’s that bringing together that I think is going to help us move our society forward.
We also have to build trust right into our technology. That means you have to have technology that has built-in protections for privacy. It’s got transparency. You have security as well as compliance. And, lastly, all technology that we build has to be more inclusive and impactful. We need to build technology so that more people can use technology. And we want to build technology such that it gets the best of humanity, not the worst.

Pizza-bot
Which does rather bring the conversation back to Tay, the social bot that did pick up the worst of humanity and become a frothing-at-the-mouth racist. Nadella acknowledged: 

We quickly realised that it was not up to [the] mark. 

But that doesn’t undermine his enthusiasm for a bot-centric future: 

What if we can now bring in your personal digital assistant right to your conversational canvas. What if we brought the world of bots, the new applications, to be able to do anything, like hire a cab, book a ticket, anything that you may want to do, that you have done historically with applications and websites, now with bots right from within Skype.
We don’t even stop there. We want to add richness to these bots. So it’s not just text bots. We want to have animation, we want to have videos and we also want to have holograms. 

This is where the new Microsoft Bot Framework comes in, a toolset that permits coders to build chat bots capable of understanding and using voice commands. The framework consists of a Bot Connector and Bot Builder SDKs, with a Bot Directory to follow, and allows developers to build and connect intelligent bots that can interact with application users. Interactions can take place via text/SMS, Slack and Office 365 mail.
Lili Chen,  Distinguished Engineer and General Manager in Microsoft Research, demoed the practical application of this in action by building a pizza-ordering bot that is able to determine which toppings and crust you want, as well to learn to judge your tastes. 
It’s early days, of course. Chen concluded:

We know we have a lot to learn.

But for Nadella, the overall message from the keynote was simple: 

It is about being able to take our passions, our empathy and go after the opportunities that we see, go after the dreams that we have. We as developers have this tremendous opportunity and a tremendous responsibility, because not only do we get to dream of the future, we get to build the future. 

My take
Product pitches wrapped up in a ethical and moral framework – the shape of tech conferences to come? No bad thing. 
Read more on: Cloud platforms - infrastructure and architectureMachine intelligence and AIUX and application design 