
The job of reshaping Burberry for the next generation is not done, but it has begun.
One of the sub-topics that runs through diginomica’s coverage of the omni-channel retail revolution has been how luxury brands tackle the direct-to-consumer online channel shift. For some companies, such as Tiffany’s, it’s been approached as an opportunity; for others, such as Hugo Boss, it’s come as a wake-up call that can’t be ignored.
I’d probably slot Burberry into the former category, although its wilingness to engage with new technological touchpoints with its customers perhaps haven’t been as successful as they might have been expected to be. Hence, in part, the comment from outgoing CEO Christopher Bailey above. But Bailey remains an enthusiast for digital radicalism, while also acknowledging the challenge of retaining the brand’s inherent conservatism:
Burberry was born from a trench coat. We were born from ready-to-wear. We have a very strong history. We will build on that heritage, but we’ve also always had this very pioneering spirit, this spirit of innovation. It’s why we have always used digital as a platform to communicate to our customers. The British references that we use, in terms of design, in terms of art, in terms of film, that will always remain the backbone. Our heritage, and our history and the story that we’ve had for over 160 years will always be the foundation from which we build.
So we don’t see [the retail market] as about being either a fashion company or a heritage company. I think that’s what Britishness is about. This mix of something that is very traditional, very conservative, very historic, with something that is very innovative, very pioneering, with a touch of eccentricity – that is what defines Burberry as a brand.
OK, so that’s a bold – and actually rather inspirational – mission statement. So, the trick now is to translate into omni-channel action. Bailey points to ongoing increases in online availabilty of Burberry stock and argues that the focus is shifting from the previous objective of “digital awareness” to actual e-commerce sales. In other words, it’s less about the fancy ‘show off’ tech in-store and more about actually closing transactions online:
We have significantly increased the amount of product available to our online customers by enabling us to fulfill commerce orders from store stock. With online stock availability up 7% and significant improvements to digital conversion through the program, we are pleased with the early progress here…Performance was underpinned by a comprehensive program of improvements, initiatives and innovations, covering all aspects of the digital customer experience, and designed to ensure that Burberry continues to lead the sector in this critical space…Building burberry.com remains a key focus for the future, with conversion improving across both mobile and desktop, and the pipeline of improvements to both sites in work.
We have recently concluded the initial pilot of our new Burberry app, which will be rolling out globally over the coming months. We look forward to this becoming a core part of our digital universe as customers continue to move fluidly between the on and the off-line worlds, expecting seamless and personalized experiences.
Back room stuff
But it’s not the customer-facing tech that’s playing a core part in reshaping Burberry. There’s a lot of behind-the-scene IT work going on, not the least of which is the recruitment of Mark McClennon from Unilever as CIO to revise the overall Burberry tech strategy.
Elements of that have begun to appear. The retailer has announced plans to to open a new office, Burberry Business Services, in Leeds in October, which will bring together shared service teams from procurement, finance, HR, in addition to some customer service and IT roles. Around 300 roles will be moved out of costly London premises and up to Yorkshire, bringing cost savings as well as process simplification.
There’s also more focus on improving procurement efficiencies, says Chief Operating Officer Julie Brown, with a global approach to to Burberry’s indirect spend which is in excess of £600 million per annum. This has involved a move to Ariba’s diigtal catalog-based procurement system. It’s early days, but this is delivering benefits, says Brown:
Just a few examples of the efficiency gains in the pilot are a 50% reduction in the number of steps to raise a purchase order, a 65% reduction in the time taken to approve an order, a 100% increase in the number of invoices processed without manual intervention.
Inventory management is also on the agenda, she adds:
Inventory is our largest sum of capital invested in the business and so any opportunity here to improve it is significant. From this summer, we’ll be rolling out a new phase of our omni-channel journey. The solution will allow an online order to be fulfilled either directly from the store or our distribution centers to better serve our customers in 44 countries. It will enable same day delivery in key cities globally and will also offer instant collect in store in over 200 stores. This will improve stock utilization and our service to customers, reducing delivery times.
But perhaps the biggest change program is upgrading the foundational technology platforms supporting Burberry’s operations. This is a long-overdue move, admits Brown:
Our core technology platforms are between 5 and 15 years old. Through the years, these platforms have been adapted to support high demands and changes within the business, resulting in a high degree of complexity and bespoke development. Over the next two years, we’ll move to a single set platform with a combined solution for both retail and wholesale, taking full advantage of operating in the [SAP] HANA Enterprise Cloud, supporting enhanced and more responsive decision making throughout the business.
We’ve also launched a new product life cycle management tool to enable more timely development of products and enhance vendor and supplier collaboration. And we’re developing new digital tool for sales associates and for customer insight.
Overall, the changes underway are intended to deliver annualised cost savings of £100 mililon by fiscal 2019, concludes Brown:
The operating model and the procurement benefits run throughout, but the step change coming from Burberry Business Services and the efficiencies from omni-channel and IT platform really start to deliver at the end of 2018 and into 2019.
My take
The pragmatic emphasis being placed on the back office support structures and the underlying IT platform is a welcome move by a retailers that has sometimes seemed more interested in demo-ing its latest flashy digital offerings in-store. Those are nice and often impressive, but getting the engines to run more efficiently is critical to Burberry being able to compete in the omni-channel world. It’s undoubtedly a work in progress, as Bailey readily admits, but it’s one that looks to be heading in the right direction.
Image credit - Burberry Disclosure - At time of writing, SAP is a premier partner of diginomica. Read more on: Retail e-commerce and the omni-channel 