

There are many kinds of CIOs in business today and a common way to describe them is based upon the technology adoption lifecycle but for this post I’ll stick to a cowboy analogy. There are four main types:

Mavericks – these are attracted to the shiny spurs. The early adopters, living by the moto:

“Don’t go where the path may lead, go instead where there is no path and leave a trail.”

Believers – These are the ones who maintain a belief in the way we’ve always done things. The laggards or late adopters, who understand how much we’ve invested in ‘getting it right’. Unfortunately, their convictions can leave them vulnerable, so

“If you’re riding a high horse there’s no way to get down gracefully.”
There are also those that are more driven by a social/community approach:

Wranglers – They work with their team, herding them toward commonly agreed goals. Not really leaders or followers but great organizers. They live by:

“If you’re ridin’ ahead of the herd, take a look back every now and then to make sure it’s still there with ya.”

Lawmen – these rule driven leaders focus on governance, defining policies and enforcing their adoption in the organization. They have to be careful though and be encouraging:

“When you give a personal lesson in meanness to a critter or to a person, don’t be surprised if they learn their lesson.”
IT leaders will take on many of these traits in their careers (sometimes all in a single day) but there are techniques that can help you understand more of what the business needs and where to shoot. Here are a few:
Understand the business strategy
What are the organizations hot buttons and why are they there? You’ll need to reach out to the business (if you don’t meet with people you can’t understand them). Once you’re in the room, you need to actually pay attention. It is amazing what people will tell you when you actually listen to what they mean, not just what they say.
“Remember that silence is sometimes the best answer.”
Look for conflict. Where there is conflict, there is an opportunity to innovate and add value.
Have a vision
Don’t just respond to the situations of the day. Set direction — yet be flexible. There are always situations that defy the rules.
“If you don’t know a where’s you’re a goin’, it’d be a good idea not to use your spurs.”
Look for anomalies, because unique is where the value is. Everything that is not unique, but normal — strive to automate. It takes out variability and allows the business to focus on maximizing value from unique situations.
Understand architecture
There are many dimensions to how a business works, just like there are many elements to a building’s architecture (structure, plumbing, electrical) that can be easily assumed or overlooked. It is not just the technical side of architecture, but the business structures they support that need to be understood. For example security, whether it is cloud, BYOD or analytics. The security implications and pressures can be dissimilar in various parts of the business, so an architectural approach needs to be both strong and flexible.
Closely related to the planning side of architecture is the portfolio of services and processes supporting the enterprise business needs. The existing environment constrains both the flexibility and spending to address the future. Make sure every system/service has an owner. Why be constrained by something that no one cares about any more. Systems build up overtime, like weeds. It’s good to thin them out on a regular basis.
“If it don’t seem like it’s worth the effort, it probably ain’t.”
Understand your options
CIO’s today have more options than they may realize. We live in a world of abundant IT capabilities and possibilities. There are new tools available like:

Mobility and IoT
Analytics
Collaboration and automation techniques

“Just because you’ve never done it before doesn’t mean that now is not the time.”
Have a plan based on the vision
“If you climb in the saddle, be ready for the ride.”
Once you have the plan, be sure to communicate it to the business and your teams. This will empower them to support the effort as well as reduce confusion and inertia. In order to be a leader, you must have followers and communications is key.
The CIO can help move the organization forward and increase value to whole new levels but only if they move away from the status quo.
“It won’t be easy. Any man can be thrown from an untamed horse, but it takes a real man to get back on and tame it.”
Featured image: Silhouette cowboy with horse in the sunset © vencav – Fotolia.com
Read more on: Collaboration sharing and digital productivity 