
Google signaled a renewed commitment to the enterprise market when it recruited former VMware CEO Diane Greene last November to head up its cloud business. Its $625 million deal to buy Apigee, announced yesterday, should dispel any lingering doubt about its determination to engage with enterprise customers. But whether Google has the mindset to deliver what they need is still to be proven.
This is Google’s largest acquisition since it paid $3.2 billion for connected digital thermostat maker Nest in early 2014. More tellingly, it is its largest B2B software acquisition since the 2007 purchase of email security provider Postini, also for $625 million.
Back then, Postini brought much-needed enterprise credibility to Google Apps. Here’s how Apigee’s platform can do the same for Google Cloud — provided Google can successfully engage with the hybrid nature of most enterprise IT environments.
Driving the digital economy
APIs are the connectors that drive the digital economy — they’re the mechanism through which organizations expose their resources as online services, which others can then plug into their own mobile and web applications. APIs are also part of the digital toolkit enterprises use internally to connect up systems, for example to connect back-end on-premise systems into mobile, web and cloud applications.
Google is no stranger to APIs — ever since the mid-noughties vogue for ‘mashups’, many of which seemed to invoke Google Maps as a resource, they have been a core part of its offerings. Indeed, no on-demand cloud player can progress far without a portfolio of APIs these days. APIs support the on-demand, automated connection that makes cloud provision so much more convenient and cost-effective than the complex negotiations and custom integrations of the old, pre-digital world.
But while Google can be considered one of the pioneers of web APIs, it lacks pedigree in providing the kind of API management capabilities that enterprises demand. It’s one thing to deliver APIs at scale, which is Google’s strength. It’s quite another to give people the tools to monitor consumption, track performance, ensure compliance with service level agreements and collaborate with downstream partners.
API ‘excellence’
That’s where Apigee comes in. Regarded as one of the leading providers of software for API management, it has the added endorsement of being SAP’s preferred API management platform. There’s been no mention of what will happen to that partnership once the acquisition closes, but plenty of praise for Apigee, which will add “excellence,” Greene wrote in a blog post yesterday:
The addition of Apigee’s API solutions to Google cloud will accelerate our customers’ move to supporting their businesses with high quality digital interactions. Apigee will make it much easier for the requisite APIs to be implemented and published with excellence.
In a brief interview yesterday, she told Recode that the deal would make it easier for enterprises to connect to Google or third-party resources automatically and without the need to write code:
You don’t have to wait on the phone. You just do it programmatically. It’s kind of an exploding area. As we provide the end-to-end solutions for what our customers want to do digitally, this is a big part of what they want to do in all kinds of verticals.
With app engines and containers, we’ve eliminated a lot of the code needed — sort of the back end of the back end. Now we can provide the front end of that back-end service.
In a separate interview with Forbes yesterday, she said enterprises are increasingly conscious of the need for API management:
Almost every customer that I talk to is talking about how they’re using APIs, and what a step function they are for their business …
It’s not so much that they’re being disrupted so much as it’s, ‘Whoa, there’s so much I can take advantage of here.’
Real-world example
A real-world example from Apigee’s customer portfolio is Pitney Bowes, which has used its tools to make a range of services available digitally, from shipping and mailing to location intelligence and customer engagement. The Apigee infrastructure makes it easy for developers to plug these services directly into their own apps to provide a seamless experience — which helps the 96-year-old postage metering company remain competitive as more and more of its customers move their businesses online.
Its Commerce Cloud initiative now exposes 200 APIs, and at identity management vendor Okta’s conference last month, Pitney Bowes’ technology chief was explaining how it uses Okta’s newly launched access management product to control access to the platform. Greene also made an appearance during the same keynote to endorse Google’s partnership with Okta. Now that partnership will have an even closer dimension, as Apigee is one of two API management vendors Okta has partnered with on its API access product.
Helping enterprises like Pitney Bowes digitize their businesses for more automated interactions appears to be the opportunity where Greene sees most potential, writing in her blog post yesterday:
APIs … are vital for how business gets done today in the fast-growing digital and mobile marketplace. They’re the hubs through which companies, partners and customers interact.
Digital and cloud together
But there’s also a significant market for API platforms within enterprises, not only as a simpler, quicker way to hook together existing IT with newer services, but also as a means of providing user-friendly tools that enable business people to connect to resources without having to involve IT. This is one of the trends highlighted earlier this week in a diginomica round-up of changes afoot in cloud platforms and infrastructure, which identified “the rising trend towards exposing micro-services APIs as a new approach that enables user-generated integration.”
This is an area where Apigee rivals including MuleSoft and Tibco’s Mashery Enterprise product may have more traction, but Apigee CEO Chet Kapoor seemed yesterday to be mindful of business opportunities in hybrid enterprise environments. In a company blog post, he wrote that the acquisition will help enterprises bring their digital and cloud strategies together:
[O]ften [companies] pursue digital and cloud independently … Smart companies realize that these are two sides of the same coin; that digital strategy must converge with cloud strategy.
Another emerging trend among cloud platforms such as Google and its rivals AWS and Microsoft Azure is the rise of serverless apps, in which developers build apps by assembling micro-services. Google’s offering here has lacked the more powerful API gateway capabilities that AWS and Azure have made available. Apigee will help the vendor leapfrog that disparity. Green’s blog post hints at Apigee’s role here:
Google cloud customers are already benefitting from no sys-ops dev environments, including Google App Engine and Google Container Engine. Now, with Apigee’s API management platform, they’ll be able to front these secure and scalable services with a simple way to provide the exported APIs.
The picture that emerges is one of Apigee providing the API management not only to digitize services that an enterprise publishes externally but also to manage how the enterprise harnesses cloud services within its own IT infrastructure.
My take
Once the acquisition closes, Google will have a much stronger enterprise offering thanks to Apigee’s platform. Perhaps this is not the end of the story. Having made one acquisition there may be others waiting in the wings to further bulk out Google’s capabilities, perhaps in identity management, application performance management or security.
But whatever its product strategy turns out to be, the vendor can still mess this up by how it handles its enterprise customers. Its track record in supporting on-premise enterprise products is sparse and undistinguished. As a cloud service provider, in the past it has often shown a haughty disregard for issues that enterprises consider important, including control, visibility, support and service level guarantees.
Many Apigee customers will be feeling wary today of Google’s intentions and the implications for ongoing support of their implementations. It’s not going to be enough for Google to just put Apigee’s technology into its own cloud and then sell Google cloud services into the installed base. Google will also have to show that it cares about the IT that its customers still wish to retain on their own infrastructure and elsewhere.
Google’s willingness to make such a high-profile acquisition has shown the strength of its intent to make inroads into enterprise. But how it follows through will be closely scrutinized.
Bonus content: In addition to several interviews with CEO Chet Kapoor, our previous Apigee coverage includes customer use cases at educational publisher Pearson, broadcaster the BBC and hotel group GLH, UK supermarket Morrisons, online accommodation booking site LateRooms, and finally Google Maps rival Mapquest, who surely must be the Apigee customer least pleased by this week’s news. Elsewhere, go back in time to hear a podcast interview I recorded with Kapoor in 2008, when the company was known as Sonoa Systems but the issues customers faced seem eerily familiar.
Image credit - Feature image - decision intersection business people © Rawpixel.com - Fotolia.comRead more on: Governing identity privacy and securityInfrastructureIT service managementMobile 