
Flash. Uh huh. Etc Etc.
As the business use of public cloud proliferates, many organizations find themselves relying on shared services for an increasing number of critical functions.
Given the size, sophistication and excellent track record of the dominant players like AWS, Azure and Salesforce, it’s easy to be seduced into thinking that they are simultaneously bulletproof and always acting in your best interest.
While that’s often (usually?) the case, there are likely to be details about how a provider operates, treats your data, handles security attacks or responds to unplanned catastrophes that don’t match your needs or expectations.
That’s why the process of buying a cloud service that will be used for critical business processes or revenue production should be no different than acquiring IT equipment or software: it requires due diligence.
Understanding the requisite details of a cloud service requires getting answers to important questions, and that means knowing the right ones to ask.
In one of the best sessions at the recent FOCUS 16 security conference, Jamie Tischart, CTO for Cloud/SaaS at McAfee (nee Intel Security) and Andy Woods, CISO of InfoReliance (an IT consultancy)  shared insights about the information every enterprise cloud buyer should have before making a significant commitment to a service.
Not all topics and questions will be relevant to every situation, however in toto they provide an excellent guide to the items IT and business leaders should consider beyond cloud features, specs and prices.
Business and legal terms
Most of us blindly click the check box to accept the onerous terms and conditions that accompany every new online service or app we want to try since few people have the time and expertise to wade through pages of legalese, however these documents couch details that take on added importance when you’re using the service for critical business functions.
The AWS Customer Agreements runs to nearly 7,000 words while its Service Terms weighs in at over 30,000 words and you can bet that the combined 100+ pages are filled with juicy nuggets about how AWS handles data, security, privacy, outages, charge credits, liability claims and intellectual property.
Each service will have similarly lengthy T’s and C’s and buyers, or better still, their legal counsel should review them to understand the specifics and avoid making assumptions.
Of particular concern in an era of divergent data protection laws and rules for criminal and civil investigation is how the provider handles legal requests for data review.
You don’t want to be the company that learns that your provider turns over data to the authorities from an indictment.
However, service agreements are only as reliable as the company behind them, so you should understand what independent certifications and third-party audits the vendor puts in place to verify compliance with both industry and internal standards.
While the legal documents will address many questions, they won’t cover everything important, so you should press cloud providers to fill in details in the following areas.
Security, data protection and privacy
Surveys continue to show that security remains a significant concern for enterprise cloud users.
Although AWS, Google and Microsoft do a better job than most enterprise IT organizations at the basics of security, since they must balance the needs of thousands of customers, they may not handle incidents and data the way you would like or expect.
Before committing to a cloud service, find out who has access to your data, both to the physical servers and drives and virtual storage instances and specifically ask whether the vendor outsources any data storage. If so, you need to press for details about who, where, how and the security measures used to protect data from third parties.
Cloud services collect a lot of operational and customer data that could be valuable in the wrong hands, so customers should ask about the types of data gathered and what the provider does to keep it private.
How and where does it use encryption? Where is the data stored and how long is it retained? What is customer data used for and is it shared with internal groups or outside business partners? If so, is it anonymized and encrypted?
Answers to these questions will expose providers playing fast and loose with potentially sensitive information.
Operational details
Most cloud services are proud of their scalability and resilience since they provide a competitive advantage.
Thus, many of them openly share the basics of their infrastructure architecture; however enterprise users should ask for more detail than the marketing spin presented on their websites.
Providers won’t share proprietary details, but you should get a better idea of how likely they are to meet reliability and performance claims.
Don’t expect to learn how Microsoft builds its SQL Server clusters, however make sure they specify the vintage of database software used, replication policies (both intra- and inter-data center), backup frequency, RTO and RPO (recovery time and recovery point objectives), maximum data loss in the event of corruption and the service’s availability commitment (is it four, five, six or more 9’s).
Cloud customers also need to understand the procedures used to protect data from accidental loss and leakage.
Ask about the provider’s backup and data retention policies and elements of the underlying storage architecture designed to protect data from exposure to other customers in their shared infrastructure.
Again, cloud providers will understandably be vague on design specifics — Amazon won’t tell you the type of servers, storage and network segmentation it uses to deliver S3 — but you should expect enough information to see that they have thought about the problem and built sufficient redundancy and isolation into their products.
Organizations storing valuable business data in the cloud also need to understand the process and cost for getting it back out.
Beware that most services are like those moving sidewalks in Las Vegas that only lead into the casino, they make it cheap and easy to get data into the cloud, but expensive and time-consuming to get it back out. Understand the ramifications before using a cloud service for an enterprise data lake.
My take
Cloud services initially won enterprise customers due to their convenience and usage-based cost model that allowed individual developers and workgroups to quickly create infrastructure for a new project.
Ad hoc installations were small and low-risk so few users paid attention to the operational and security details of running on a public, shared service. As cloud services displace core IT infrastructure and applications, their effect on business continuity and data privacy goes up dramatically. Assessing the risks requires the same sort of careful evaluation that IT has traditionally applied to internal systems.
Being a wise cloud consumer requires developing a sophisticated understanding of the vendor’s operational and security policies and controls that come from studying the available documentation and service agreements and asking the right questions when these fail to provide enough detail.
The task of cloud due diligence covers so many disciplines, unearthing and understanding the relevant details will require organizations to field a team of specialists from IT, legal, finance and application development. In that sense, this is necessarily a fly by assessment but one that should get you started considering the priorities, risks etc.
While the process takes the spontaneity out of cloud consumption, it’s upfront overhead that can save heartache in the form of lost data, revenue and reputation later on. There is a reason that SLAs have grown up to be an integral part of the IT buying process. Going cloud amplifies that requirement.
Image credit - Featured image © gustavofrazao - Fotolia.comRead more on: Cloud platforms - infrastructure and architecture 