
Stuck in the bottleneck
Here’s some food for thought for job seekers, or for recent graduates looking to get a foot on the first rung of the career ladder – if you’ve got data analytics skills, you may be in line for a 36% higher salary offer than a candidate who doesn’t have those skills.
At least, that’s the stand-out message from the Business Grammar Report, a survey of over 500 European business leaders, commissioned by self-service analytics company Alteryx and published last week.
It finds that some business leaders now place more importance on data skills than they do on industry experience, management experience or speaking a second language. Commenting on the poll, Alteryx EMEA VP Stuart Wilson said:
The change in attitude that’s taking place in boardrooms today shows the value of being data-savvy and how important it is that effective analytics are made available to business users. It makes sense to equip every business analyst with self-service tools that allow them to ask questions of their data.
This is interesting, because it’s not an entirely new message. I, for one, remember being lectured about “data democratization” and “self-service BI” by the likes of Cognos and BusinessObjects as far back as 15 years ago.
But I wouldn’t dispute for a minute that being able to interpret data and extract business insight from it has become a far more important business skill to employees, in all kinds of roles, over that intervening decade and a half.
Nor would I argue for a second with Alteryx’s contention that getting data into the right hands remains a sticking point for many businesses. It’s no secret that decisions often get delayed, especially those that rely on data drawn from multiple sources, because of the problems associated with the accuracy of linked spreadsheets or with simply finding the skills get all that data into the same place for analysis.
This is Alteryx’s sweet spot –  providing a tool that bridges the Extract, Transform, Load (ETL)  gap that many organisations face, and adding cleansing and blending functions to the mix. Recent conversations I’ve had with three Alteryx customers, meanwhile, confirm that the technology is doing a good job for them. Judge for yourself.
Beneficial analytics
The first of these is BBC Worldwide, the Corporation’s commercial arm and wholly owned subsidiary, which generates revenues (£1,029.4m in 2015/16) through the sale of broadcast content and formats for audiences outside of the UK.
When that content is delivered via digital formats, there’s accompanying advertising revenue to measure and manage, too. In order to help with that, BBC Worldwide has been using Alteryx now for around two and a half years, says Terry Robinson, from BBC Worldwide’s advertising sales department:
In digital advertising, there’s been quite a significant sea-change in recent years, with the proliferation of devices and screens as well as the emergence of programmatic advertising for automatic buying. So three years ago, we were dealing with 8 million rows of data each month. Now we generate 450 million rows a day.
Senior management, however, expect to see a consolidated view of difference sources of revenue, across different platforms. That makes Excel totally unfit for purpose, says Robinson: too manually intensive and too time consuming. Much of the reporting BBC Worldwide previously did with those tools was backwards looking, he adds, focusing on historic data. Today, BBC Worldwide uses Alteryx for blending, Tableau for visualisation and Google cloud services for data storage, which means, says Robinson:
Now, we can do more predictive and prescriptive analytics, rather than being hindsight driven. We’re just able to respond to our findings far, far quicker.
At BBC Worldwide, about 93% of analysts time was previously spent on ETL tasks, with only 7% on analysing and reporting it. There’s still work to do here, says Robinson, but the majority of time is at least now spent on the analytics/reporting side of the equation.
It’s a similar story at media and advertising company The Specialist Works, confirms Ed Wells, associate director of strategic planning at the firm. The company used to face similar problems when it came to analysing clients’ advertising spend across a wide range of media channels:
The process used to take hours and hours in Excel – and this was a task we had to repeat each and every week. We basically employ an in-house analyst and this was taking up pretty much 99 percent of their time. Using Alteryx, the team can blend data in seconds, cutting human output [of data] down to just 5 percent and freeing up our analyst to spend her time on creating new views.
The final Alteryx customer I spoke to is UK-based customer ratings and reviews specialist ReeVoo. There, product manager Jayson Robinson told me that the company relies on accurate and fast reporting to attract, retain and up-sell services to client companies that include Ford, EE, British Gas and Nintendo.
For us, it’s about creating transparency not just between brands and consumers, but also between Reevoo and its clients. What Alteryx has given us is a way to do that faster and better, by presenting web dashboards to our clients that reveal detailed data around the user reviews that their customers submit.
So, in all three cases, these organisations are overcoming the ETL bottleneck, to make better decisions, faster. Just as importantly, they’re putting data in the hands of business-savvy decision-makers, reducing their reliance on data specialists to furnish them with the information they need. And the more they’re able to do that, with a wider range of data, the more bosses will need those decision-makers to understand exactly what data is telling them.
Image credit - Freeimages.com Read more on: Analytics planning and data analysis 