
Leslie Stretch
Callidus turned in a loss of $4.5 million for its first quarter this week, on revenue of $48.4 million, but CEO Leslie Stretch points to a 38% year-on-year rise in SaaS revenue to $34.5 million as indicative that the firm is on track in shifting its customer base to the cloud. 
The firm added 100 new customers during the first quarter, with Stretch citing: 

AgeWell, a New York-based Medicare health plan provider; ChannelAdvisor, a cloud-based e-commerce software provider; Ooredoo Qatar, an international telecommunications company; Ultimate Software; Vodafone Ireland; PeopleFluent; Lumeris Healthcare Outcomes, a St. Louis-based health management solutions provider; and McKesson.

But there are still 90 customers running on-premise implementations of Callidus software. There is cloud traction however, says Stretch:


We had three conversions to cloud in the quarter, demonstrating continued momentum in the move to SaaS of our loyal on-premises customers. The case for cloud is now overwhelming and is rooted in a broader and deeper user experience, richer software, and very compelling economics for our customers. I expect to see continued steady progress in the coming quarters.

He adds that the firm is actively end-of-lifing on-premise deals: 

We expect to see continued conversion activity for our on-premise customers who are being given notice of the end-of-life of the on-premise implementations. At the same time, this means our license forecast for the future is now zero.

On-premise licence revenue for Q1 was only $200,000, down from $600,000 for the same quarter last year. Stretch explains: 

In the middle of Q1, we felt we had to finally devote all of our energy to the cloud. Every fiber, really. We didn’t want to be distracted with continuing to maintain the on-premises environment. Now, we are going to maintain those customers through to June 2017. But we have been maintaining them for the last eight years in the cloud, or seven years in the cloud. So it’s not as abrupt as it sounds. But we’re not taking any new licenses. We’re just not.

Conversion case
The case for conversion is compelling, insists Stretch: 

So far, we’ve been pretty good at making the conversion and not having them convert to somebody else. The case in each different industry where there are on-premise customers is very strong. You know, they’re surrounded by cloud-to-cloud decisions. Nobody’s writing new business applications for on-premises deployment. So the case is very strong.

He adds that the firm saw “more than a dozen” conversions the cloud last year, but expects that to accelerate: 

I’m sure there’ll be people who for whatever reason will do their own thing. We won’t get every one of them. But I think we’re going to have a very good run here and the conversion pipeline is the strongest that it’s ever been. But never take it for granted…It’s actually a fairly gentle step now because the latest release that they’re on is closer. And there’s more automation. It’s much less of an implementation burden for those customers to move to the cloud.

As the customer base becomes cloud-centric, new market opportunities open up, says Stretch:

With the sun setting on the on-premise line, it is more than ever about the cloud. We are seeing the effects and opportunities of disruptive technology all around us and I believe we are uniquely positioned to exploit the big themes of cloud computing, Internet of Things (IoT), machine learning, and platform as a service.

There will be more about the IoT play next week at the firm’s C3 annual conference in Vegas, but Stretch hints: 

The quotation in the ordering solution, the CPQ solution is already enabled through APIs to connect with self-ordering autonomous devices. We’ve already got customers, one customer I think I mentioned before, planning to connect up to 100,000 devices to the CPQ platform this year. That’s getting at a differentiation around CPQ. It’s more than configure price and quote now. It’s really machine ordering and connected machines. So it’s a really exciting area. 

He adds: 

We will announce an important new product and market initiative which has the same potential as our agent management suite Producer Pro. We will be partnering with a major customer in this venture and it will open up a multi-billion dollar addressable market for us.

As well as the announcements at C3 next week, expect to see more acquisitions  from Callidus to bolster its cloud offering. Stretch says:


There’s some great assets to buy. There’s SaaS assets now. We’re going to be a buyer…Oracle just bought how many SaaS companies? Vista just bought how many SaaS companies? Why should we be left out in our own small way? We’d like to continue the tuck-ins. We’ve got plenty to do with the cash. We’re a growing SaaS business.

My take
Steady progress, with SaaS revenues set to rise as the end-of-life program accelerates. But those 90 customers still on-premise still have more than a year to stick with what they have. How successful Callidus is in convincing them to shift over to the cloud will be indicative of the strength of the firm’s messaging and customer management.
Image credit - Change, Same Green Road Sign Over Clouds © Andy Dean - Fotolia.com/Leslie Stretch - YouTubeRead more on: Cloud ERP financials and supply chainInternet of Things 