
Greg Foran
There’s some interesting new research doing the rounds from brand advisory firm Millward Brown Digital that reports that the success of Amazon’s $99 a year Prime service is hitting traditional retailers such as Target and Walmart hard.
Basically the research suggests that Amazon Prime’s 40 million subscribers are less likely to visit other retail sites when making online purchases, whereas online consumers without Prime membership are 8 times more likely to shop among different retailers.
And just to complete the misery, around 63% of Prime members carry out a transaction when they go onto Amazon, whereas for the likes of Walmart that figure is as low as 5%.
It’s just another warning shot across the bows of the traditional retailers. Earlier this year we looked at what Target plans to do to restore its brand value with the online shopping generation.
As for Walmart, well, the challenges are pretty much the same, as CEO Greg Foran is all too aware. He’s been 8 months in the Walmart hot seat and in that time he’s found that there are some significant issues that need to be addressed, not least around customer choice and experience:
We know that we’ve lost some of our muscle in building a customer relevant assortment and we’ve been slow in using data to help achieve this. I am pleased to tell you that this project is now well underway and we’ll roll it out sensibly and carefully over the next 18 months to 24 months.
We’re establishing customer decision trees based on data about how our customers shop; building substitutability in loyalty tools to assist with choice; and driving disciplines around the design and building of modules and stores.
Walmart has, says Foran, advantages in the offline world that should be complemented by increased digital offerings:
With over 4,500 stores, we are within 10 miles of nearly 90% of all Americans. As we continue to expand, that equation becomes even more fascinating. That is a competitive advantage. But both grocery home shopping and pick up are areas where we can be better from many aspects.
Initiatives
Curiously, despite the success of loyal schemes at the likes of Amazon and CostCo, such an initiative still doesn’t seem to on Walmart’s radar. Foran says:
I absolutely believe because I have seen it work that focus your attention on just getting the right price in front of the customer and offering that in a consistent manner generally is the program that works the best over a long period of time. So that’s what we’re focusing our attention on at the moment.
But Foran does point to the store’s Savings Catcher price comparison service as a digital asset:
It’s a pretty good program. The way I look at it is, it’s a bit like an insurance policy, I would expect that our pricing on shelf is right in the majority of cases. In the odd case that it isn’t and you go through to check out and you decide that you want to scan that receipt, I am hoping that you get a response that comes back that says we save you a dime or we didn’t save you anything at all.
Savings?
When it comes to pricing, Walmart has made concessions to the online threat posed by others by allowing stores to match prices. Foran explains:
We made decisions at the end of last year to actually allow our stores to match prices if they need to and where customers can find products online.
Like anything you have to develop the muscle to do that because there are always some people out there who can come out with an item that’s on a marketplace at ten cents, but they cost you $20 to have that product delivered.
As I get around the country I can tell you that we’re doing a pretty good job of making sure that what we do online, not only in walmart.com but across the broader set, and what we do in-store is much more appropriate. I’m not saying that it’s 100% right but we are doing it and that’s working.
How we think about that pricing and how we’re working through it, that still work in progress with us, we’re making a lot of progress around it. [We] have tools that strike particular sites, that run particular algorithms and we’re looking at how we can take those learning and put those into the life of a buyer in a physical store.
Walmart is also rethinking the buy side from the firm’s perspective:
We’re looking at how we appropriately combine the buying between what we do in a physical store and what we do online. So take toys for example, we sell a heck of a lot of toys in our physical stores and we’ve run a pretty good business here and is going well. I can also tell you that we run a pretty good toy business online. In a lot of cases we’ve got the same suppliers, in a lot of cases it’s the same inventory and so [we’re] learning how we can now take that physical team and join that with the digital team. [That] is something that we’re looking at. working out how we do it.
Foran concludes:
Retailing is a simple business. We buy some merchandise and we sell. Our ambition is clear, we will grow sales; we will improve the core operations by running great stores; we will leverage by integrating digital and physical in ways only Walmart can; and we will continue to invest in our associates.
We’ve got a lot of work to do, but I am very confident about our future. With our footprint of over 4,500 stores, we are uniquely positioned in the retail landscape to win the features customer shop in our stores online or on mobile phones. With these strengths combined with our investment and associates, we will reset the legacy we inherited from Sam Walton, leading the next revolution in retail to save our customers money, so they can live better anytime, anywhere.
My take
Walmart is a perfect example of a firm that flourished in the physical world, but sees its biggest asset – those 4,500 stores – now becoming its biggest problem as it struggles to contain costs, improve the customer experience and integrate the offline with the online needs of the customers now flocking to Amazon Prime.
Foran clearly recognizes the issues and what’s at stake. That said, it’s alarming in 2015 to hear how often Walmart is still “learning” about digital. With the likes of Amazon Prime scoring conversion rates in excess of 60%, this is not the time to be still learning.

Read more on: CRM and customer experienceDigital and content marketinge-commerceRetail e-commerce and the omni-channel 