
Adam Brotman
We’ve written quite a bit over the years about Starbucks heavy investment in digital technologies to extend its brand and enhance its customer experience.
These are moves that are essential to the long term future of the coffee giant, as Beto Guajardo, the firm’s SVP of Global Strategy reminded shareholders this week at the company’s AGM, when he warned:
There is a seismic shift happening with consumer behavior and that shift is primarily due to our growing dependence on e-commerce and mobile commerce platforms.
It’s just a reality people are taking fewer trips to the mall.
But Starbucks has never been a brand, that’s about retail traffic interception. Instead, we are a brand destination, a place that people seek out and we are creating new ways for people to seek out brand Starbucks.
On the front line of that mission is Chief Digital Officer Adam Brotman, who lists the firm’s digital assets as its store technology, its card platform, its loyalty program and most importantly, the way they integrate as a digital whole:
What’s important to note is that they are all linked together. They are integrated with one another. Our card platform works perfectly with our store technology. Our loyalty program is literally built on the back of our card program. And all of those are seamlessly woven into our mobile app, which makes our mobile app an incredibly powerful and useful ecosystem actually that our customers are using every single day.
This is a major differentiator, according to Sharon Rothstein, Starbucks Global Chief Marketing Officer:
Many members download our app, link their My Starbucks Reward card and start using their phone as payment in our store. Once you have that app, you are never going to open up your wallet in Starbucks again – no more credit cards, no more cash.
With all the growing benefits and values of our loyalty program, MSR membership has more than doubled in the past 3 years. Today, we have more than 10 million actively engaged members in the US alone. And MSR members spend approximately 3 times as much as non-MSR members. That’s really the power of this loyalty program.
Rothstein highlights the rise in mobile spend:
It’s grown 50% over the last year to $1.5 billion in 2014. As we look ahead, building MSR, both membership and usage, is a critical driver for our growth in 2015 and beyond. We have enormous untapped potential to realize this opportunity when you think that there are 70 million unique customers coming in our stores every quarter.
What’s probably even more exciting is frankly we are just getting started, adding more benefits to our loyalty program in each step, including the very important build-out of the mobile commerce platform
We are exploring all ways to expand our communication to customers, moving beyond traditional e-mail to text messaging and in-app notifications. The result of all these improvements is what we believe is the most compelling mobile-enabled customer loyalty program in the consumer marketplace.
Mobile mugs
All of this empowers Brotman to boast:
We believe we built the most power and robust mobile ecosystem with any retailer in the world.
In the US alone we are now up to over 14 million active mobile users. Every week we process over 8 million mobile payment transactions. And for all transactions in our stores, over 18% are via mobile payment. Over half of our card payments are now through the app.
This is only the beginning, he adds:
What’s so exciting, and frankly useful, about a mobile ecosystem like this is that we can now add more features to it without asking our customers to have to download a new app, create a new account or even use a different card.
Mobile Starbucks
Brotman cites as a case in point the recently-launched Mobile Order and Pay feature which allows customers to use the mobile app to send their Starbucks order to the store ahead of time, so that it’s waiting to be picked up. This was launched in Portland in December. Brotman says:
In Portland, it’s been going really well. Our partners are loving it. Our customers are loving it. My favorite is right after we launched in Portland, on Facebook a customer posted, running late for class, ordered and paid from 3 blocks away on the Starbucks mobile app, walked into the store and [the coffee] was waiting on the bar, got to class right on time.
We have reached the height of civilization.
That depends on your definition of civilisation perhaps, but with Portland deemed a success, a wider rollout will take place this year:
We are going to roll out Mobile Order and Pay to all of our company-owned stores. We are going to launch Mobile Order and Pay in Canada. We are going to pilot Mobile Order and Pay in the UK. And we are going to bring Mobile Order and Pay to our Android app.
Brotman pitches Mobile Order and Pay as beneficial to the bottom line and to the customer experience:
We literally put Mobile Order and Pay features right into the palm of our hands of our customers in the mobile app. So, now our store partners can spend more time engaging with customers and making drinks and beverages and spending less time just ringing up and taking orders. That’s going to increase throughput and capacity in our stores, is going to reduce the lines in our stores, which is going to be good for everybody, and it’s going to be good for business.
We are giving our customers back valuable time. The age old question is ‘Alright do I have time to go to Starbucks, do I not have time to go to Starbucks?’. Now, they are going to say ‘With Mobile Order and Pay, I am confident I have time to go to Starbucks, I know exactly which one I want to go to. I am going to walk in, connect with the barista and walk out’. That’s going to create more occasions to come to Starbucks and create incremental transactions, which is great for our business.
And in case being able to order ahead and collect still isn’t convenient enough, Brotman and his team are now exploring new methods of delivery to make it easier to get your caffeine fix without breaking sweat. Two developments will be seen later this year on that front:
Later this year we are going to be piloting delivery in collaboration with a leading on-demand delivery provider, Postmates. We are going to do it in Seattle. We believe our strategic collaboration with Postmates is going to be a great way to leverage the mobile ecosystem
The second delivery format is what we call green apron delivery. This is where our actual green apron partners, employees, are going to bring the coffee and the beverages to you. This is going to be great in dense urban environments like office buildings.
We believe we have cracked the code on another way to bring Starbucks to our customers in this way. That’s having our brewers on hand in the building to provide an exclusive service for customers within that building. This will be just great for especially in places like New York City.
The first green apron pilot will indeed take place in New York and where better than in the Empire State building. Beyond that, who knows? But the digital direction is set. Brotman concludes:
We are passionate and excited about everything that we are doing to build a truly innovative platform using digital for innovation and we are doing it unlike any other retailer in the world.
My take
I’m not convinced that for many of us the question of whether we’ve got time to get to Starbucks is an “age-old” one. But that aside, I continue to be impressed by the digital thinking going on inside the coffee behemoth.
RELATED STORIES

Starbucks brews the right blend of mobile payment and customer loyalty
Starbucks taps tech sector exec as COO
Full fat digital to go for Starbucks as it eyes up platform provider ambitions


Read more on: Cloud platforms - infrastructure and architectureCRM and customer experiencee-commerceMobileSocial 