
IDC – big numbers
Recent numbers to come out of market researchers IDC in its Quarterly Cloud IT Infrastructure Tracker show that cloud infrastructure sales rose 14.4% in the fourth quarter of 2014, to some $8 billion.
This figure covers sales of hardware such as servers, disk storage, and Ethernet switches and, according to IDC, now accounts for some 30% of all IT infrastructure spending, a rise of 3% over the previous year.
Private cloud sales rose 18.3% to $5 billion, while public cloud sales rose 12.3% to just shy of $3 billion.
So, cloud infrastructure sales are doing quite well it would appear. But that then has to be set against other surveys looking at the penetration of cloud utilisation, which collectively suggest that market penetration of cloud as a service delivery model may not as high as these figures would seem to imply.
All of this raises a simple discussion point: is it time for some new, different numbers with which to measure cloud and its impact? Indeed, is it time to stop thinking about measuring the market penetration of cloud by the number of `things’ deemed necessary to make it happen?
Questioning value?
This is not to knock IDC or its stalwart work in collecting and collating the numbers which go into the Worldwide Quarterly Cloud IT Infrastructure Tracker figures. But it is to question the continued value of its purpose.
For example, its results show that while HP is the top biggest single brand manufacturer of cloud infrastructure components with a 16.2% share, by far the biggest slice of the business, close on 53%, was pretty evenly split between `Others’ and `Original Design Manufacturers’ (ODMs – the big public cloud vendors such as Amazon and Google that now produce their own servers to their own designs).
This demonstrates two significant points about the on-going relevance of the figures on hardware sales into a cloud marketplace. One is that, in a cloud services marketplace, the brand value of the hardware is diminished, for servers and network switches are just enablers of service, but not the service itself. And when the branded servers themselves are commodity items all made by a few large, specialist manufacturing businesses, the value of the branding trends towards `who cares?’.
The second is that, where the demand is high enough, the economics make it sensible for the major players to make their own devices. This also means their hardware becomes part of their `secret sauces’, at least tailorable to meet specific performance or functional requirements of their services, potentially giving them attractive service provision advantages.
As a guide to this change it is said that Amazon’s AWS now adds, every day, the same level of resources as it added in the whole of 2004. That trend will only grow.
And this is the important difference that the cloud brings to any examination of the IT marketplace. The hardware vendors are now just part of the facilitation process for something else – for the sake of argument, let’s call it Customers’ Customer Expectation Fulfilment (CCFE). Though the boxes are important in a secondary way, the reason – and the real money – is now elsewhere.
CCFE used to be something of a hazy concept that had some bearing on the hardware and software that company IT departments used to purchase. As Pentaho CEO, Quentin Gallivan, said to me recently:
The CEO of a business would say to the IT department, `I think we need big data’. So IT would go off and buy Hadoop, and then try and work out what to do with it.
What drove that notion was the knowledge, or quite possibly fear, that company data was being insufficiently exploited, coupled with the expectation that `buying something’ would resolve the problem.
The cloud has changed this. IT vendors’ customers are being driven by their own customers to deliver more functionality directly related to those customers’ business or end-user-consumer requirements. Put simply, they want service providers to decerebralise things as much as possible.
Businesses want it to be a no-brainer that their accounts are up to date, they don’t want to argue the toss about purchase ledgers; consumers want the product they ordered NOW, or at least on the delivery date agreed online. The IT vendors’ roll is to be the enabler of their customers maintaining and growing their relationship with their customers.
What those customers want is a service, and their expectation now is becoming one that says ‘it will be fulfilled, or I go somewhere else’.
Utility thinking
Since the early days of Service-Oriented Architectures and the cloud, the notion of information management as a utility has been a common metaphor. That has often been put down by IT vendors as a dreadful over-simplification of the issues, but in practice it is now the exact description of what IT vendors play a part in.
People turn on light switches to obtain better vision of their whereabouts, not to ponder the material specification of the windings on the armature of a generator in a power station. It is now the same for information management: users want the results they expect to see, not the wonders of the technology undertaking the process.
Against these tectonic shifts in the underlying value of IT for its own sake, the revenue numbers of the vendors of cloud-related hardware take on a fast-diminishing value. They may still be important to those desperate to play the US stock markets, but even here it becomes questionable.
Does cloud tip the scales?
As more IT customers move to the consumption of services rather than running IT installations, more and more will be resourced by service providers more than capable of building their own resources – even if that is dedicated bare metal. Here, the ‘hardware revenue’ becomes just a component cost of providing the service.
For example, the IDC figures show that HP still holds sway in the branded section of the table, with 16.2% share of the market, down from 19.8% last year. IBM was in second place last year, with 10.6% share, but has dropped to fifth. This is hardly surprising as it sold its commodity server business to Lenovo during the year.
Yet earlier this year IBM reported cloud service revenue rose some 60% to $7 billion with `–as-a-Service’ revenues accounting for half. The acquisition of fast-growing infrastructure service provider, SoftLayer, played a prominent part in this growth.
HP on the other hand, showed a dip in services revenues of 11%. Only the enterprise division, selling servers and related hardware, held its own – though this was only by flat-lining.
What is most noticeable here is that services, from the provision of cloud infrastructures and platforms through to complete, fully managed and resourced business services, is where the big revenue of the future has to come for such a company.
And that itself highlights another issue, for it becomes difficult to break out sub-categories of service revenue. Even the smallest customer’s requirements will vary by the different nature of different tasks between being a consumer of just infrastructure services and a full-on, ‘please, you manage it all….please’ type of customer.
My take
There is now a need for new way of measuring the successes or otherwise of the cloud service provision industry, one that actually measures something important that is meaningful to customers and a worthy aspiration for the vendors.
Personally, the idea of a `Service Fulfilment Value Rating’ appeals. Perhaps the statisticians at IDC can apply their brains to that idea.

Read more on: Cloud platforms - infrastructure and architectureInfrastructure 