
Pricing pressure, difficulties cracking the video advertising market and a slowdown in user adoption numbers – Twitter CEO Jack Dorsey doesn’t have far to look for his problems this week.
Twitter reported revenues yesterday of $602 million, up 20% year-on-year, but falling short of the $607 million expected by Wall Street. Net losses were reduced year-on-year from $136 million to $107 million.
But it’s the slowing growth rate in user take-up that spooks Wall Street the most – Twitter only added 3 million new users in the past 3 months.
The firm also admits to losing share in social marketing budgets, while struggling to get marketers to understand the potenial for video ads on mobile platforms. Dorsey argues:
Continued growth also involves educating people about why to use Twitter, for the fastest way to see and share what’s happening and comment on it. That drives everything on our service, especially news and social commentary.
Seeing and sharing what’s happening also includes live video. We have some exciting momentum here with Periscope as well as with live-streaming video on Twitter. People can now watch an event like the Republican or Democratic National Conventions directly on Twitter and talk about it in the same experience.
We’re partnering with the providers of the world’s most popular live content to bring more and more of those events on to Twitter together with the conversation.
Making video ads work is becoming something of a ‘bet-the-farm’ element of Twitter, to the extent that Chief Operating Officer Adam Bain argues that Twitter should now be thought of as a video-centric platform:
Video is now the number-one ad format in terms of revenue on Twitter…There is a whole new set of video budgets out there today. These are these online video budgets. It’s about a $10 billion marketplace in the US These are video budgets that today we basically don’t qualify for, since the spend is going in other areas. There’s a set of products and features that we’re in development on to land those budgets. We have some good signs of early success around video, and especially around these online video budgets in terms of incrementality.
Twitter grabbed attention recently by beating off Amazon, Yahoo! and Facebook to win the rights to broadcast Thursday night NFL games online across the world for free. This is the sort of deal that will attract eyeballs, says Bain, as well as (he hopes) marketing budgets:
We’re seeing really strong demand for the NFL packages. We’ve already sold through a meaningful percent of the inventory that we control, and a good number of those advertisers, these premium advertisers, have signed up, people like Anheuser-Busch, Verizon, Sony and Nestlé. What’s most interesting to me about those deals are that the advertisers are funding the budgets from the online video part of their [budgets], so something that we hadn’t gotten access to before which we’re now getting some exposure to.
Just today, the firm announced a similar deal in the UK  with the English Premier League to show live highlights of goals during games. What is important with such tie-ups, adds Bain, is that Twitter pursues a live-streaming premium content strategy which leverages something that’s very familiar for users:
It’s very simple to tell people why to use Twitter now. Watch the Democratic National Convention. That’s something they understand. That’s something they’re familiar with. And when they get to Twitter, it’s all there for them – the best tweets that go with the live video. They don’t have to understand follows, they don’t have to understand what accounts to look for, they don’t have to understand hashtags or at signs. So, it’s one complete solution. And what we’re really focused on today is the quality of video and the quality of that timeline.
It’s a premium environment. It’s programming that they know and in many cases love. Things like National Football League, college sports, baseball, et cetera. It’s content that they are very familiar with in terms of the programming schedule and the like. The difference is now all of a sudden it’s available on Twitter.
We’ve only brought the NFL package so far out to the marketplace. It moved very quickly in a matter of weeks in terms of our ability to take in that demand that we saw. We have not brought out the next set of content, but we’ve already seen a tremendous amount of strong interest from advertisers on content outside of the NFL.
Size matters
Of course, to make this work means pulling in similar unique content deals, which in turn means winning on board partners to work with. Dorsey says that in this respect, size very much matters:
We have a very large global audience. We have obviously over 300 million logged-in users. We just reported 313 million. We have more than 500 million plus logged-out users, and then we have a very large syndicated audience. So, when we sit down with media partners and brands and content owners, we’re able to articulate to them the scale of that audience.
The reason why all three audiences matter is because the live premium streaming content product is the same in all three use cases. The video player that sits in the logged-in experience from the app is the same exact experience you’ll get in logged out without having to log-in and under syndicated partners, properties as well as connected TV partners.
Because of that, we can actually sell in an audience that’s quite large relative to other offerings. What’s more important than that is that we know our users’ interests. Those logged-in users explicitly express their interests, what they care about, if they’re a Red Sox fan, if they’re a Jets fan, if they’re Republican or Democrat, based on who they’re following. We can tailor the content that we’re delivering to them based on their specific interests and that delivers a higher-quality audience, not just a scaled audience.
Those ‘quality’ audiences are then sufficiently engaged to produce conversations, he adds, with video enhancing the existence experience:
There are already people talking about the National Football League and looking at tweets without any video, live video, on Thursday nights. We can now deliver to that audience the live video combined with a curated timeline, like we’re doing for the Democratic National Convention right now, in one complete solution. That’s a connected audience, not just connected digitally but connected to each other. So, you can experience the live event with the live video and the conversation and benefit from both.
Twitter’s audiences have some distinguishing demographics, claims Dorsey:
Eighty percent of our users are outside the United States, 80% of them are on mobile and a significant proportion of them are 18-year-olds to 34-year-olds, those that are hard to find, those that may not be on pay television. So our value proposition is quite clear. We can help them reach people in different places that aren’t necessarily that they’re reaching today in the younger demo, and extend the reach.
What that ends up doing is delivering a bigger audience for them, better economics for them and benefits for us. And one of the biggest things about our conversations with them is, we’re looking to be their partner. We’re looking to be additive. We’re not just replicating the experience that’s on television; we’re combining it with this great timeline and many of the other social features.
Connected audiences drive virality and they drive popularity. And when something happens on Twitter now in live video, that can be pushed out and shared with many others to make the audience even bigger in that moment and experience.
And that experience has to be high quality, consistent and reliable, adds Dorsey:
We’re putting a lot of thought and effort into our architecture and infrastructure around live-streaming. We’re doing a lot of this both on the individual side with Periscope, but also on the premium content side. So, we’re getting more and more confident about our abilities here, because we’re really measuring and making sure that we’re being thoughtful about how to develop that.
That includes investing in new technology, such as the machine-learning AI tech acquired from London start-up Magic Pony last month for $150 million. It’s worth every cent, according to Dorsey:
Magic Pony is a fascinating technology that we’re really excited about. And what this enables us to do is really open the aperture of how many people can see this and to see an experience that is live with low latency. This technology allows us to digitally reconstruct the stream in real-time, independent of network or device. That’s really cool because it doesn’t matter where you are, you can watch that experience on Twitter, and it’s going to be the most live with the highest quality.
[It also complements] all the other deep learning and machine learning that we have in the company, that we’ve been applying most recently around our core experience, on-boarding, the timeline, notifications, and also tweeting. So, this is a technology, deep learning, that we’re building a lot more strength in. We want be a leader here, because it provides a great lever for every experience that we want to provide in the world.
My take
Never mind Magic Pony, it’s clear Twitter wants to avoid being seen as a one-trick-pony. The pursuit of the video advertising audience has clearly been made a strategic priority, but then it was also such over at Yahoo!. By his own admission, Dorsey has yet to convince marketers of the merits of Twitter as a video ad platform. Marissa Mayer didn’t manage it. The jury’s out on whether Twitter’s CEO can or whether he’ll be looking for his own LinkedIn acquisition moment sooner rather than later.
Image credit - NFLRead more on: Social 