
A long time ago, I did a bunch of custom and package software work for a restaurant chain. They had over 200 locations across the United States and needed to collect a ton of financial and operational data from each location every morning, 24X7. I built the systems that captured this data back when there was no Internet, cloud, etc. While the gig was a cool one, it also gave me a great deal of insight into what the parent company’s financial and reporting needs are in this world.
The other day, I got to re-visit that world.
I did an analyst call recently with an executive from Qvinci. They make a financial consolidation software tool that franchisors might find of great use – and it’s inexpensive, too.
Essentially, Qvinci puts a sync app on the desktop/laptop/tablet computer of a franchisee. At 2 a.m. each morning (and/or whenever a franchisee logs into their accounting system), the app automatically transmits summary accounting data to the franchisor. Data is mapped from the franchisee’s accounting solution to the franchisor’s consolidating Standard Chart of Accounts. Qvinci received a patent  for this “dynamic mapping” process. The data is then validated to ensure that there are no errors in the transmission (e.g., did the franchisee add a new account to their system but fail to map it to the consolidating chart of accounts?). This validation effort is displayed via their “Health Check” screens.

Qvinci is designed to work with Xero, MYOB and most Intuit accounting software products. Other accounting products can also be used if the software can extract summary daily balances to a flat file (e.g., CSV format).
Beyond the consolidation functionality, Qvinci provides a number of anonymous ecosystem benchmarks. These can illustrate how well one franchisee is doing vis-à-vis others. As this is a cloud solution, Qvinci will also aggregate data across customers and have industry-specific benchmarks available in the near term. Benchmarks (and the reports that highlight actual to benchmark differences) can show variances and alerts whenever certain factors reach unfavorable levels.
The economics of this are noteworthy. The software costs only $14.95 (USD) per franchise location per month with a one-time setup fee of $35.  That’s it. I discussed this with Den Howlett when we met in Detroit last week. We both agreed this pricing is insanely cheap for the service it offers. That does beg the question how it will scale from a dollar value standpoint but then when you know it is playing in the same ballpark as the SMB offerings mentioned above, it’s easy to see how prices might be constrained.
Qvinci has a POS (point of sale) API for those firms wishing to connect POS outputs to the franchisor system.
In addition to serving franchise systems, Qvinci also supports accounting firms, particularly those that provide bookkeeping services for their clients. The same technology that franchisors use is also used to collect data from accounting firm clients and display aggregated results for the accountant. The software can be white-labeled by accounting firms to provide a branded portal for their client interactions.
Image credit - All images via Qvinci contentRead more on: Analytics planning and data analysis 