

Paul Hermelin
It is a challenging task and I tend to believe that 60-65 per cent of them are just not trainable…A large number of them cannot be trained. Probably, India will witness the largest unemployment in the middle level to senior level.
That’s a downbeat point of view from Srinivas Kandula, head of Capgemini India, expressed at the Nasscom Leadership Forum gathering in Mumbai, which focused on the need for the digital re-skilling of traditional Indian outsourcing firms. Nasscom believes that 1.5 million people will have to be re-skilled to serve the changing market dynamics.
Given that Capgemini employs around 98,000 people in India, half its global headcount, Kandula’s pessimism is potentially pretty bad news, especially coming only days after the firm’s CEO Paul Hermelin told analysts that digital re-skilling was a priority agenda item for the French services giant:
First, we’re accelerating our portfolio shift towards innovation, making digital and cloud the engine of our growth. To that purpose, we’re carrying out investment internally and through acquisition. We enrich our portfolio of services with the launch of new offers and the development of our applied innovation exchange network. In 2017 we have ambitions to grow by more than 20% in digital and cloud.
Second, we amplify our sectorial expertise and invest in our consultancy schemes which are key for successes in digital. We already have deep expertise in financial service and manufacturing and we invest in CPRD and automotive. We will also increase our account focus, a proven growth driver. Our top 100 clients are growing organically by more than 5%.
The firm is also seeking to bolster its digital presence in North America through acquisition. Last week it announced the purchase of TCube Solutions, an Insurance IT services firm, and Idean, a fast-growing digital strategy and experience design consultancy, headquartered in Palo Alto. Hermelin explains:
Idean brings several blue-chip clients to the Group, notably on the west coast and will be a transformational lever to accelerate our digital customer experience offerings.
TCube Solutions is the largest independent service provider specializing in Duck Creek Technologies, a leading solution for the insurance sector. These two acquisitions will bring key capabilities for the Group and there is more to come. I’m confident and thanks to these action and to the Group’s strong execution, we will be back to a positive growth in North America as of Q1 and that we will accelerate all along the year.
Trumped
But of course, as with every other services firm doing business in the US, Capgemini is playing a wait-and-see game with the new administration. With President Trump planning a new executive order on banning travel from certain countries and still eyeing up the H-1B visa scheme for radical reform (or removal), Hermelin is careful what he says:
Like our peers we do not disclose detailed figures, but I will just say we rely on each country’s immigration program and the primary driver is to serve client needs while abiding to local legislation. What I want to add is there is no availability of IT staff in the US markets. The unemployment in the IT labor market is estimated at 3%, so any change in the visa policy would result in salary inflation and consequently our ability to address prices accordingly.
This being said, we have hired approximately 2,000 local employees per year and we intend to hire 2,000 people and we have activated our local recruitment channel, notable through Sogeti. So I think we’re well equipped but we will wait for the confirmation of any legislation change before acting.
For full year 2015, according to the US Office of Foreign Labor, Capgemini filed 2833 Labor Condition Applications (LCA), a first step in the H-1B process, with the US Department of Labor. That doesn’t mean it got 2833 H-1B visas and that number of applications pales compared to the 33,425 filed by Infosys.
Nonetheless, it’s clear that Capgemini management is aware that this is sensitive subject. CFO Aiman Ezzat argues:
The numbers published are absolutely meaningless. I can tell you, people confuse between the LCAs, which have nothing to do with the number of visa requests, which has nothing to do with the number of visas we end up getting. We will not disclose the number of visas, but I can promise you it’s a very small fraction of these crazy LCA numbers that was posted.
But we’re not going to spend our time trying to correct all the numbers that get published right and left. But the only thing I can tell you, the number of visas is very small…We hired 2,000 people locally. We get less visas than the number of people we hire locally, just for you to have as an idea.
We intend to continue both leveraging visas as we can and hiring locally. We’ll adapt if the legislation changes to be able to continue to serve our clients while maintaining something that makes sense economically. But we don’t want to over-speculate on all what we’ll do, depending on what future legislation could be. But we feel quite comfortable where we stand today.
My take
Away from the challenge of growing North America – and at a time when macro-conditions aren’t helping to reduce the scale of that task- – Capgemini also faces the issue of the insourcing of the Aspire contract, the largest outsourcing contract in the UK public sector. That’s due to have a negative impact on government-related revenues. Add to that the ongoing uncertainties kicked off by the Brexit vote and Trump-generated uncertainties around doing business in the US and it’s clear that 2017 is going to be challenging for the French provider.
Image credit - CapgeminiRead more on: Digital government and public servicesDigital skills and trainingOutsourcing

