
Just before the Easter weekend, Capita let out some news that it has acquired a Newcastle-based digital agency called Orange Bus in an attempt to enhance its “digital development capability and strengthen its ability to deliver complex client projects”.
Whilst the acquisition in isolation perhaps doesn’t seem particularly interesting, when considered within the broader context that Capita’s latest results were less than impressive and that the likes of Accenture are flying, thanks to early investments in digital capability – it begs the question whether or not this hints at a future direction for the outsourcing company?
Analysts have raised the point that whilst Capita has a digital division that is growing, it incorporates a lot of areas that you wouldn’t traditionally associate with ‘digital’. And that for it to position itself alongside the likes of Accenture, it needs to be bold and split out ‘digital’ on its own.
Back in February Capita’s shares slid on the news that its pre-tax profits were down over 50% on the previous year, despite reporting that it had a 7% rise in revenues and an 11% rise in underlying profit.
However, in those results Capita highlighted two important points, 1) that digital transformation was and important focus for buyers and 2) that it was going to use acquisitions to deliver growth to shareholders. It said:
Across the private sector, companies continue to face pressure to reduce costs, improve customer service, better utilise digital technologies and deal with changes in regulation and competition.
The vast amount of data generated by multi-channel engagement means that customer insight and analytics are becoming more important and we continue to invest in these areas for the benefit of our clients.
In Northern Europe we have an opportunity to shift the customer management market from buying short term services on a volume basis from multiple vendors to buying multichannel, digitally focused services from a single partner on a multiyear basis, with new ways of working that improve efficiency and customer service.
It continued:
Capita makes acquisitions to build capability in existing markets, enter new markets and enhance our future organic growth potential, largely focusing upon small to medium sized businesses. We aim to drive value creation for shareholders through our acquisition strategy and seek to achieve a 15% post tax ROCE after integration into the Group.
For example, Capita highlighted its acquisition of Brightwave, a digital learning business specialising in bespoke e-learning and content creation for large corporate clients. I believe we can expect more of this from Capita.
Orange Bus
 And to this point, Capita has now acquired digital agency Orange Bus, which it has said it will integrate with its own existing design agency G2G3.
Orange Bus has a number of high profile clients that include HMRC, Aston Martin Racing, Pearson, Philips, Barbour, NHS Professionals and Sage. Capita is also one of their existing customers.
To persist with the comparison, this is exactly the sort of acquisition that has worked well for Accenture, which has acquired a number of companies of this nature over the past year or so.
Capita said that the acquisition of Orange Bus will build upon its existing expertise, allowing it to offer and “extended range of digital solutions to new and existing customers”. It added that Orange Bus will provide a number of opportunities to bring “additional value” to Capita’s existing clients and contracts, as well as build “innovative propositions for prospective clients and new markets”.
Craig Rodgerson, chief executive of Capita Digital and Software Solutions, said:
We are thrilled that Orange Bus is coming on board. We are always looking to extend our capability and reach in the digital arena, and the acquisition of a specialist digital solutions agency like Orange Bus will enable us to increase our scale and reach to design and deliver ever more innovative projects for our clients. They have been delivering some incredible work for their clients – including Capita – and we look forward to working with them more closely.
Julian Leighton, chief executive of Orange Bus, said:
Joining Capita is the ideal next step for the team at Orange Bus, giving us the scope to continue to grow. As part of Capita we’ll be able to offer a broader range of services to our clients – and its track record of nurturing the many businesses it acquires speaks for itself.
Moving away from outsourcing
As diginomica has highlighted, outsourcing has become a bit of a dirty word at Accenture, which seems to have helped the company deliver in spades. For example, its most recent results saw profits leap 24%.
However, on the face of it it doesn’t seem that Capita has made a similar effort to put the same emphasis on digital and consulting for digital transformation (which companies are willing to pay plenty of $$ for) and move away from the traditional approach to outsourcing.
For example, look at its results and its major contracts, the deals being done are more often than not shared services or outsourcing contracts. Which are not to be sniffed at, but are becoming less convincing as companies move more towards in-sourcing their IT capabilities.
Research Director at TechMarketView, John O’Brien, highlights that Capita could be putting more emphasis on its digital capabilities to better compete. He notes:
Orange Bus employs 75 people out of offices in Newcastle (HQ) and London and provides a range of digital-related services from strategy and planning, design, technology development, user experience and optimisation and performance.
Capita plans to merge Orange Bus with its existing digital design business G2G3 Digital, which sits within the Digital & Software Solutions division. As we discussed in our recent assessment of Capita’s FY15 results, D&SS is a growing part of the Capita portfolio, and a key focus for future growth.
However, as a division D&SS is very broad in scope, employing 5,000 people and covering Capita’s traditional software products like SIMS and Academy and in total some 300 products/modules.
To truly build its digital credentials Capita needs to take the bold move to break out Digital as a standalone operation. This would shine a light on the range of true digital capabilities and skills it now has and potential for the broader business – raising Capita’s profile – as rivals like Accenture, Wipro, Atos and others and are now doing.
My take
If this is an indication of future plans for Capita and it’s digital division, it should stand them in good stead. However, others have been making these investments for well over a year now so there will inevitably be a period of catch-up.
Read more on: Digital skills and trainingOutsourcing 