
Claire Pereira
Business travel management company Carlson Wagonlit Travel’s mobile app, CWT To Go, has come a long way since its initial launch in May 2011.
Over the course of 2015, CWT To Go saw 62% growth in user registrations, to reach 560,000 business travellers. And earlier this month, the company announced that mobile hotel bookings have grown 20% month-on-month since this feature was first introduced in February last year.
In effect, CWT To Go is on a transformation journey from a simple itinerary management tool for business travellers to something far more comprehensive. Mobile hotel bookings are just the start, with flight booking functionality due for launch later this year.
Much of the heavy-lifting is done by the team at WorldMate, a Tel Aviv-based mobile travel app developer that Carlson Wagonlit Travel (CWT) acquired back in 2012. Overseeing their work, meanwhile, is Clare Pereira, global digital services director at CWT. She says:
One of the reasons we acquired WorldMate was to be in control of our own timelines, to be in charge of the introduction of features and functionality. But what we also really liked about the company was its focus on user experience. For us, it’s not about having thousands of features in the app, it’s about offering a really best-in-class user experience.
Hotel booking in CWT To Go made the company some $10 million in sales during the 2015 financial year, but work continues on this feature. The next release, Pereira explains, will see the introduction of ‘cap rate management logic’, so that hotels will be displayed based on the travel policies set by the individual traveller’s employer:
It will look at your company’s policies, look at its daily budgeting allowance and heavily promote your company’s negotiated rates. We’re coding and testing that right now, so it’s imminent.
Personalization on track
Right now, hotels are generally displayed in price order and travellers receive an email if they’ve booked anything over their daily allowance. The planned enhancement, she says, means travellers can adjust their behaviour, based on information provided ‘in app’, as they move through the booking process:
Also, it focuses far more on personalization, so when we’re collating results, rather than just present them in a long list, we’re also looking at where you’ve previously stayed and where your peer group has previously stayed.
There’s some heavy-duty integration work at the back end, underpinning all this. CWT To Go integrates with four major travel industry Global Distribution Systems (GDSs) – Amadeus, Sabre, Galileo and Apollo. It also integrates with online travel agent Booking.com to offer the widest choice possible of hotels – some 467,000, according to Pereira, as well as with CWT’s own internal systems:
The reason that’s important is because, by connecting through to our mid-office systems, all transactions then flow through to the back office. That means that all the data goes to our data warehouse and fuels our reporting products, CWT AnalytIQs. The beauty of this is that the client travel manager can use our analytics tools to see all of the reservations that have come via mobile, as well as online and offline. They have complete visibility.
In an era of increasing self-service among business travellers, she adds, that’s vital for companies looking to keep control of employee travel expenses.
[An interesting aside on this: a recent study by CWT, conducted in partnership with researchers at Ohio State University and Arizona State University, analyzed 6.4 million flight booking transactions and found that women business travellers book their flights 1.9 days earlier than their male counterparts and pay an average of around 2% less for their tickets as a result.)
At present, CWT’s mobile app development team is releasing new software every eight to ten weeks – faster than it’s ever done before – using Agile methodologies. A long list of candidate features are prioritised according to customer feedback and the results of usability studies and then handed to the development team. They then work through the sprint, aiming to get as many of those features into the next release as possible. Some of the usability testing that follows, Pereira explains, is done in-person with test groups, tracking their eye movements and body language as they work through tasks on the app.
When it comes to this year’s flight booking launch, internal beta testing got underway last year, Pereira says:
We always do an internal beta among our own staff first – because they are definitely our harshest critics. We beta’d it first in the US and we’re about to go to an external beta with one of our largest clients. Then we’ll launch to a handful of what we call our ‘pioneer clients’, usually a group of around 10 companies, and then move on to a larger release.
Offering flight booking via CWT To Go won’t just offer travellers the chance to view routes and fares and buy tickets, she says. Business travellers also need to see booking conditions; they want to check-in online; they need to be sure that their frequent flyer details are sent through so they get points for their trips and they want to know they’re benefiting from their employer-negotiated corporate fares, as well as CWT’s own negotiated fare programme.
Although it’s early days, one piece of valuable feedback has already been incorporated into the app – the importance of being able to search flights not just on price, but also on schedule. For business travellers, after all, the cheapest fare may not be the best if it doesn’t get them to their meeting on time or involves an endless layover in some far-flung airport terminal. Says Pereira:
We’ve taken that on board on the [beta] release that went out yesterday and enhanced the UI to make it easier to select an itinerary based on schedule rather than cost.
To date, the hotel booking function in CWT To Go has been rolled out across 19 markets. Pereira is hoping to replicate that pace with the flight booking function over the next 12 to 18 months.
Image credit - CWT/Jean-Paul FrogetRead more on: MobileUse casesUX and application designBest of 