
The Lands End brand has been around for more than 50 years and has been a firmly-established part of the US retail landscape. But since it was spun off from Sears as a catalog-based company in its own right back in 2013, the firm has struggled.
Its latest quarterly numbers are the latest example of the decline. For the quarter ended 27 January, Lands End posted a net loss of $94.8 million compared with a net loss of $39.5 million, during the same period last year. Revenue fell 3.1% year-on-year to $458.8 million, from $473.5 million.
For CEO Jerome Griffith, only weeks into his new role, the turnaround strategy is built on two premises – exploiting Lands End iconic brand and partnering that with a transition from a traditional catalog retail model to an e-commerce platform business.
There’s a lot to build on here, he argues, which is why he’s taken on the job as CEO:
In the more than half century since the brand was established, Lands End has become a symbol of American family values, American spirit, and has amassed a strong and loyal customer following. The company’s iconic heritage and strong brand recognition as well as its highly compelling model as an e-commerce-led business are the attributes that drew me to the role.
However, in the recent history, the company lost traction as it lagged behind competitors and in some ways did not adequately evolve to keep pace with the changing retail landscape. I believe we have a tremendous opportunity to rejuvenate this business as we address these issues and position the company to leverage its strengths. This includes creating a relevant assortment that maintains our classic American heritage with an updated look, providing a clear brand. identity to speak to today’s consumer and better leveraging our existing distribution channels, while expanding into new channels.
For new channels, read online and e-commerce. Griffiths affirms:
We will focus on capitalizing on our e-commerce business. Overall, our goal is to be seen as an e-commerce-led company that sells a great lifestyle brand. We will work to become more agile on our online platforms, adopting a test-and react-culture, that will enable us to best meet our customer’s needs.
Those customers are also a major asset, argues Griffith, suggesting that the amount of data that Lands End holds on them as a result of its catalog history is something that many other retailers would “kill” for:
We’re an extremely good catalog company, and we spend a lot of money in managing catalogs. But I think some of those resources could be better used particularly in our e-commerce group. People would kill for our data. I mean, we have so much good data on our consumer where they are, what they buy, how often they buy, what they are looking for.
We don’t do a good enough job of mining that data, looking at it. We don’t do a good enough job of analyzing consumers’ needs and wants based upon what they’re buying history is. So I think you can safely say that we could do a better job, and put more resources towards running a great e-commerce business as opposed to running a great catalog business.
Process updates
He adds that this poor historic exploitation of data is only one example of where Lands End’s practices have fallen behind:
That really jumps out at me, because when I look at processes for the company, I think we’re probably not up-to-date where a lot of other companies are in the world today. We are slow on product development. We are slow on reacting to trends. And we’ve got some pretty good businesses out there. Our swimwear business is a very good business. Our knit wear business is a very good business. We should be able to jump on trends. We can’t do that today.
Additionally, we should be a lot smarter about how we are managing or advertising dollars from a digital standpoint, we are not there yet. So we’ve got areas where we do well and then a lot of areas for improvement. And a lot of those improvements really are going to come about from re-tasking resources and putting the right resources in the right areas.
Work has begun, he adds, but it’s going to take time to get all the pieces in place to execute effectively on this:
We’ve already begun to take tactical improvements, but given the increasingly dynamic nature of our online business, we’ll need to be more diligent in improving our online experience. To accomplish this, we will need to augment our team, bringing in expertise to help ensure we maintain an e-commerce business that is ahead of the curve and create a best-in-class digital organization. We will also leverage the expertise and systems that we already have in place. In addition to our established catalog business to ensure that we’re making the right decisions to fuel growth.
The most high-profile decision taken to date was last week’s announcement that Lands’ End has appointed Robert Bowman, president of business and media for Major League Baseball, to its board of directors with the explicit remit of bringing digital expertise with him. Griffith says:
Bob has an incredible wealth of experience in the online and digital media space. And we look forward to leveraging his deep knowledge as we focus on further building our e-commerce business.
What’s missing from all this is any mention of omni-channel. That seems to be intentional, as Griffith observes:
When you look at most successful companies today, they are looking at an omni-channel approach, where you’re really distributing product where the consumer is. I think for us, you’ve got 87%, almost 90% of everything that we are selling going through e-commerce.
You’ve got still a pretty decent size business at Sears. We’re doing a couple of hundred million there. That’s says that there are customers out there that want to shop in a physical presence. I think there is an opportunity for a company-owned store platform. I’m not exactly sure what it is yet.
That I think will play out over the next few months as we take a look and put together, what we think a profit model might look like, and what a store footprint might look like. And you’ve got opportunities for sure in a third-party e-commerce, and potentially in some brick-and-mortar places where we could be, but its early days.
My take
As Griffith says, it’s early days in his tenure as CEO, so too early to predict how effective his turnaround strategy is likely to be. That said, the emphasis he places on making the move from catalog to e-commerce is a sensible one, similar in some respects to the transformation underway at JC Penney.
The crucial difference between the two is that Lands End doesn’t have a large offline real estate to take into account when attempting to strike the omni-channel balance. That might turn out to be an advantage in this case, in a week when former parent Sears warned in a regulatory filing that:
Our historical operating results indicate substantial doubt exists related to the company’s ability to continue as a going concern.
Image credit - Lands EndRead more on: e-commerceRetail e-commerce and the omni-channelUse cases 