
There is always a difference of opinion to be had over whether it is better to mix’n’match best of breed applications and tools to achieve an objective, or go with a `packaged’ solution of some kind provided by one or two selected vendors. And as often as not the arguments are not so much technical than primarily business related.
Take the experience of Celtic Manor Resort, a large, Welsh-based leisure and conference services provider that has some significant expansion plans in hand and a need to extend its IT capabilities to match the expected demand. As the plans involve both new hotels and a new conference center, the company’s IT manager, Chris Stanley, sees real scope to develop a template service environment, based on the existing applications suite at its main resort based near Newport, that can then be rolled out across new developments.
Not only would this give a high degree of coherence across all the business operations, but it would play to the benefits that can come from also selecting the one or two partner-model, benefits that he sees outweighing the advantages of having different’mix’n’match’ options for each location.
In the Celtic Manor case, the vendors selected are Dell for hardware and VMware for systems and operations management. This approach is one the company has used before, after being an HP customer for everything up till 2013.
Headquartered in South Wales, Celtic Manor has a strong leisure business, largely dominated by golf. On the Newport resort site it has three championship class courses, one of which hosted the Ryder Cup in 2010. There are also spas, pools, gyms, restaurants and bars. Over in Cardiff, it has a large conference and exhibition center with 13 meeting rooms. This can boast some major customers, including the 2014 NATO conference, with many of the world’s leaders present.
According to Stanley, the split between leisure and conference business runs at around 49/51%, and both are growing, fast enough to warrant the expansion programme. So the company has started work, in conjunction with the Welsh government, on the International Convention Centre Wales, which will open in June this year.
The company is also looking to expand by between four and six new hotels over the next 24 months, with some being new build and some being part of a new franchised hotels operation that use the Celtic Manor brand. The template model is planned to be used across all three expansion areas, he explains:
We needed a solution then which would scale quickly, so we looked at a couple of options but as a Dell EMC customer already and a VMware partner/customer we had proven experience with what they did, and we invested in four VxRail E-Series nodes to create an HCI hyper-converged environment that was deployed in our admin building where it currently sits because the new convention center is still a building site.
According to Stanley, deploying the first cluster last September highlighted many areas where the company had been struggling with its existing data center, such as the management and patching of the existing infrastructure. The new deployment freed a good deal of time to be re-used in more productive, proactive work, particularly in terms of preparatory work for the up to six new hotels he now has on his radar over the next 24 months, together with the new conference centre.
The team are largely saved the effort of involvement in new applications development, as most of this is contracted out, with Oracle providing its Opera platform as the primary business engine. They have developed different systems for different offerings, such as a booking system for bedrooms, booking system for events, and a booking system for golf courses.
Hyper-converged hardware, with software to follow
Stanley acknowledges that while the company is moving to be hyper-converged in a physical sense, the applications are not at this stage, and that the level of collaboration now required is outstripping the capabilities of the current systems. So without change is admits it is moving to become a `kind of a mess’, although he adds the important caveat:
But it works for now. It’s not hyper-converged applications, but that’s somewhere where we want to get. We’re happy with where that is and how that is evolving. One of the VMware announcements about how you can now manage your networking from VxRail will help that whole automation/one panel to view from. The end user experience is very much something that we’re focusing on for our staff.
This means he will now be looking at new end user tools and services, an area which has not had much attention recently. But the move to a hyper-converged environment is prompting renewed attention at the client end. He is therefore now interested in announcements made by VMware on developments with Workspace One.
Since going hyper-converged his team now has time to look at these systems, and they are down to a couple of vendors still on the radar. Discussions are still going on as to whether the developments Celtic Manor require can be developed in the right timescale.
One tool that is helping here is ManageEngine, which was brought in originally to manage patching. But it also now gives access to inventories across the environment, and mobile device management.
In many ways the company is in a classic state of digital transformation. Go back three years and the senior company management would not have touched cloud, but views are rapidly changing as the business grows and the provision of services, especially in terms of taking bookings, and keeping bars and restaurants functioning, becomes a 24×7 operation then cloud services look ever more attractive. Stanley says:
But there were some stability issues with the initially, about a year and a half ago, and I’m still not happy they’re resolved. Other hotels will speak to, that are on that platform, have had a few issues so we’re not comfortable putting our crown jewels there.
He is however more than happy to exploit cloud services where the stability is obvious. One area is email, and the plan is to move all email to Microsoft’s Office 365 early this year. This will be replacing a Domino (Lotus Notes as was) service that he inherited that when he came to the business 10 years ago:
It’s one of those things you’d like to replace but there’s more demand elsewhere, because it sits there and we use it was for email, phones and instant messaging. But I think the reliance now on email as a communication tool is so much that we can’t manage it on site.
To the next obvious question – a move to Microsoft Azure? – Stanley’s answer was “potentially”. He could certainly foresee one of the planned VxRail clusters could be used to run Azure-based services.
Image credit - Celtic Manor Read more on: Cloud platforms - infrastructure and architectureDigital enterprise in the real worldInfrastructureUse cases 