
Aneel Bhusri
Brexit and the US Election generated enough CEO uncertainty to delay several large deals in Workday’s third quarter, but the firm still managed to beat Wall Street’s expectations yesterday.
Workday’s third-quarter loss widened 47% to $114.1 million on revenue up 34% to $409.6 million. Subscription revenue rose 38%.
CEO Aneel Bhusri described the decision slippage in Q3 as something that the firm had suspected might happen and hoped would be short-lived:
We have seen a few multinational prospects delay their projects. Some attribute the delay to global uncertainties such as Brexit, the US Presidential Election and pending elections in other G8 countries.
He added that the firm is still waiting to see how things play out in Q4:
There were a handful of large multinationals, a couple in the financial services space that are trying to figure out what Brexit means and now what our Presidential Election means to them and they just said, ‘Hey, we’re going to hold off on making a final decision’. I think in both cases, we’re selected. So, it’s not a competitive dynamic, it’s much more of a uncertainty issue and this is coming directly from the CEO of these companies.
These are macro-political rather than wider economic worries, Bhusri posited:
I think it’s macro-political concerns, waiting to see what happens in Italy, waiting to see what happens in France. There’s just some uncertainty. I personally believe this uncertainty will go away and it’s early enough in the quarter where we have time to make it up. But there’s definitely uncertainty in the marketplace that candidly we haven’t seen from that political environment in quite some time.
This is down to unexpected outcomes on issues such as Brexit and the Trump victory in the US Election:
The good and the bad for me is I’ve had access to a lot of CEOs over the last couple of months. I’m part of a Business Council and I really don’t think anybody in the Business Council expected the US Election to play out the way it did. Independent of who they wanted to play out with, people did not see that coming, the rhetoric around trade agreements and some of the protectionism.
On Brexit specifically, Bhusri rejected the notion that data residency concerns might be in play:
The data sovereignty issues haven’t really been raised with Workday and I think it’s because we’ve got such a good story in Europe for data sovereignty. We have the two data centers and we have an ability for European customers to keep all of their data in Europe without having anything leaked back to the US. So, that has not been an issue.
Pipeline
Meanwhile, Workday continues to pick up customers. New Q3 HCM customers included State Street Corporation, GE Appliances, Couche-Tard, Phillips Lighting and KONE Corporation in Finland, while new financials logos include Denny’s, Iowa State University, Zillow and “a large investment management company”. Bhusri said:
We’re getting some nice wins like Denny’s and Panera and the big financial services company that we’re not allowed to mention yet. I think as those companies go live, we’re going to see a step function in the way that people adopt financials and that will be an important point for us along our trajectory.
If you look at historically, the mid-market is where technology adoption happens first. We saw and that we’ve been successful that market has already shifted over to the cloud; it’s just a matter time before the high end of the enterprise flips over as well. When it happens, I think we’ve got a pretty good sense. I’d love to see it happen faster, but we don’t control when the market flips.
From a competitive landscape perspective, Bhusri said the firm is performing better against SAP and Oracle than against NetSuite (now part of Oracle) and Ultimate:
Our win rates against SAP and Oracle are quite a bit higher than they are against NetSuite and Ultimate. Against NetSuite and Ultimate, they were both above 50% this quarter, but as not as high it is against SAP and Oracle. Frankly, it’s because we’re so focused on the high end of the market and yet, there’s a lot happening in the middle market and it’s just getting more competitive in that segment.
He added:
I think both of our large competitors are really good at marketing well before the product is available…Frankly, I think as SAP gears up to launch financials in the cloud that might be impactful in a positive way, because it will signal that financials are truly going into the cloud. Right now, it’s just us and Oracle competing for business.
I don’t want to throw our competitors under the bus as much as I would enjoy doing that. It’s worth digging into both of these vendors, their ability to actually run their customer’s data center operations, I mean run their data center operations for customer. I think if you dig out, you’ll find that there’s quite a few problems as they move into the cloud.
That leads Bhusri to make the inevitable bullish prediction:
I don’t envision a world in three or four years where people are running SAP and Oracle and PeopleSoft financial systems, I just don’t see that being the case.
My take
How Q4 plays out for Workday will be an interesting bell-weather for the wider post-US Election decision-making cycle. As Bhusri notes, it’s not so much who won the Presidency as what happens next in terms of international trade agreements and wider economic policy decisions. Until there’s more clarity around those, jittery CEOs are going to err on the side of caution. As Workday pursues its large enterprise ambitions, those CEOS are the people it needs to get to sign on the dotted line.
Image credit - WorkdayDisclosure - At time of writing, Oracle, NetSuite, SAP and Workday are premier partners of diginomica. Read more on: Cloud ERP financials and supply chainCloud platforms - infrastructure and architectureHCM and the digital future of work 