
Great things happen at CERN, the European Organization for Nuclear Research. It was here that Tim Berners-Lee invented the World Wide Web in 1989. A few years ago, the world was agog (even if few of us actually understood it) when CERN’s Large Hadron Collider discovered the Higgs boson.
So, suggests Lucy Lockwood, HR systems analyst at CERN:
You’d imagine that our administrative processes would be pretty awesome too, right?
She’s quick to dispel the myth. Little has altered in CERN’s HR records office since it opened in 1965. The outfits and hairdos may look a little different, but employees are still carrying around the same large bundles of paper records and personnel files. According to Lockwood:
The only thing that’s changed since 1965 is that we’ve got a lot more paper and the cupboards that the papers are in are electronic.
In 2013, the HR department set out on a quest of its own: to become a paper free department. It wasn’t starting totally from scratch, just doing things in slightly odd order, because for the last 20 years or so the organization has been automating our workflows linked to HR processes.
Yet, although it already had a workflow engine and some electronic documents, at the end of the workflow trail, these documents needed to be printed off. CERN IT manager, Andrew Short, explains:
We’re kind of in reverse. We had the workflows and electronic documents and end users would print these forms out.
Some of the HR processes are also a bit time consuming and clunky. To illustrate, Lockwood describes the many ins and outs of what happens when a recruiter notifies a candidate that they have landed the job.
Brace yourselves, it’s a long story:
The recruiter prints out everything relevant. Then takes it to the records office. Then an administrator will update the core HR system by manually typing everything in. Then the administrator prints five copies of the contract. Then the recruiter checks and signs all five contracts. Then the recruiter takes them back to the records office. Then those are dispatched: two to the candidate, one of which has to signed and sent back  to the hiring manager, one is sent to the salaries office and one kept in the personnel file.
Lockwood admits:
I’m embarrassed just saying it frankly. So you can see there’s lots of room for improvement and a lot of backwards and forwards.
Making changes
Although it did have some electronic documents stored in its electronic data handling system (EDH) or elsewhere, it became clear that there was no management and there was no central place of access for these documents.
CERN approached open source document management company, Alfresco, to handle records management and importantly, integrate with the workflow engine.
Using Alfresco the new recruitment process will strip out and automate many of the unnecessary steps outlined previously by Lockwood. When a job offer goes out, the recruiter will notify the candidate through the applicant tracking system. That action will automatically create a new personnel file in Alfresco and all relevant documents will be put there.
At the same time, a records officer or administrator can inject all information into the core HR system with one click. Lockwood observes:
There’s no manual entry, there’s no chance of making errors. It’s all very quick and streamlined.
Lucy Lockwood
Alfresco will email the candidate with a contract as an attachment and the hiring manager and salaries department can view the information in Alfresco. The result, says Lockwood, will be a streamlined and centralized repository:
There are no copies flying about. All systems are talking to each other.
The organization has been able to use Alfresco pretty much out of the box. The only tweaking necessary was to remove some of the options and functions that CERN didn’t need.
There were a few challenges along the way:

First, it was key to create a simple file plan and decide where it was going to store its documents.
Equally important was sorting out the meta data. It was decided to keep the metadata entered by end users to just three fields: the person who the document is about, what kind of document it is and a start date. These three pieces of information are portals into a lot of other information held in other databases and sources.
The third consideration was to identify the security needed for each document, allowing access only to authorised personnel.

Lockwood takes up the story:
Not only did we want to put a new repository in place, but was also wanted to ask people to change the processes. Again and again we said: don’t just automate a bad process, that’s just a bad automated process.
She admits that getting end users to relinquish the papers they’ve been handling for 50 years “was a challenge”, but it helped that there was already a lot of trust built up between end users and IT, thanks to the work already done on worfklows:
The fact that they trusted us helped. There was still some resistance but ultimately people were relieved to be given the opportunity to relinquish their papers.
The question now is, what to do with all the backlog of historical documents, for as Lockwood notes:
It’s not particularly secure, it’s not easily searchable and there’s lots of it. So we need a single repository, not just for documents we’re creating new but all of this.
Current thinking is to use optical character recognition (OCR) to scan all the documents, but the final decision has yet to be made.
The exploration continues.
diginomica supports

 

Read more on: Future of workHCM and the digital future of workTalent management 