
Cystic fibrosis Trust’s public affairs manager Darren O’Keefe
On Wednesday this week, the UK’s healthcare cost watchdog, the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE), gave an initial thumbs-down to the NHS providing a new treatment, Orkambi, to cystic fibrosis (CF) patients.
According to NICE, Orkambi offers some benefits to people with certain forms of CF, a genetic, life-shortening condition that affects the lungs and digestive system. But at an annual cost of £104,000 per patient, the agency decided, it’s too pricey to represent a cost-effective use of NHS resources. Orkambi manufacturer Vertex, meanwhile, has hit back, slamming NICE’s appraisal process. And Cystic Fibrosis Trust chief executive Ed Own has weighed into the debate, pointing out:
It would be ethically unforgivable if people with cystic fibrosis were treated like pawns in a bigger battle between the NHS and Vertex over price and longer term impact.
It’s an important point, because, thanks to advances in treatment, far more CF patients are now living into adulthood and their voices need to be heard. When the CF Trust started back in 1964, children with the condition were lucky to live past five years old. Today, half of those with the condition in the UK will live to celebrate their 40th birthdays. A baby born with the condition in 2016 can expect to live even longer. So this is a population of some 10,000 people with democratic rights they should be able to exercise.
At the same time, treatment regimes, consisting of daily drugs and physiotherapy routines and frequent hospital stays, can make that challenging. The risk of cross-infection compounds the situation further: CF patients often carry bacterial infections in their lungs that, while seldom harmful to people without the condition, can be extremely serious if transmitted to others with CF.
So, in practice, people with CF can’t socialise with each other on a face-to-face basis, making it extremely difficult for them to join forces in order to demonstrate against potentially harmful healthcare policies, for example, or to lobby their MPs.
It’s against this backdrop that, last week, the Cystic Fibrosis Trust used Skype for Business to host a virtual workshop to give people with CF, along with parents of children with CF, an introduction to Parliament and advice on how they can engage with the political process, in line with the Trust’s campaigning work.
This joint venture was set up by the charity in conjunction with the UK Parliament’s Outreach and Engagement Service. According to Parliament Outreach, which is working to maximise the opportunities digital technology can bring to democracy in the UK, the initiative was the first of its kind.
Using digital tools to lobby
 As we’ve noted before, the CF Trust is already ahead of the game in using virtual technologies to bring together its own staff, many of whom have CF themselves. In 2015, for example, it completed its rollout of Microsoft Office 365 for communication and collaboration and many of its key systems have been migrated to the Microsoft Azure Cloud, from where they can be accessed over the Internet by authorised staff members. But this is the first time it has experimented with extending cloud technologies to the wider CF community with the explicit intention of helping them to participate more actively in its campaigns, which focus on raising awareness on issues such as access to medicines.
Speaking to Diginomica ahead of last Friday’s (18 March) workshop, the Trust’s public affairs manager Darren O’Keefe explained the thinking behind it:
What’s really important is empowering people with CF to affect the decisions that have a huge influence on their lives. As a lobbyist myself, I sometimes forget that a lot of people don’t quite get the nuances and complexities of parliamentary procedure – but by giving this kind of presentation, we can demonstrate to them in a really accessible way that there are ways they can really exert pressure on decision-makers and make a difference for themselves.
The session was held on Skype for Business, so that representatives of Parliament Outreach could give a video-based presentation, including slides, on engaging with government and so that participants could ask questions via the IM function.
On the day, seven participants took part, asking questions such as:
– Is there a best time to contact an MP?
– How long should I wait for a response from them?
– Is it worth writing to [both] an MP and a Peer?
Reflecting back on the session, O’Keefe tells Diginomica:
MPs are the gatekeepers to decision-makers in government. With a relatively small cystic fibrosis community, it can be hard to get their attention. So the purpose of the workshop was to give people with cystic fibrosis a better understanding of how they can be heard. By allowing them to be a campaign partner, they can lobby MPs and in turn make a real impact on behalf of the community.”
This bespoke, interactive workshop saw Parliament Outreach and the Trust give [members of] the CF community the tools they need influence change on their own behalf at the highest level. This is just the start of an ongoing relationship that has opened up a new front in the CF Trust’s fight to make a life with CF a life unlimited.
Read more on: Collaboration sharing and digital productivityUse cases 