
CERN
Mention ServiceNow to most IT folk and the thoughts will automatically swing towards the delivery of applications and services to business end users. It is less likely that anyone would think of the sometimes thorny problem of getting a lightbulb changed at their place of work.
But the two do fit together, as Reinoud Martens has demonstrated at Europe’s premier home for particle physicists and other `rocket’ scientists, CERN. The reason is not only simple, but also demonstrates how the same fundamental processes – and the same solutions – apply to most areas of service provision, whether that is rapidly on-boarding a new employee and getting them productive with the IT tools they need, or making sure they have a working lightbulb over their place of work.
It is fair to say that, back in 2009, CERN was extremely good at firing particles at each other at the speed of light, but somewhat less than efficient at looking after the place and making it run smoothly.   
A change of management at that time led to Martens moving from IT, where providing good service management was essential to achieving good scientific results, to become CERN’s manager of general services. It did not take long for him to realise that this part of CERN’s operations lacked, as he put it diplomatically, a certain maturity:

So we thought how can we get some order in this, because we had a financial manager who wanted to have a dashboard on how we delivered services. I’d had some exposure to ITIL and good practice and I looked at what kind of standards there were for providing services in organisations like CERN and I couldn’t find a lot. So I thought that I could apply ITIL or ISO 20000 good practices beyond IT.

Simple question
The fundamental question was simple: could ITIL provide a best practice framework that would then provide these services in a coherent way? Could it deliver the metrics which could be used to create those dashboards for the management? It took Martens a few months to convince colleagues to agree to a trial of the idea, but he then set about building a service catalog with the help of a consultant.
This took half a year as a spare time project, but he realised the scope was huge. The next task was to find the incidents of requests for processes, from someone asking for leave, to recruiting someone, to transporting something, repairing a door, painting an office, moving someone to another office etc.  That took another couple of months.
In many enterprises managing this then becomes a paper process, or even a process based on the tacit knowledge of the people running it, but Martens decided that this needed more functional support, so went looking for suitable tools. The end result of this process, which sifted through a whole range of suppliers, resulted in ServiceNow being selected, not least because of its close affinity with ITIL:

ServiceNow was the best solution at the time, and is still, because it works very well for many reasons. It was flexible enough to support our service catalogue, and the scope of this gets very large. Staff have to get guidance to send the requests to the right support teams and this service catalogue is key for this. It’s the inventory of all services that are available to our users and also how they are provided.

Its scope is wide too, as it covers just about everything from allocating tasks to specialist software support teams for the many different software tools used by the CERN researchers and their support teams, through  to snow clearing, and from drainage to Windows support. The service went live in 2011 with one single service desk for people to go to for anything, providing comprehensive, standardised processes for everything.
There are a few exceptions to this rule, but they do have to be exceptional to avoid being squeezed into the same framework. Martens says:

I am an old man, so I have a lot of experience with over-engineered solutions which are very good in certain vertical applications – and do those very well – but they cost a fortune to maintain. There were hundreds of them for which there was no solution except being email driven, or even nothing driven. Users would have to know the right number to call for this or that.

Some of this is an inevitable consequence of CERN being CERN. It is about providing a particle physics infrastructure to particle physicists that look for particles like the Higgs Boson. Such people have little interest who cleans the carpets. So making services easy for them to use continues to be the absolute focus. The second focus has been to allow the support staff to work in a similar and collaborative way and on a comprehensive framework, because it makes everything easier.
The managers also get the visibility that they didn’t have before. They can become much more proactive with a solution like this than they were before when, for example, they can see workload trends and anticipate problems before they actually arise:

We also have 5 years of statistics on this information so we can trigger the improvement process because we get this information that we didn’t have before.

Continued development
Martens is very ambitious about continued development of the service, building on its single service portal on which anyone can ask any question. For instance,  this now encompasses renting out vehicles, as an implicit part of his job is providing  mobility services for staff, with some 600 bicycles and 900 cars on his books. Renting a car can involve a lot of form filling, but is also a well-structured process so ripe for technological assistance.
He is also responsible for the biggest hotel in the French-speaking part of Switzerland, in terms of occupancy rates:

We have set this up in a way that we can add services very very easily. The marginal cost to get an extra service on is only half a day of work just to define everything fill in the support team details.

Even with a hotel, every issue can come down to managing a ticket that has a process attached to it. So a guest having a problem with a room may talk to the front desk, but the issue – cleaning, equipment failure, special booking requirements or whatever – becomes a ticket that can be managed by due process. This also gives them transparency when managing service contractors:

The operational things are more and more managed now. We started with the user-facing processes  requests because the focus was on the user but it has expanded into orchestrating operations in the field. For instance we do cleaning inspections in the hotel and if we find an anomaly from the set criteria inspectors score the rooms accordingly. If  the score is below a certain threshold it’s rejected. Then you push another button and it creates an incident ticket in ServiceNow which goes to the cleaning contractor they have to recover the situation within a certain time. And if it’s not done then there’s a penalty.

One factor, especially with more traditional physical tasks and skills like cleaning and building maintenance, there is often a lot of tacit knowledge that operatives are not even aware they have. This has led Martens into adaptations of ITIL to accommodate exploiting that knowledge, using the knowledge system within ServiceNow. This is used as the repository for such information as it can be collected.
This can then be used to push as much service information down the service levels within the organisation, for example as Frequently Asked Questions.:

We want to push this down because it drives the cost down and it also makes the whole system more reactive. We don’t want the particle physicists answering recurrent questions which have been answered already many times. This also makes it much easier and quicker to bring a new service contractor on board.

Martens also sees this as a new market opening up for ServiceNow, as there are many businesses that already exploit ITIL to manage their information services and could transition that knowledge to wider service requirements as well:

Yes it’s a new market, but  it makes sense. I came from the IT world and I moved into this other world. I saw there may be an opportunity and it’s absolutely something that’s going to happen I think.

My take
For many it the front lines of IT management this story may seem like a side issue, yet it is an important example of how tools primarily focused on pure IT management can find roles outside in the real world.
Image credit - CERN Read more on: IT service managementThe new professional and IT as a service 