
Thanks to a focus on cost cutting, inexperienced staff, an over-reliance on outsourced IT and a perception that it’s more of a ‘business problem’, the charity sector is not keeping on top of the threat posed by modern-day cyber attacks.
According to a new piece of qualitative research carried out the the Department for Culture, Media and Sport, charities also believe that cyber protection, including insurance, is too expensive to consider and perceived to be a bit of a ‘luxury’.
Charities are also unprepared for the incoming EU GDPR legislation, which will come into force in March 2018, and places far stricter requirements on organisations to organise and control their data. For example, once the legislation is in place, organisations will be required to delete all of an individual’s data upon request.
The fines for not complying with GDPR could reach €20 million or 4% of global annual turnover.
The research coincides with the government’s annual Cyber Governance Health Check Report, which found that businesses are also not ready for the new incoming data protection legislation, with only 6% of the FTSE 350 stating that they are “completely prepared” for the changes.
According to the charity sector findings, which are based on 30 in-depth interviews undertaken earlier this year, with a range of charities by income, location and charitable area, those in the third sector don’t seem to perceive ‘cyber security’ as a top priority. It states:
Those in charge of cyber security, especially in smaller organisations, did not feel well informed about the topic, and several noted that they had not seriously considered it before or proactively sought out any information, often leaving it to an outsourced IT provider to deal with.
In this context, there was often a low awareness of the Government support available on cyber security. This was despite the fact that the Government and other public bodies were considered as trustworthy sources of information. Some participants assumed that if the issue was important enough for them to address, they would hear about it through their established communication channels, via the Charity Commission or voluntary support bodies, such as NCVO.
In some cases, participants assumed cyber security was more of an issue for businesses than for charities. These participant assumed that businesses would be more at risk as they would be more likely to hold customers’ financial details and generally be expected to have more cash in the bank.
The outsourcing problem
Given that many charities would be classed as small-to-medium organisations, it’s unsurprising that most rely on third parties or outsourcing providers to supply their technology and infrastructure. However, the issue with this, as the research notes, is that charities then perceive cyber security to be the ‘problem’ of the IT provider – despite the fact that it is the charity that would be liable for any serious breaches or attacks.
The report states:
Relationships with external providers tended to be very passive, and this was linked to the fact that charities did not have the technical expertise to deal with the external provider. There was a sense from some charities that by outsourcing their IT, the issue of cyber security was kept at arm’s length, and that they did not necessarily need to engage with the topic internally, as it was all dealt with by the highly trusted external provider.
One Chief Executive noted that they would only get in touch with their IT provider when something went wrong, and would not proactively contact them otherwise. In another case, with a large charity providing support for unpaid carers, the guidance around data storage followed by staff and volunteers had been produced directly by the outsourced IT provider.
The findings indicate that some charities are unsure about how to check the cyber effectiveness of an IT service provider, whilst others chose providers based on decisions made by other organisations, with the assumption that they would have carried out the necessary checks.
The report adds:
There were instances where charities had attempted to validate the security of their providers. One charity had tried to find a secure provider by simply using the same provider as their local authority (and assuming the local authority would have checked the provider’s security credentials). Similarly, another large healthcare charity was based in a UK university, and felt it was safest to use the university’s IT infrastructure, which they assumed would be cyber secure.
However, in other cases, participants admitted that they could not judge for themselves whether the outsourced provider was doing a good or bad job. This indicates that some charities struggled to identify appropriate providers and to manage the contracts effectively.
The cost of becoming secure
One recurring theme that emerged from the report that charities typically don’t have the time or resources to focus their efforts on cyber security. Some noted that they had very little reserves, so would likely not be a target, whilst others simply just see bolstering cyber protections as a bit of a luxury. These tight budgets, as a result, have a direct impact on training staff and/or getting effective cyber insurance. The report notes:
Competing demands on time and resources – with greater focus often given to areas such as fundraising and delivery – meant that cyber security was often de-prioritised and could lack investment. As a result, there was often a reliance on outsourced IT providers, as well as informal sources of support such as friends, family or other local charities.
Cyber insurance was similarly often seen as too expensive to consider. Some charities noted that they had wider insurance policies such as public liability insurance or business continuity insurance, but were not clear on whether these would cover them in the result of a cyber attack.
In other cases, cyber security was considered as an unaffordable luxury. Some participants said they might invest more in areas such as awareness raising, training and outsourced cyber security if they had the funds to do this, but without these funds there was a sense that there was nothing they could do.
One participant from a mid-sized health and social care charity felt, for example, that protecting themselves was not worth the cost – they were instead prepared to accept a financially damaging cyber attack on the basis that their donors would by sympathetic to lost funds, knowing that the charity does not have money to spend on cyber security.
GDPR is coming
The research came across examples of charities that had incurred cyber security breaches where non-personal data were lost, and where organisations spent considerable amount of time getting their data restored. There were also examples where charities had incurred a sizable financial cost from a cyber security breach.
And whilst charities had a belief in the importance of data protection, this did not always translate into thinking that cyber security was important. The report notes that some smaller charities especially did not make the link between data protection and cyber security, seeing them as two distinct issues.
For example, some charities said that data protection was one of their top concerns, and had kept abreast of data protection law proactively, but had not looked proactively into any information on cyber security. The research, in particular, highlighted the lack of education around the forthcoming GDPR legislation. It states:
Awareness of GDPR specifically was low, reflecting that many had not looked into the upcoming regulatory changes. At most, some participants had read up on the topic but had not taken any action to adhere to GDPR yet.
Image credit - Images free for commercial use Read more on: Data privacyDigital government and public servicesRegulation

