
David Kasonga – consultant
When I meet customers and their representatives, I’m looking for that ‘something special’ that distinguishes a successful technology implementation. Most often, it starts with a clear and present problem that cannot be overcome using existing solutions. But that in itself is not enough. Most often, it needs a motivated leader who understands what is needed and can, at the same time, stand alongside those who have to use the solution. Such was the case when I recently met David Kasonga, a business and systems analyst who specializes in Box implementations for UK local government.
Kasonga described how his most recent project went viral once users understood the benefits. Here is the background:
When I joined the local government in July of last year, the council had already engaged in a digital transformation project. They were planning on how they would of course, cut cost. And they were looking for some kind of solution to a legacy storage system that was growing by almost close to ten, twenty gigabytes per day. The business had analyzed and investigated a few cloud providers out there. They favored Box due to the security, the ease of internal and external collaboration, and also enabling the staff to be more productive in using their mobile devices. Even so, the council needed us to get the project going in various pilots.
At the time, the council acquired 150 licenses, more as a proof of concept than anything else but they wanted a fast track implementation.
This case is unusual because many of the services provided by UK local government cut across departments, requiring a significant amount of co-operation. Most often, users had to make requests to IT in order to get access to the parts of the storage system they needed. This was a cumbersome and inefficient process. In short, as service demands increased, the existing system was getting in the way of people’s ability to get their job done. A key part of getting Box rolled out relied upon providing access controls that do not require IT’s intervention. But equally, Kasonga says that they needed a ripple effect to occur between users.
We were counting on that ripple effect, which is a strategy that worked for us. The business users caught on by themselves and wanted more of the software. It was apparent very quickly that freeing up users and IT had obvious benefits in terms of time taken to resolve questions for council customers and for IT that needed to get on with other projects but had found itself getting bogged down.
One surprising near win comes from the legal department. It didn’t come without challenges.
The legal department creates large legal bundles that they send out to the court. You’re talking about reams of papers printed out, sent to the courts, and copied to the lawyers. And sometimes they put it in a PDF format electronically and you can’t send it via email. It was a hot mess. The problem we encountered at first was, most judges didn’t want to change. They still wanted the reams of papers. We found two judges that were prepared to try Box as an alternative. We were just getting success and then boom! That work was outsourced.
Undeterred, Kasonga discovered that the Coroner’s Office had a similar requirement.
They told us they put together large document bundles that are shared with lawyers and with families. It was really the same use case we had been looking qt for the judges so we rolled that out and it has worked very successfully.
What about other departments?
Initially, Kasonga thought that it would make sense to go from department to department. Unfortunately, the number of requests became overwhelming so he switched tack to roll out on a per request basis. Even then, concerns over security kept cropping up. IT had already bought into Box but he was still faced with ongoing questions about data residency and compliance from the business. I found that surprising but as he explains:
People have heard of this cloud thing but they don’t really understand it. They hear about security issues but again, they can’t always relate what they hear to what they have to deal with on a daily basis. They worry that when we are transferring responsibility to them for access control purposes that somehow that increases the security risks. I’m not sure we can overcome that worry today because for many people this is still new. What we can do though is point to the successes we see in departments you’d not think would be so keen  but which have clear collaboration issues.
We then moved on to discuss integrations to local government specific integrations. Some work has been done there but for Kasonga, the next big hurdle is Office 365 integration. Right now, testing is underway to determine how best to use Box in the context of an Office 365 environment where the hope is to retire the Citrix environment.
We think there is a lot of promise here, in fact I’d say Box and Office 365 is a marriage made in heaven, but we also have to consider the network situation.
Kasonga concluded by telling me that what started out as a modest Box storage pilot is now scheduled to reach 1,600 out of around 2,500 staff.  Box can go a long way in a business but it isn’t needed absolutely everywhere. At least not yet.
Throughout our conversation, I got a clear sense of excitement at the way this project has gone, especially given that it has been running on a very tight timeframe of just over 15 months. While there is commonality in some of the use cases, the keys to success were obvious:

A system of working that was fast becoming obsolete.
A pre-existing culture of collaboration, however loosely assembled makes a big difference.
Empowering users to just get things done may be scary at first but quickly becomes valuable.
Ensuring that people hear about success through both formal and informal means.
Letting the rollout proceed at its own organic pace rather than a forced march.
Light touch training and support.

Image credit - Story image via the author, featured image via © Login - Fotolia.comDisclosure - Box covered most of my travel and expense for attending BoxWorks 2016Read more on: Digital government and public servicesDigital transformation - frictionless enterpriseProductivitySecurityUse casesUser experience

