
One of the toughest sections I studied at university centered on gender inequality. At the time I was in a relationship with a hardcore feminist so what could possibly go wrong? Plenty as it turns out. Fast forward 22 years and I am still in the same relationship but now with the added frissance of thinking about what gender inequality means in technology environments. Why? a bunch of clients believe it is an important topic but each has unique problems attached to solving in what is a ‘man’s world.’
So when I discovered I had the opportunity to listen to Cindy Jutras talking about the Plex women’s breakfast I had one thought in mind: blow it – I’ll learn something.
Our video shoot was one of the toughest I’ver ever done. Why? I was concerned to match Cindy’s sincerity with erudite questions. I’m not sure I got there and throughout the shoot I was nervous to a degree I have not known in many years. All the same, Cindy was a gracious guest and provides the perfect balance between optimism and reality, To that extent the video succeeds.
As an aside, I asked several of my women friends to critique the shoot – they all agree that Cindy got it pretty much right.
Plex deserves a great deal of credit for setting up what was a sold out event with a long waiting list. Who would ever have thought that women in manufacturing are taking a lead in this topic? Yet that is exactly what Cindy discusses. From my POV – I met with several very powerful women who all made strong cases for their topic areas without needing to bang the feminist drum. I was both impressed and humbled.
As an older white male I see what Cindy discusses as both refreshing and disturbing. I am not sure for instance whether I have the understanding to simply listen to a woman without mentally criticizing what she might have to say in advance of understanding her POV – a learning lesson for me.
Regardless – here’s the shoot – you decide…and thanks Cindy for being a stand up example of femininity in the workplace.

Disclosure: this video was shot at PowerPlex 2015. Plex covered most of my T&E for the event and provided video production facilities.
Read more on: Digital transformation - frictionless enterpriseDiversity 