


Convergence of a hyper nature?
If the runes of IT industry history are any guide, then it seems quite likely that one of Cisco’s next moves should be to abandon manufacturing in favor of even more software development. 
This however is not part of the company’s plan, according to Frank Palumbo, the company’s SVP Global Data Center Sales, but he acknowledges that the evidence can be read that way.
He was speaking at the company’s occasional, travelling conference series on enterprise data center and cloud issues, which last week shipped up in Rome. The content was all software, and despite the company’s huge networking hardware heritage, that software was aimed squarely at the issue of data center and cloud services management and exploitation.
Though Palumbo states that its margins on hardware systems remain very healthy and that there are no plans to withdraw from those markets, the trend can’t help but prompt the speculative thought. Cisco is starting to pull together a good story around applications and services deployment and management for the enterprise IT sector, particularly in terms of the mix of new, recent, old and downright historical technologies that most enterprises find themselves working with these days.
Key components in the Cisco portfolio for this task are recent additions. The company moved to acquire CliQr Technologies on 1 March, at the same time it introduced Hyperflex. CliQr is a technology-agnostic service orchestration tool that is intended to be able to connect any application to any other. Hyperflex, as the name implies, is the company’s pitch into the hyper-converged systems marketplace, where it will come up against rivals such as Nutanix.
Double tracking
Mention of Nutanix is pertinent here as it represents, in many ways, the opposite of Cisco’s approach to this new market. 
For example, Cisco sees the impact of Nutanix on its enterprise customers as just another silo. This could be argued to be a correct view. However, it can equally be argued that Nutanix is pitching at building a single silo capable of handling just about everything, from new applications designed to fully exploit hyper-convergence through to legacy business management applications, such as those from SAP and Oracle.
Cisco, on the other hand, sees a big enterprise requirement for operating a dual-track approach to data center and cloud services. Here, the two domains of old and new applications are intended to stay separated, running in the environments that suit them and the IT management best.
 This can be read as appealing to the innate conservatism of established enterprise users, though it can also be seen as an extremely sensible management strategy, so long as solid bridges can be built between them.
The company is already targeting that need for bridges with the acquisition of CliQr. It is developing reference designs to be used with CliQr that can be quickly exploited by enterprise IT departments to build complex services that join old and new environments.
According to Palumbo, CliQr can orchestrate a complete environment for an application and service:

This goes much further than simply spinning up some servers. This can, for example, set up a complete policy-driven environment where the policy includes governance and compliance requirements where some parts of the service must be run on-premise while other parts can be run anywhere convenient.

Inbar Lasser-Raab, Cisco’s VP of Product and Solutions Marketing, sees CliQr as qualifying for the sobriquet of Orchestration 2.0: 

It is funny how some words get re-used. This used to be the term for low level management in Service Oriented Architectures but now it has grown to cover the next level of abstraction, building whole systems and services.

Its key capability is in working across the spectrum of applications, services and systems that typical enterprises have in their data centers, from ageing legacy back office applications running on pensionable one-application-per-server environments all the way through to the latest IoT micro-services running on hyper-converged systems.
What is more, Cisco sees the dual-track model, with its ageing big applications deployments, staying in place for a good while. Those applications will need to be mixed with the new apps running on a hyper-converged architecture that is largely driven by the development community. 
It is also the type of data center architecture which the company expects will draw applications currently running in public cloud services, back into running on on-premise resources.
Hyper-converged, just for the new?
The Hyperflex architecture was also announced on 1 March. According to Palumbo the goal is to provide an environment that is simple to set up and deployable out of the box in minutes, while offering 30% lower TCO and 48% higher performance. It is also sees it as the platform for the widespread use of applications containers. He stated that it is one of the few hyper-converged platforms that is ready for mission critical applications. 
For the moment at least, the company sees hyper-converged systems as being for a very specific range of largely new applications. It is talking with some of the existing major business applications providers about certifying their wares on Hyperflex, in the same way that Nutanix has done, but it does not see there being too much of a rush. The company has, of course, already certified its legacy market service capabilities with the major applications vendors. 
This is a perhaps curious position to adopt, in that it does seem to validate the strategy adopted by Nutanix, namely getting its hyper-converged platform certified for legacy applications – including the movement of current, production applications from the likes of SAP and Oracle – while at the same time leaving the market open to the company.
Here lies a clear demonstration of the two schools of thought about where users are coming from when it comes to their core thinking about how their applications portfolios need to be managed and run in the future. Cisco does seem to be pitching itself squarely at those users that feel more assured maintaining their current business management processes in the environments which run them successfully already, while new applications are run in new hyper-converged environments.
The likes of Nutanix, on the other hand, is proving attractive to those users who see advantages in having a single environment capable of running ‘everything’ – or at least the majority of applications, both new and old-  that is of importance. 
Cisco’s arguments against this are that the latter approach simply creates a new silo model. That is, at one level, a justifiable point. However, if everything of importance to the business is running in the one silo there can be arguments in favour of performance, scalability, and flexibility and business agility.
On the other side, however, is the undeniable reality that, for many enterprises, their environment is a collection of different technology stacks, tactical business needs and everything else that goes to creating a mass of operational complexities. 
The reality of making that work – for example, creating an operational environment where a 10 year-old legacy back office application now has to communicate in real time with several Internet of Things applications and services – will demand an orchestration capability that can work with just about anything.
This is the user community Cisco is now making a big play for, and why it invested in CliQr. 
My take 
The key dichotomy amongst the enterprise user community – whether to grow from what they know slowly into a newer, wider world, or jump into the new to gain an advantage – now has champions on both sides. For Cisco, there will be plenty of mileage in the former marketplace, at least for a while. But if enterprise users take to CliQr, and it fulfils its potential in building complex, pan-technology-stack service orchestrations, it could be on a long term winner as well. 
Read more on: Cloud platforms - infrastructure and architectureDevOps NoSQL and the open source stack 