
 
Or in 90 days at any rate…
Here’s an apt summary of the Citrix Synergy user event taking place this week in Anaheim, California:
If there is an underlying word that sums up the Citrix Synergy conference currently underway, it would probably be ‘productivity’. The company has made a bunch of announcements of new and reworked products and services that stretch across managing cloud sprawl, adding new security tools and methodologies, analytical tools, particularly to bolster the security efforts and, last but by no means least, an extended Workspace toolset for personal productivity.
The problem is that those are, in fact, the exact opening words to our coverage of last year’s Synergy event.
The location might have changed – the firm has switched Disneyworld’s Orlando for Disneyland’s Anaheim; the CEO might have changed – former CFO David Henshall took over the reins from Kirill Tatarinov last July; but the announcements and themes are pretty much a carbon copy of last year’s event.
The main difference a year on is that the products that were unveiled at Synergy 2017 are now actually available – or in some cases, within the next 90 days!
The headline announcement for the firm is the Citrix Workspace app, billed as a one-stop shop for application access and information retrieval, regardless of where the data is stored. Precipitated by the rise of the millennials and the shift to mobile working, the Citrix Workspace app offers users a central point to access Windows, Linux, mobile, SaaS and web apps, desktops and files.
Universal search is also on offer, meaning there is no longer a need to visit different applications or systems to retrieve all your relevant information, whether it’s stored in repositories like OneDrive for Business, ShareFile, Salesforce and so on.
According to Henshall, this product will be crucial for organisations burdened with running a myriad of different applications – a number that he says now stands at 100 per organisation, all with their own environments and log-ins, making it difficult for workers to obtain the information they need to get the job done. Henshall added:
Complexity of course, it just adds cost. It just adds cost and it slows us down along the way. What we’re hearing from a lot of customers is that SaaS and cloud is powerful to the environment, but they’re being forced to engage in a whole bunch of discrete point product solutions in order to manage this complexity.
The average company is spending between $800 and $1,000 per person per year just to manage this complexity, just to license this complexity. These costs are in addition to what you’re already spending today to manage your traditional IT environment. It’s a lot of money to be spending on declining productivity.
The Citrix Workspace app is the firm’s answer to this challenge, offering more “people-centric computing” and focused on making teams much more productive. Henshall explained:
We’ve built a universal workspace. It’s going to be applicable to every user in every organization. It will add value to every employee, whether just a few SaaS apps all the way up to your most complex requirements. The result is everything you need to be productive in one single unified experience.
Citrix demoed various use cases of the new app, from switching through devices seamlessly; getting into a PowerPoint presentation from the app to add people to it; and moving an email thread into Slack thanks to integration between the collaboration platform and Secure Mail.
For security, the app supports single-sign on, so once a user has signed into the core Workspace they won’t need to use their passwords for the myriad of apps they might use in any given day.
The app also locks down insecure web browsing. If Salesforce is being used over airport Wi-Fi, for example, the app will automatically open a secure embedded browser inside the Workspace, with a dynamic watermark. This means company security policy over copy/paste or phishing emails, for example, will still be enforced, and corporate data will stay safe.
ServiceNow integration is also on offer, so when a user needs a new app or desktop, they can request resources within the Citrix Workspace app to generate a ServiceNow helpdesk ticket. IT admins can then automate the provisioning of the app or desktop directly to the user’s interface..
Analytics
Citrix also announced availability of its new security analytics technology, which builds a profile of every individual and their typical activities, devices and access points, and then dynamically monitors them. If anomalies are detected, the user can automatically be prevented from taking that particular action, based on rules and policies created by the business.
Even though the objective is a valid one, this type of personalised profile monitoring sounds a little sinister, especially with the upcoming GDPR rules heightening firms’ paranoia around privacy and data-collection.
Aside from its own product releases, Citrix reiterated the importance of supporting customers using a range of technology providers rather than trying to push vendor lock-in. Google Cloud’s chief operating officer Diane Bryant joined Henshall on stage to highlight the firms’ mutual commitment to offering customers more choice, lower cost and better productivity. Bryant said:
IT has moved from being a support function, a cost center to actually driving and fuelling the business. And we know it’s a multi-cloud world and it’s going to remain a multi-cloud world. It was a topic debated a while back but certainly every day we see that it’s more and more true.
In support of this partnership, Citrix announced Autoscale for Google Cloud Platform (GCP), to help firms better manage their compute resources to save costs. Later this year, customers will be able to automate a Citrix environment on GCP directly from the Citrix cloud.
Although Citrix was keen to profess its love for its partner of seven years, Google, it couldn’t leave out original partner of 20 years Microsoft, with the announcement of upcoming support for the Azure Government Cloud.
My take
Often with these annual user shindigs, it’s an opportunity for the CEO to shout from the rooftops about his or her organisation’s many successes and developments of the previous 12 months; or in the mode of the Microsoft CEO this week, using it as a platform to take a leadership role on the current hot industry topics.
Henshall took neither of those approaches, instead focusing on tried and tested themes of productivity, mobile and cloud. As Henshall pointed out to the audience:
For years at Citrix we’ve talked a lot about how we improve the productivity of your most valuable asset – your people. This week you’re going to hear a lot more about the future of work.
As was also noted at the event, though, the future of work is already here, and mobile, cloud and productivity already feel a little like rather old topics within that conversation.  Time to focus on the use cases – of which, more to come on Day 2.
Image credit - TwitterRead more on: Collaboration sharing and digital productivityFuture of workProductivity 