
 
Stephanie Cox at Synergy
When Indiana University first decided to deploy Citrix technology back in 2011 to enable its staff and students to more easily access the latest software, it decided to go big.
Stephanie Cox, Manager of Virtualization Services at the university, explains:
They were going after ageing end-point devices. They had a lot of old computers. That lifecycle replacement money was what fuelled the initial investment.
It made sense to mimic what was on all of those ageing computers. So they ended up with a very large image, huge, they couldn’t do anything with it, with all of the applications we had a license to carry. They tried to offer it to everyone. It did not go very well.
Considering the size of the project, dubbed IUanyWare, a migration en masse was always going to be a challenge. The university’s virtualization team supports all eight campus locations across the state of Indiana, and it offers every software package it has a license for to all 130,000 students and faculty staff.
By the time Cox joined the university five years ago, the Citrix deployment was already underway. The university had a dual purpose in mind when it signed up with the tech vendor – ditching its many ageing desktop machines that were no longer able to handle the latest software; and maintaining the required educational software updates across local computer labs and student laptops.
Indiana University rolled out XenApp and XenDesktop across more than 300 servers, while Citrix NetScalers ensure secure access, and Citrix Workspace Environment Management helps to lock down the images and provide fast log-on times. All this means users are free to work from any device of their choosing.
After taking the all-in approach with the initial rollout, the university soon learned a slimmed-down model was more sensible. Cox admits:
We got smarter over time, and then we ended up busting that up from one big image to smaller ones that just made sense. We cleaned up that big image that was a pain to support and sometimes it launched and sometimes it didn’t. In doing that, we were able to gain confidence in the platform itself and the actual product and the delivery of it. That started inspiring other use cases.
Uptake
The first department that came knocking was the Dentistry School, which had a set of apps they were finding very difficult to maintain on the students’ end-point devices. They wanted to go down the virtualization routes, and Cox’s team was able to fulfill that request. The impact was huge, she adds:
It changed the way those students were able to learn, we were able to add more people into the program and we added security. It was about getting the technology cleaned up; getting it to the right people; and then letting people like dentistry and medicine come along and see if they can use it for other things.
As well as deploying HPIAA-compliant desktops for the Dentistry School, the School of Speech and Hearing Sciences, and the IU Medical School, The Office of Online Learning is currently one of the biggest use cases for the Citrix software.
As distance-learning specialists, the professors were looking for a way to give their students access to a particular course and the required tools or applications in a centralized location, rather than sending the information to be downloaded to their own PCs.
The university is now able to offer a virtual desktop that students can log into, where the professors have already pushed the relevant content and documents to the virtual drives. Students get everything they need for a class in one place, making it a great time-saver.
Working on specific projects for specific departments has helped the university get broad buy-in for the Citrix application access model – the technology now has an 88.7% customer satisfaction rate. But it wasn’t always so well-rated, as Cox explains:
When I came there five years ago, it was not a popular thing. Maybe false expectations had been set, they start hearing about this new virtualization that’s coming that can probably do anything and that kind of soured it initially. They started off really large, they licensed everything for all those users and thought they could replace every endpoint device with a thin client.
To win them back, it’s really just been finding a small use case and a customer that you know will work with you. Partnering with a customer has been the key for how we’ve been successful. I wanted the trust too. They had to actually see that we were stable and were secure as we said. We couldn’t tell them that, they had to see evidence.
The university has taken further security measures more recently, upgrading to two-factor  authentication (2FA) for application access by rolling out Duo in November 2017, with Citrix NetScaler Gateway as the second form of authentication. The Duo project was managed by the university’s Identity Management team, which initially licensed the 2FA application for its 20,000 staff. Finding it a cost-effective way of securing the system, they went ahead and included the students.
My take
Cox made a good point that in the world of academia, security concerns are often quite different to those in industry:
I’ve been a Citrix engineer for about 18 years. Only five of those have been in the public sector for education, all of those other years I’ve been in big pharma. They do different security. I was kind of blown away when I came to Indiana University and thought, ‘Oh my god, we don’t really have any [security]’. But that’s not really true, it’s just that we have a different set of resources to protect. The thing that I want to protect the most is manipulation of my resources. We have a lot of servers that are out there, the last thing I want is for them to be used for malicious attacks.
The next project for the team is the rollout of Windows 10, currently available as a beta, a good use case in point for how the underlying Citrix technology enables access to the very latest software versions. Contrast that with public-sector organizations the world over, which are still running many thousands of Windows XP machines and face major infrastructure overhauls toupgrade.
 
Image credit - Indiana UniversityRead more on: Cloud platforms - infrastructure and architectureDigital enterprise in the real world 