

The end of a five-year managed services contract is a good opportunity for any CIO to take stock of their domain and make some important decisions about the future.
When Alan Crawford, CIO at skills development, training and qualifications provider City & Guilds, was facing just that situation, he came up with a strategy that struck some in his team as bold, if not reckless.
Crawford’s proposal was to migrate the business-critical systems that keep City & Guilds up and running to the Microsoft Azure cloud. There, they would be managed by staff from IT services company Ensono, which had previously hosted those systems in its own data centres.
These systems include City & Guild’s core SAP system, including a bunch of education-specific modules for tasks such as student lifecycle management; Sitecore, for running the organization’s websites and e-commerce operations; and E-volve, which City & Guilds uses to provide web-based assessment and exam administration to training centres.
For some in his team and in the wider business, says Crawford, agreeing to go along with this plan involved:
…a leap of faith. They took some convincing that the cloud was a place where we could safely and reliably run business-critical systems and I had to work to build their confidence, along with our partners at Microsoft and Ensono, that we could achieve that.
Springboard for innovation 
There is certainly some risk involved. In making this move, City & Guilds will be among the first organizations to run SAP S/4HANA on Microsoft Azure, since SAP’s Bill McDermott and Microsoft’s Satya Nadella announced that deployment option back in November 2017.
For City & Guilds, it has been necessary to upgrade the software twice – once in order to ready it for migration to Azure, and then again post-migration to S/4HANA. No straightforward ‘lift and shift’, then, but Crawford’s still convinced it’s the right move:
For me, with this contract coming to an end, it was a case of making the move in a bold way, or doing it next time around, after another five-year contract came to an end, having missed out on five years of cloud benefits. So yes, there was some bravery involved, but it was honestly based on sound business sense.
When I spoke to Crawford, the migration process was still underway but had so far gone to plan, he said. Once it’s over, some time this month, it will provide a springboard for innovation, he reckons: for example, City & Guilds plans to deploy Successfactors for human resources and also migrate overseas operations that currently have their own finance systems, for example, onto this main cloud platform.
Cloud makeover 
Other systems will get a spruce-up, too, says Crawford:
Outstanding requests for improvement that hadn’t previously been a priority have become more important in light of this project and are now getting our attention.
For example, Sitecore is used to run both websites and ecommerce operations – but since the ecommerce shop is more integrated with back-end processes, such as sales order processing, it requires more controlled management. Websites, by comparison, can be managed among more agile lines. So in moving Sitecore to Azure, the decision has been made to separate websites from e-commerce.
Plus, there are the extra ‘bells and whistles’ that can be accessed by Microsoft Azure customers, says Crawford.
I really like Azure Application Insights – once you move an app to Azure, you can just plug it in and go. It’s really simple. Apart from giving you performance stats and all the rest of it, it also tells you a lot about people’s customer journeys – so if they’re using a particular page a lot and that page is running relatively slowly, you can target your developers and your investments to where you know it’s really going to make a difference in customer experience terms.
Plus, City & Guilds is starting to talk to Microsoft and Ensono about chatbots, among other projects. Its customer contact centre in Wakefield employs around 60 agents, but Crawford reckons that the most common 250 questions asked – for example, ‘How can I get a copy of my certificate sent to me?’ – could be answered by a virtual assistant.
As Crawford points out, his strategy may have seemed bold to many at the start – but playing it safe and sticking with what you know comes with its own risks too, especially in an age of digital disruption:
The thing I’ve been keen to get across from the beginning is that this whole move will save us money, yes, but at the same time, it also gives us opportunities for innovation that we just wouldn’t have otherwise – or might have needed to wait for five more years to implement.
Image credit - City & GuildsDisclosure - At time of writing, SAP is a premier partner of diginomica. Read more on: Cloud platforms - infrastructure and architectureDigital enterprise in the real worldProductivityUse cases 