
Neil Thomas
It does seem to be an inordinately long process but, if ClaraNet is typical of the hosting and cloud services providers, their move from being just an Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS) business to offering a richer set of platform services is now at last under way.
It is, perhaps, a sign that the industry is at last realising that its long term market potential is to move up the food chain and de-cerebralise what they offer in order to match what users need.
ClaraNet is pitching at a move beyond the traditional `pencil-making’ model of the IaaS provider, where the customer that requires a ‘pencil’ in order to gain business benefit, but the service provider offers up just a block of wood and a lump of graphite. In most cases, the customers are also told to buy their own tools to make their pencils.
According to UK Product Director, Neil Thomas, the company is now moving beyond just being an infrastructure services provider and into the area of Platform as a Service (PaaS) providing a platform on which customers can build their services with the adding of new tools and applications.
It is also investing in new storage platforms, based on Solid-State Disk (SSD) technology, which offers faster and more flexible storage options, and has added new services providing managed database capabilities and desktop web-hosting:
We like to think we have a better idea of why customers buy services from us – it is because we understand that they live or die by their data.
Code deployment
One of Thomas’ aims is to help customers deploy code between development and production, with more than half an eye on the trend towards continuous delivery of code. Applications development is now becoming much faster with much shorter development cycles:
We can offer the scale and the skills, as well as a lower price/performance level, together with a strong service focus.
He said the company is now finding that customers are thinking much more strategically about which service providers can cover off the services they need, but are not part of their core value proposition – what Thomas calls the commodity applications.
There is also a growing pressure on businesses, as witnessed by the recent Windows Server 2003 story, that are struggling to integrate their existing world of legacy systems with the new world of cloud-delivered applications and services that they also need to develop their businesses. There is a growing need for IT departments to off-load the management of commodity tools that are widely used in the business community so they can concentrate on the new requirements.
So Thomas sees evidence that users are now starting to move to an application-first approach to buying services. This can then be coupled with the shorter life cycle of applications, and the trend towards continuous delivery of the code. Together, they point to a higher potential for disruption of traditional IT management models. He sees this leading a growing number of users looking towards cloud service providers that can offer PaaS capabilities.
ClaraNet is now looking offer a mix of applications and services as the basis of a Platform as a Service (PaaS) offering. This will include SaaS tools for utility applications such as email services.
While the company has long focused on using its own datacenter resources, the plan is to start using more public cloud service providers as the basis for these utility services:
We will continue to use our own datacenter resources for the foreseeable future, as customers will always have certain applications or business issues where this makes sense. For example, many of them face compliance issues with regard to data residency, so our network of datacentrers will continue to be an important component in what we can offer to meet that need. We aim to become a trusted adviser for customers, offering them a range of service options that suit their specific needs.
Thomas makes an interesting observation about ClaraNet’s ability to achieve this objective. He sees the company having the ability to understand what customers are really saying about the services they require, framed in the customer’s business language, as central skill:
The cloud offers them more choice and options than ever before, and many are uncertain about the applications they need, especially as they move beyond using their trusted legacy applications. We aim to be able to analyse their requirements for availability and performance to establish what they really do need.
My take
Even the likes of Amazon is starting to react to the inevitable negative pressure on service prices that just providing infrastructure resources inevitably means. The price trend is inevitably towards zero. Adding value is the only way to go, and value is in the eye of the beholder – the business users.
So companies like ClaraNet pitching at decerebralising their service offerings – making them a no-brainer decision for the users to select – is not only sensible but inevitable. It also shows that the service provider industry is at last starting to understand what it is actually selling. Then again, customers seem to have been equally slow in understanding what they really need to buy.

Read more on: Cloud ERP financials and supply chainInfrastructureSecurity 