
Shortcomings
A valuable reminder about public sector cloud computing adoption can be seen in criticism of the US Department of Defense’s (DoD) lack of metrics to prove that its cloud-centric Joint Information Environment is delivering the financial benefits claimed for it.
The Joint Information Environment (JIE) is a wide-ranging program to consolidate and standardize DoD and military-service IT and networks across all its branches. It’s a critical element of US defence capabilities and their strategic direction and cloud computing services are at the heart of its development.
According to a report by the department’s Inspector General (IG), the DoD is falling short on a number of things, including having no standardised definition of cloud computing in place and no repository for cloud services contracts that would allow for the Return on Investment (ROI) to be tracked and measured.
The report states:
Specifically, DOD cannot determine whether it achieves actual cost savings or benefits from adopting cloud computing services.
It finds:
DoD did not maintain a comprehensive list of cloud computing service contracts. This occurred because the DoD CIO did not establish a standard, Department-wide definition for cloud computing and did not develop an integrated repository that could provide detailed information to identify cloud computing service contracts.
As a result, DoD cannot measure the effectiveness of the DoD cloud computing initiative. Specifically, DoD cannot determine whether it achieves actual cost savings or benefits from adopting cloud computing services.
When the IG asked for a list of contracts from fiscal 2011 through fiscal 2014, the DoD CIO’s office had to cobble them together from “various sources” and not on an ‘apples and apples’ criteria:
Cloud computing service contract information did not always match what the DoD CIO representatives provided.
DoD CIO representatives acknowledged that DoD reporting systems were not configured to collect and provide a reliable inventory.
Specifically, the IG reported cited as a case in point, that the DoD CIO list contained three Army indefinite-delivery, indefinite-quantity (IDIQ) contracts for cloud computing services, while the Army Contracting Command cited six additional IDIQ contracts.
There’s also the chance, according to the DoD, that it hasn’t been able to provide all the information asked for.
Lack of definition
The lack of a standard application of a cloud computing definition is also picked out for criticism, with different departments and agencies picking and choosing from the NIST definition:
DOD CIO representatives stated that an IT service did not have to possess all five essential characteristics of the NIST cloud definition to be considered a cloud computing service. Air Force CIO representatives stated they considered all five essential characteristics needed to classify an IT service as a cloud computing service. Navy CIO representatives stated there was a lack of clarity to determine whether a service had to meet all NIST characteristics.
Equally seriously, given that security concerns are still cited as the primary reason for resistance to cloud adoption in government circles, that lack of a repository could also hamper DoD’s ability to identify security risks. The IG notes:
Without accurate and complete inventories of cloud computing systems, agencies did not know the extent to which their data resided outside their information system boundaries and were, therefore, subject to the inherent risks of cloud systems.
Likewise, although according to DoD CIO representatives, all DoD outsourced IT services must receive a security control  review, unless DoD Components accurately classify their information systems as using cloud computing services, DoD CIO will not be aware what security risks are specific to those services.
The IG report recommends that DOD develop a standardized departmentwide definition of cloud computing or adopt one based on the National Institute of Standards and Technology’s definition. It also calls for the creation of an integrated repository for cloud services contracts.
It’s unclear what happens next. Responding to the report, the Pentagon’s principal deputy CIO David L. DeVries set himself against its findings, insisting that the DoD’s icloud security requirements guide adheres to the NIST definition of cloud services.
He added that enhancement of a reporting system Select and Native Programming Data Input System for IT (SNAP-IT), dealt with the single repository issue.
The IG was notably unimpressed by both those answers, suggesting that future criticism is on the cards.
My take
At a time when the DoD is looking to put more and more information up into commercial clouds, this report isn’t particularly helpful to the cause. Or at least, it won’t be unless the DoD and the Pentagon takes the criticisms in it on the chin and takes action to put them right.
Meanwhile, for the wider public sector, there are important lessons to be taken away from this around the importance of having established metrics in place and a single view of what the cloud actually means.
Read more on: Cloud platforms - infrastructure and architectureDigital government and public services

