
During his keynote presentation at the recent CloudBees/Jenkins World conference in Nice, CEO Sasha Labourey observed that all businesses now face the payment of an inevitable ‘Innovation Tax’ if they want to stay in business – with the subsequent demonstration of that tax in action as he ran through the latest developments from the company.
CloudBees may have started life with the aim of providing a Platform as a Service for Java-based applications development, but it soon backed away from that goal as it started to focus solely on the development and promotion of the open source Jenkins continuous applications delivery environment. While intended for both the cloud and on-premise use this has, in practice, ended up as a favourite tool for providing Dev/Ops capabilities in the world of the on-premise enterprise.
Now, however, the company is taking a step back to its cloud roots – or more specifically, forward to what those roots have grown into as the cloud becomes the route through to widely distributed, hugely scalable and rapidly changing applications.
Jenkins made it possible to automate old systems and applications, reducing the manual processes needed to run them. These, however, became islands. Also, the skilled people using Jenkins were often the target for other development groups that piggybacked off the original Jenkins implementations.
This has ended up with many-an enterprise creating what CloudBees CEO and co-founder, Sasha Labourey, calls the `Jenkinsteins’ – Frankenstein-esque software monsters of Jenkins implementations.
The issue for those enterprises has become how to get beyond this? The CloudBees answer has been to take Jenkins and build round its core capabilities the new tools and services needed to meet the needs of developing for the business potential of the cloud, particularly out into the future. Labourey said:
First off, there needs to be that old classic, C-level, top-down buy in and that is tough to get, at least until a competitor comes along taking market share through better use of software. Scaling infrastructure is also a problem if it is not in the cloud, so moving to the cloud is important. Companies that do not, or cannot, morph into being a software company will simply vanish. Every company has now to be a software company and every employee a potential developer.
The ‘Continuous Economy’ wards off continuous economies
The goal is what he calls the ‘Continuous Economy’, where the software side of the business is able to make available whatever applications the business side needs on a continuous basis. This is now what is expected of the business side of any company is they move to meet the need to run 24/7 operations in the cloud. And one of the key factors needed to meet such demands is that the infrastructure and resources are scalable, reliable and elastic.
This, Labourey said, goes beyond what can be offered by Enterprise Jenkins alone, which has its roots firmly in the world of on-premise operations. The is where CloudBees Suite is expected to come into play.
It aims to provide an end-to-end software delivery system for any business looking to adopt the trio of continuous integration (CI), continuous delivery (CD) and DevOps practices. These are what he sees as essential to creating an environment capable of delivering the software tools that make a continuous economy possible. It also moves the company out of the silo of being closely aligned with the enterprise/on-premise sector only.
To this end it now also gives the company a chance to target companies of all sizes, and with diverse software portfolios and future plans.
The Suite is made up of four main `CloudBees’ elements: Core, DevOptics, CodeShip, and Jenkins Support.
Core covers, as the name implies, the over-arching business goal of providing unified governance of continuous delivery operations and processes. This is an area where organisations must have both the efficiency and flexibility to run software pipelines in a self-managed way, whether that is in the cloud or on-premise. It also includes Limited Availability of Kube CD, the company’s toolset for delivering cloud native applications on Kubernetes.
DevOptics provides both visibility and the ability to deep-dive into captured operational data on the value streams and operations of the CI/CD infrastructure. This includes continuous reports on the four DevOps metrics: mean lead time, deployment frequency, mean time to restore and change fail percentage. These have been identified by DevOps Research and Assessment (DORA) as the leading indicators of IT and organisational performance.
One important area here is for businesses to know more about their developers, their capabilities and the impact those capabilities may have on the way the business itself develops and grows. He likened this to the world of CRM, particularly since the cloud came along.
Now it is one of the few universal systems of business record across a wide spread of business and management issues, ranging much wider now than just data on what a particular customer bought last. One of those wider issues is the ability to get information on business and operational processes, and therefore have some standardised processes in place.
There is plenty of similar information relevant to developers – about them and about their outputs, training, skills and interest areas – and all of it currently gets lost. So CloudBees has introduced a new ‘CRM-ish’ tool – CI/CD – as part of DevOptics, designed to gather all that information together.
Metrics like these are becoming increasingly important, especially as the development process moves from working on `projects’ and towards building products. That shift leads to integrated product teams that can also include users as the generators of business value. And this, at base level, is the foundation of Labourey’s views on the `continuous economy’.
DevOptics supports both Core and Jenkins CI/CD deployments and is available now. There is also a new `DevOptics Free’ plan so organisations can get basic operational insights, as a Service, at no cost.
CodeShip has been developed to provide a SaaS-delivered version of CI/CD for development teams that want to move towards the `NoOps’ world.
Jenkins Support does what it says on the tin and provides Jenkins users with full support for their Jenkins systems.
My Take:
Labourey’s observation about the `Innovation Tax’ is particularly pertinent right now. For most businesses  the times are not just ‘a-changing’, but are changing fast. Businesses are going to have to ‘re-wire’ themselves is they are to shorten or their own product lifecycles across the board. And they will have to shorten applications lifecycles even faster if they want to keep up with market demand. It used to be typical to have applications software in place for at least five years, probably 10 years, and sometimes even longer. These days that is approaching madness, for it is far too restrictive. The short-lived task (such as the classic marketing campaign) is being joined by the short-lived application.
Companies will know and understand how to exploit the short lived task, but they will undoubtedly suffer if the have no skills in the quid pro quo of producing the matching short-lived applications.
 
Image credit - Concepts of idea and innovation with light bulb on blackboard, by @turgaygundogdu, via Shutterstock.com.Read more on: Cloud platforms - infrastructure and architectureDevOps NoSQL and the open source stack 