
There are many things in life that are possible, but that does not mean it makes any sense at all to actually do them.
In fact, as we read in the news or in social media posts from various degrees of ‘friend’ nearly every day, people do the strangest things – often at great peril to them and theirs – for no more apparent reason than because it is possible. Oh, and the fame/notoriety that comes attached, of course.
That being said, it seems like there must be people in IT departments around the world pondering the prices of the individual services and applications that go to make up any cloud service their employers would like to get set up and running.
This must be the case because the latest edition of the Cloud Price Index, published quarterly by analyst firm 451 Research, is making something of a feature out of pointing out the savings users can make by shopping around for each part of their Web application.
The compiler of the Index, Dr. Owen Rogers, Research Director of 451 Research’s Digital Economics Unit, suggests that instead of using a single cloud provider to deliver an application, buyers who mix services from multiple providers can make substantial savings. And while the report only analyses US pricing, it is the view of 451 Research that similar savings can be achieved in other markets.
According to 451, the analysis suggests that if cloud buyers mix and match services and make long-term commitments to their providers, they can make substantial savings. These start at 58% for a small application, according to the index, while for a large application, the savings could be as high as 74%. This, the Index suggests, could amount to as much as $23,000 saved per Web application.
Those are indeed impressive numbers, but they do beg one important question: why, in all practical reality, would anyone want to do that? It is a question that Dr Rogers himself poses:
The CPI shows it is possible to achieve substantial savings by using multiple providers; however, we believe the complexity of dealing with various providers offsets any advantage at this time. Technically, there is no reason why applications can’t be architected across multiple clouds, but the potential challenges organizations face include latency between datacenters, managing different GUIs and APIs, invoicing, documentation, and support functions. As a result, we believe most users would prefer to pay a premium for an integrated solution from a single provider.
It is possible such people exist, and that for a few of them the suggestion of pricing out individual services may make sense. But in practice, this is a technique that will only work if a process is liable to remain unchanged on a long lifecycle. And if that is the case, then going to the bother of changing it to run in the cloud – either for the first time or on a newer hardware platform – suggests that it might need to change platforms again, in which case there may be scope to enhance or upgrade the software while you’re at it.
The downside of that could include little matters of then being in breach of contract and subsequent penalty clauses.
Agility and change
The whole point of cloud, of course, is to provide greater ability to change – and change fast and often – in order to meet the needs of business agility. And change, which is difficult to manage at the best of times, is made infinitely more difficult by having different vendors for different components of a service environment.
The 451 argument is that money can be saved by negotiating longer term contracts with individual suppliers rather than a full-service Cloud Service Provider (CSP). This, as the Index proves, is true. But it is only true up to a point.
The cost of negotiating ‘n’ contracts, including getting their start dates to dovetail correctly, will be higher than negotiating one with a CSP, even if that one takes longer than any of the individual contracts. This will probably have to include negotiating and resolving different standard contracts for extras, such as managing cloud bursting and longer term scaling of services.
Then there is the subject of Service Level Agreements (SLAs). Working with a CSP means setting the level of service the customer needs to fulfill their business objectives – and leaves it up to the CSP to work out how to deliver what it has agreed to. Individual contracts will require individual SLAs to be set, and they may even end up being mutually exclusive. It will certainly mean some serious analysis work on the inter-dependencies and interactions between the SLAs of the different services contracted.
Finally, there is the traditional issue of what might be called out-of-phase-itis. Different vendors will upgrade their applications and tools at different rates. Some will be charging down the DevOps route with fast and furious updates occuring all the time. Others will be more traditional, with updates being packaged up into periodic upgrades.
Marrying that lot up into a workable, consistent, reliable and deliverable cloud service – one where the end users get a good (or at least worthwhile) experience in just using it rather than arm-wrestling the system – will require a brave or perhaps foolhardy IT team.
And as a last thought, it will be necessary to bear in mind a simple question: ‘long term contract’ is going to mean what? Five years? Three at a minimum will be necessary. Now say, and offer a degree of certainty on it, what the market sector your company operates in look like in three to five years’ time? How might it change? And finally, how much will you need to pay in re-engineering, re-negotiating and penalty clauses for contracts terminated early?
Now set that against the revenue that might be generated by signing up for a service that might not even be quite what you wanted, or quite as good as you would like, but at least has your company out in the marketplace, generating sales, perhaps even creating a new market opportunity that competitors have to chase. Getting such a service right – or a least better – can often be achieved with relative ease.
My take
Some things are true, but some truths are no longer relevant
Read more on: Cloud platforms - infrastructure and architecture 