
Sound advice?
This is certainly not the first time that the issue of Cloud Service Providers (CSPs) lacking in the skills, experience and knowledge needed to sell their services effectively has been raised (this writer stands so accused and happily pleads guilty). But pointers to a solution for at least some of these deficiencies are now appearing on the horizon.
One of the strong ones, already being played to by the likes of Docker, is application packaging. But there is an argument that this, in its current form, does not go far enough and that a more sophisticated approach is going to be required.
Another, which CSPs might well find attractive, is what might be termed a `DIFY’ service – one where CSPs are effectively told: `it’s OK, we’ll Do It For You’.
One of the voices making such suggestions is that of James Bottomley, the CTO of Odin, which in itself then raises a question or two – not least being: `who or what is Odin?’
Whither Odin?
The company emerged more than fully formed, in March this year. It came out of Parallels, a company that had over the years developed two completely different lines of business – a very popular line of consumer products, largely aimed at helping users build bridges between the worlds of Apple and the PC, and a suite of management and delivery tools aimed at the cloud hosting and CSP market sector. These, as Bottomley readily acknowledges, didn’t have much in common and were growing apart naturally:
I think for us one of the turning points was the first open stack summit that we actually had a booth at. We got a guy that was quite insistent that companies that just did desktop for Macs shouldn’t be at a Clouds conference.
Just in marketing terms fighting those misunderstandings and false impressions was starting to take as much time as promoting the brands, so the decision was made to split the company into its two halves. The Parallels name remains with the consumer side, and the service provider side was named after the Scandiwegian/Germanic God Odin, a choice not unrelated to the roots of Birger Steen, who remains as CEO of both companies.
Following on from some necessary juggling of which owned what patent and product rights – for example Parallels’ access product went to the consumer products side, while the Parallels service automation tools are now Odin Service Automation – the pair are now free to plough their own furrows.
Container Furrows
Tt is the applications packaging and DIFY furrows for CSPs that are now a primary focus for Odin. This is hardly surprising as Odin (in the Parallels days) pre-dated the arrival of Docker in the container marketplace by several years. Bottomley now sees a bifurcation occurring in that marketplace which exploits the different start points for two types of complementary containers:
There is the container that we’re sort of famous for (aimed at CSPs) which is now being effectively called the operating system container. This is where you run the full operating system all the way from the net, inside the container. And there are applications-type containers, which is what Docker is trying to do. We announced in March the first release of an update to Cloud Service 6 that could actually support Docker to running inside the container.
James Bottomley
In effect this will give Odin the ability to run Docker applications containers inside its own operating system container. This gives Odin management control of Docker itself, overcoming the problem of service providers requiring the skills to directly deploy Docker images. This involves uploading, doing a Docker push and having an application deploy straight into their cloud so that it does not claim all the resources for which a user then gets billed.
Currently, bringing Docker to the mass market involves the service provider leaving users to manage the application themselves once the CSP has provisioned it:
So it’s all about consumer-managed Docker at the moment, that is what the offers are from Amazon, Digital Ocean, Microsoft and so on, and to emulate that in containers meant we had to do the nested container technology. The good thing is that it still gives us the container performance benefit. The penalty of doing nested containers is a lot less than the penalty of nesting inside a hypervisor. So we hope we have that argument. Obviously, the next step for us is fairly easily transitioning to a model where the service provider themselves actually manage Docker.
This pre-supposes, of course, that the CSP community is ready and willing to take on that revenue-earning role. Early evidence suggests that the majority of Docker instances are actually being run by enterprises experimenting with its capabilities. This means that service providers have yet to start building the wider application ecosystems needed to properly support direct deployment to the cloud. The advantage Odin may well have here is that ability to provide a full DIFY service, where nested containers work seamlessly with the company’s existing service automation tools:
With our announcements in Docker support and the fact that we already run operating systems in containers means that we are well-provisioned to take the technology and combine it with our automation platform and assist service providers in deploying it.
Another complementary component in the Odin armoury could be another long-standing offering – the Applications Packaging Standard (APS). The main benefit of APS for the CSPs is that they get an application that is actually service provider ready. That means that it has consumer panels both on the front end for self-provisioning from the consumer, as well as control panels for the service provider to allow them to service at charging ratios and display it in the store. So APS effectively packages up what CSPs need to put together an application for onward resale to end user customers. Bottomley says:
About APS and its relation to Docker, we like the fact that the industry is settling on a single packaging standard, I don’t think it might hurt anybody, I think it might help. But if you look at other things like Linux they muddle on perfectly happily with two completely separate standards, and we supply the under-lying technology on which containers run. Whatever packaging standard was chosen it would always still run on our container technology. So in some senses we are a bit more agnostic in what the application packaging format for containers should be. Our view is whatever that is, we will work with it.
The Big DIFY
Bottomley sees this playing to the needs of business users in one of the other debates currently revolving within the cloud community, namely: whether hybrid cloud means CIOs must pull in extra cloud resources and then effectively sell them on to department heads, or where service providers encourage a lot of virtual machines to come out of the enterprise because of the ease with which those department heads can get their line of business problems deployed directly to consumers.
Perhaps not surprisingly, Odin sides with the notion of enabling service providers to pull virtual machines directly out of the enterprise from the department heads. In that model, Docker is seen as a key technology. The reason it is generating all the excitement within the enterprise is because of the growth of interest in rapid application development and shortening of the deployment cycle, and Bottomley sees Odin being used to enable that in an increasingly automated and containerised deployment model.
There seems to be a bit of a push back by new users, a large minority of which are saying migrating to the cloud is not as easy as they expected it would be. Bottomley not only agrees with some of their view but also sees a lot of opportunities in this area:
If you think about where most of the cloud service provider industry is today it’s all about Infrastructure as a Service. IaaS is fantastically difficult to consume because from the operating system on up, users are responsible for the lot.
On the other hand, the thing called platform as a service was supposed to be the answer to that, But in reality what it turned into was trying to lock a load of users into a silo with the question being `do you support the language system that we have, yes or no?’. If yes, you fit into our silo and if no then you have to go somewhere else. So that leaves all the service providers scratching their heads, going ok which silo do we support, how many are there and how thinly would we be spread if we did this.
Because it is currently the enterprises that are taking the lead on container-based applications and services use, Bottomley sees the service providers’ community and a largely untapped market. It is also one where the company can allow CSPs to concentrate more on their understanding of the markets they aim to serve, by providing them with the DIFY service of important provisioning and deployment standards that are coupled to automated management processes. As Bottomley says:
They are an untapped market with a hell of a lot of money that it would be useful to be able to capture.
My take
There is nothing new about DIFY, of course; it is the basis of every type of service. So the idea that service providers also need services should not be a surprise, least of all to them. And the combination of operating system container, applications containers and automated services could make it much simpler for CSPs to concentrate on serving their markets rather than making the technology work.
Read more on: DevOps NoSQL and the open source stackInfrastructureSecurity 