
The worst possible way to reach a decision is to drop people in a meeting and let them just talk it through. But that’s the way most decisions are made in business, says Erik Larson, CEO of Cloverpop, which wants to be known as the ‘system of record’ for enterprise decision making. While supporting business decisions in organizations such as Cisco Systems, Sanofi Pasteur and Moss Adams, Cloverpop has found there’s no substitute for proper planning. Putting things down in writing is the only effective way to surface all the issues, as Larson explains:
A conversation in a meeting is just about the worst way to arrive at a decision. Almost all of the biases that could come into play are much more likely to happen.
If you have people writing things down in advance, besides having a system of record, you importantly have a much more inclusive approach … The clarity of thought to put together even a series of three sentences is very high. It requires different parts of our brain that are much more sophisticated to kick in. It’s easier for people to scan it, harder for people to ignore it. There’s a bunch of different elements that come together.
Literally getting people to read the memo before the meeting — and making sure people have written the memo before the meeting — is a really valuable practice.
Digital decision making
Cloverpop, which releases the latest version of its software today, provides a framework for collecting that information, recording the decisions taken, and following through to track outcomes. Think of it as the digital equivalent of agenda papers and minutes — with the addition of a rules engine that prompts you for suggested actions that Cloverpop claims improves the quality of enterprise decision making, and the ability to analyze performance over time. Larson cites some impressive results:
Our customers decide twice as fast with half the effort and 75% better choices.
At early adopter Cisco, meeting times have been cut in half and decisions are better communicated and tracked, says Audrey McLaughlin, Business Operations Manager at the network equipment giant. With the ability to track outcomes, Cisco has now figured out, for example, that product managers typically overestimate eventual adoption of new products and features when decisions are first taken to invest in them, says Larson, and can feed that knowledge back into the decision process.
Adding structure and discipline
Cloverpop’s role therefore is to add some structure and discipline to the usually haphazard process of enterprise decision making. It’s a mission that has evolved over time — when I last spoke to Larson, he was talking up the use of Cloverpop to monitor the inclusiveness of decision making. But it turns out that this is just one of seven dimensions outlined by the vendor (PDF). These flaws in enterprise decision making were simply hiding in plain sight, says Larson:
It’s such an obvious problem that we didn’t even notice it. Managers are trained to measure things that they want to improve and yet it wasn’t happening.
The Cloverpop system acts a single source of truth about what was decided and why, who was involved, what information and choices were considered, and how results compare with expectations. Hence the notion of being a system of record for decisions, Larson explains:
Decisions are a data object that needs to be recorded and managed in a similar way that you manage CRM data objects. They are very consistent. There’s a set of choices, the people involved, a set of expected results. It begs the question of why it’s not in a database.
Are you getting the results you expected?
There’s an API that connects decisions into a large portfolio of business applications, including collaboration and workflow tools such as Microsoft Teams, Slack, GitHub and Jira. Cloverpop’s guided flows and decision templates take people through proven methods of framing and participating in decisions so that the best options are surfaced and built-in bias avoided. Once a decision has been made, the system helps to make sure it is communicated succinctly, while owners can delegate tasks and follow up on results. This is another crucial element, says Larson:
Our investment in the product and success with customers has centered far more on logging decisions and communicating decisions and making sure the decisions are rolled out into dashboards — are you getting the results you expected, aligning them with broader corporate goals?
As a relative newcomer, Cloverpop hasn’t yet built up a large enough customer base to be able to train machine learning to supplement its existing rules engine, but that’s definitely a target for the future. There’s a strong focus in the product on coaching business executives to make better decisions over time.
While in theory AI tools could also be used to take notes during meetings, interestingly Larson cautions against relying too much on transcripts as a record of what went on in a meeting:
One thing we do notice is, the quality of information sharing in verbal meeting discussions is pretty low. There’s a lot more going on in people’s heads and it’s very difficult to tease out.
Meeting notes are a summary not a transcript. Those notes typically have more information than what was said in the meeting. In short, the discipline of writing things down is valuable for improving the quality of the thinking. There’s a lot of benefit to encouraging as much written summary as possible, whether in the meeting or in advance of the meeting.
My take
As someone who’s very interested in the role that digital collaboration processes play in the modern enterprise, Cloverpop’s work brings important observations to the table. It turns out we still understand relatively little about how people actually interact in the enterprise, and therefore our attempts to digitally automate those processes risk missing out on vital elements. It’s something of a surprise to realize that this has significant impact on the crucial process of enterprise decision-making, which turns out to be not as sophisticated as we’ve always assumed.
Image credit - Team meeting around a table - via SteelcaseRead more on: Collaboration sharing and digital productivityDigital skills and trainingFrictionless enterpriseFuture of work 