
A mixed set of half year results for the Co-Operative Bank today. Whilst the lender managed to narrow its losses compared to the same period last year, costs were up because of investments in new systems that are intended to improve the bank’s resiliency.
However, the Co-Op Bank results show that it is still negotiating with the Financial Conduct Authority over its breach of IT risk thresholds, which it warned about last year, and it has also said that a mortgage outsourcing deal with Capita could face delays and increased costs.
But the results also point to improved digital development and attempts to meet customers’ changing expectations. The Co-Operative Group last year hired ex-Government Digital Service director Mike Bracken, and a number of his close colleagues, to head up the group’s digital strategy.
The Co-operative Bank, however, is partway through a significant turnaround strategy after it almost collapsed back in 2013, after it was revealed that it had a £1.5 billion black hole in its books.
The bank had been fully owned by the 150-year old Co-operative Group up until this point, but following its financial difficulties, it had to seek investment from hedge funds to prop it up. The Co-operative Group now only owns a 20% stake in the bank.
Today it reported losses of £177 million in the first half, compared to losses of £204 million this time last year.
Niall Booker, Chief Executive Officer, said:
The progress made during the first six months of the year has delivered a small Core Bank operating profit for the second successive half year period with mortgage originations remaining strong, an improved current account proposition, customer satisfaction scores at their highest level since 2013 and widening jaws between income and costs. In addition, with further investment in our digital channels to modernise the business around how customers want to bank today and significant progress on our major transformation and remediation programmes, much has been done.
However, as we’ve said many times before, addressing the Bank’s historic legacy issues will continue to impact our overall financial performance until the end of our plan period.
We have always been clear that turning the Bank around would be a significant journey of at least five years and so far the overall story remains one of progress and improvement. Much has been achieved in de-risking the Bank, in strengthening our resilience, in improving our IT platform, in demonstrating our values and ethics in action and in ensuring good outcomes for customers.
Despite the challenges ahead, we continue to make progress building a differentiated, resilient bank which is valued by our customers for the quality of its service and I would like to thank colleagues for their hard work and dedication in meeting our customers’ needs.
Commitment to digital
The bank said that during the first half of the year it continued “significant investment activities” to progress the transformation of IT resilience, remediation of systems and processes and to simplify products. It also cited the continued commitment to investment into digital channels, which has resulted in upgrades to the online banking website and new digital product offerings. The bank reported total expenditures on these initiatives at £125.7 million.
Last year Co-Op Bank warned about it being in breach of the Financial Conduct Authority’s IT risk thresholds. In order to rectify this, it embarked on a plan to outsource its entire IT infrastructure to IBM. At the time, the bank said:
The Bank’s IT system has been underinvested for a considerable period of time. The Bank needs to urgently and significantly improve and re-engineer its existing IT platform as the existing infrastructure is unsuitable and inherently fragile. There are also concerns about its resilience as the Bank’s IT disaster recovery plan is not proven end to end.
Today, the Co-Op results noted that “significant progress” on the outsourcing to IBM is expected towards the end of the year and that the bank is engaging with the FCA to “agree the point at which in their view [the bank] will no longer be in breach of the threshold condition in this area”.
Elsewhere, the bank also noted the changing behaviours of consumers and how this has enabled it to shut down 54 branches across its network. It said:
Across the industry, customers continue to increase their use of digital devices for everyday banking needs. Investment in our digital channels is a key component of our plan to build a more efficient Core Bank and digital transaction volumes have continued to increase, with an offsetting reduction in branch transaction volumes, as we have continued to improve our personal online banking service. In May 2016 our latest mobile and tablet friendly update increased our online payments functionality and made it easier for our customers to bank how, where and when they choose.
The continuing decline in branch transactions is indicative of the changing behaviour of our customers. As a result, the 54 branch closures announced in January 2016 were completed by the end of June 2016, and we plan to close a further five by the end of the year. Our branch network remains an important part of our multi-channel service but we continue to review the level of usage as customer behaviour changes.
Trouble ahead
However, despite the progress across digital and the outsourcing of IT to IBM, the Co-Op Bank did hint that a separate outsourcing deal with Capita for its mortgage systems faced issues that could impact the overall cost.
The bank has entered into an outsourcing contract with Capita for the provision of mortgage origination and servicing processing. At present, Capita has taken over and is currently operating the bank’s existing mortgage processing and this is “operating satisfactorily” using the Co-Op’s existing infrastructure.
Work is underway on the design and build of a new Capita system to deliver ‘enhancements’ in mortgage origination and processing, with new lending processing to be undertaken on the new business in time. This will be followed by a phased migration of existing business, which it hopes will deliver long-term cost efficiencies and an improved customer experience.
However, it warned today that trouble may lie ahead. The bank said:
This is now likely to be significantly delayed. Notwithstanding potential mitigation, there remains material uncertainty over the extent and implications of the delay in the transformation elements of the outsourcing contract with Capita.
This could result in any of the following: increased costs; reduction in the transformation scope; and increased legal risk for the Bank. Consequently there is a risk of an adverse effect on the Bank’s mortgage business and its Updated Plan.
My take
Very much at the early stages of a turnaround an plenty of risk still lies ahead for the bank.
Image credit - Changes Ahead Freeway Road Sign © trekandphoto - Fotolia.com.Read more on: Financial services and fintech 