
Graydon is a data business. Its primary purpose is to provide data and information on companies operating out of the UK, Belgium and the Netherlands. For example, you can use Graydon to carry out credit risk management, for corporate fraud intelligence and for credit control training.
But at the centre of it all sits company data.
However, up until recently Graydon had been operating its business as three distinct entities, rather than as a multi-national company with a single overview. To move away from this it has begun implementing single platforms for its different functions, including finance, CRM and marketing
But in addition to this, the company has decided to use Birst as the fabric to weave all the data from these sources together in order to provide one view of the business and to align its stakeholder priorities.
I spoke to Graydon’s Group CRM Director, Bart Redder, who gave some insight into how the company is using Birst and how the implementation has progressed. He said:
In the past two years we have made sure that we become more and more one company internationally.
We came to Birst in the Summer of 2014 and we were busy with an implementation of SAP at the same time. But we started the project with finance because they wanted a reporting tool, but they didn’t want to do the reporting in SAP. And from a marketing perspective we were looking for one tool where we could do all the targeting selections and to be able to create a customer dashboard with one overview.
We were looking at others, including SAS, but what we liked with Birst was how we could combine the data quickly because we have got quite a few sources. We have got the company information database for three companies in three countries, so we wanted to make sure that we have got the entire market covered in Birst.
Additionally we found out that as we were using it it was quite easy to add more departments easily. So HR has started to use it as well, slowly it has started to spread throughout the organisation and now we are thinking about how we can link the HR data to the CRM and SAP data to make sure that we have got one employee code.
The business case
 When I asked Redder how the company had put together a business case for Birst and whether or not it was measuring the return on investment, Redder said that the case for Birst could have been made simply on the fact that it was cheaper than the other tools he had been considering.
However, the more defining factor in terms of ROI is that the company as a whole now has a central customer dashboard that has been built with relevant KPIs that relate to the business’ strategy. Redder added that the reporting times have also been significantly reduced. He said:
From the start we made sure that we derived our KPIs from the strategy map. It was easy to prioritise the requirements, because now we can say this is our main strategy and these are the main KPIs attached to it, so we have to focus on these main objectives in Birst. Once we have got those we can zoom in to get the details of finance or marketing or online.
We also used to get weekly and monthly reports from the online team, we used to get monthly and weekly sales reports, and these were all sent to the company in Excel via email. If I look at all the time spent on those reports, versus it now being always available, it easily makes a business case for Birst.
Redder added that Birst allows Graydon to easily pull in its data from multiple sources and more importantly urges employees to broaden their focus. He said:
The usability is important, to be able to actually mould data in a very flexible way. As opposed to the traditional way of working with data warehouses, where whenever you get a request you have to change the data model and then run some queries – and that will take a few days. Now it’s just a matter of hours of putting together. You find something and it’s there, the flexibility of being able to provide insight is a big benefit.
Also, within the company everybody uses data, because that’s what we do. But even the standards internally become higher and higher. Now we have started showing how the customer dashboards can work, they can see the opportunities in combining all of these sources in one overview.
So they start asking questions not just on the conversion rate, but lead to opportunity, or web visitors throughout the channel, or conversion rates on ambassadors. It inspires people to think outside the box and the requirements for analytics become higher.
Challenges
Despite the benefits noted by Redder and his excitement for the tool going forward, he did yield a word of warning for other companies embarking on similar data consolidation projects. Redder said companies looking to do something similar should make sure that they focus on the ongoing governance structures so that users remain active within the data.
Redder said:
Data governance is still an aspect, it doesn’t matter how fast you can load the data, you have to make sure the different sources are connected well and that the processing is done right.
You have to make sure that you have resources assigned at the technical application management level, to track everyday whether the data was processed correctly from the different sources. This also builds up the trust in the analytics.
What we’ve done now is set up bi-weekly sessions with all the different stakeholders, from sales and marketing to business control, in all three countries, to ask if there is anything peculiar in the dashboards, to see if there is something missing, and if there is,then try to build it within those two weeks.
Just by creating this short feedback loop we are keeping everyone engaged and interested in the development. If someone only logs in every two months or so, it’s hard for them to remember where those figures came from.
Read more on: Analytics planning and data analysisUse cases 