
One of Bill McDermott’s crucial points about this year’s Sapphire Now is that attendees are just about half from business and half from IT. But that doesn’t mean business and IT are having the same SAP conversation. I spoke with one ASUG board member who attends the co-located ASUG event with his CFO, but that level of partnership is still an enviable rarity.
That’s why I was pleased to get the chance to get an IT and finance manager on the same video couch. During our shoot with ConAgra Foods, David Tomlinson, Sr. IT Director, Finance Analytics, and Carrie Molczyk, Finance Director, Margin Management and Analytics, shared some practical tips on how they make this often-thorny IT/business relationship work.
Before the video, Molcyzk joked about barging into Tomlinson’s office and saying exactly what she wanted. I asked her if it was really that simple:
It is that simple. I can march into his office and say, “I want this, this, and this,” and he makes it happen. David really helped us understand and diagnose our business problems and how tools can help and what new processes we need to put in place.
That relationship was put to the test during ConAgra’s recent HANA projects. ConAgra is an example of what I call a “mature” HANA customer. These companies often have a HANA install in place (in ConAgra’s case, BW on HANA), and now they are pursing new initiatives.
These use cases are worth paying attention to because they are often derived from IT-business conversations, as in, “We have HANA in place – and yes, it’s fast. But how can it help our business grow?” . Instead of the classic (and, frankly, very limited) TCO/cost savings discussion, these use cases focus on what HANA’s speed and predictive capabilities can do. But you can’t have these conversations in an IT echo chamber – you must involve the business. Tomlinson:
Last year at this time, we were migrating our BW system onto HANA. Then, as we got through that, we looked at what’s next. One of the biggest issues we have at ConAgra is improving our forecasting process. We worked with SAP to understand what was on the market, and there really wasn’t anything there.
This is the only catch with such conversations. Though there are now 2,000 SAP startups and more than 125 certified solutions, sometimes the HANA app or capabilities customers want isn’t ready out of the box. ConAgra solved this problem by collaborating with SAP:
We decided to co-innovate with SAP on a new product called Total Margin Management. It leverages some of the things that we learned from BPC, but also leverages the power of HANA to bring a couple of different applications into a single application. so that we could do more with the data that we had, and be able to better understand the data that we didn’t have yet.
To make this predictive application work, Tomlinson worked closely with the finance team for design input and testing. Molczyk:
There’s about 15 of us that have been working actively with David’s team on a regular basis, both from the design as well as testing the configuration.
The application went live on April 13, with a full rollout to 150 business users scheduled for June/July. I asked Molczyk about the business benefits of Total Margin Management:
It will give us access to customer profitability, allow us to better predict the future instead of looking back at the past, trying to digest the data and trying to reconcile a bunch of systems. Now data will be integrated and we will be able to move much quicker.  We will be able to see, not only specific customers, but all the way down to the material components that go into making our food products.
For Conagra Foods, open communication between business and IT is the key – that means the tools are put through a constant gut check. They must be easy to train on and easy to use, or adoption will fail and all the hard work goes for naught. Molczyk:
Our end-users really want something that’s simple and fast. The front end of this is very easy to use. It’s almost like a pivot table in Excel, and it retrieves data very quickly. We are looking to significantly cut a lot of forecast work out of our finance processes.
But is heavy training needed? Because that’s a deal breaker for businesses today:
No, absolutely not, right. It’s get in, play with the tool, not a lot to learn about how to build reports. Instead of using paper reports and outdated data, we can live right inside of the tool and do analytics.
Final thoughts
ConAgra Foods is a good example of what customers can invent with HANA – but only if there is a viable IT and business relationship. Molczyk jokes about storming into her IT director’s office, but that’s the kind of openness that is required
With big data offering both headaches and possibilities, Tomlinson sees interesting use cases ahead:
The power of the HANA is it’s a complete integrated platform. It’s not only the database pieces, it’s integrated through the entire stack, from UI5 to being able to make customer components within the modeling layer, and then leveraging the power of the database. We think there’s a lot of use cases for it.
We really want to get more into big data and understanding more about what’s impacting our customers. We believe that leveraging HANA and some of the new capabilities like Smart Data Access and will give us the power to better understand our customers and what their needs are, so that we can be better partners with them.
We shouldn’t be fooled into thinking that whiz-bang HANA tech can erase the IT-business divide. But this example advances our thinking, and finally, sets up the business conversation about HANA that SAP itself still struggles to articulate.


Disclosure: SAP covered the bulk of our travel, accommodations, and video shipping expenses at Sapphire Now. We produce these videos on our own schedule with final editorial control. SAP is a diginomica premier partner as of this writing. 

Read more on: Analytics planning and data analysis 