
Whilst being part of the European Union (EU), the UK enjoys access to a broad range of shared systems and mechanisms that help to protect the rights of consumers – including information sharing and reporting. However,  whilst the UK has helped shape and influence the body of strong consumer protection Directives and Regulations (known as acquis), concerns are being raised about how effectively the UK can continue to work with the EU on these important issues post- Brexit.
Unsurprisingly, many of the regulations in question also relate to digital purchases and e-commerce, an area the UK has actually helped lead the EU on as it relates to regulations.
A new report from the House of Lords EU Select Committee calls on the government to clarify how it plans to gain access to the EU reciprocal cross-border mechanisms and systems after the UK leaves the trading bloc in March 2019.
The implications of Brexit for the UK are complex and far reaching, but much of the attention thus far has been placed on the impact for government and business, with little attention being given to the consumer rights and benefits.
Whilst the House of Lords report recognises that the UK has led much of the EU acquis, and the Minister responsible for consumer rights, Margot James MP, has been unequivocal in stating that protections will not get worse for consumers post-Brexit, it seems that little thought has been given to how the UK will actively work with the EU in the future.
The report states:
This complex and interconnected system touches on all areas of the UK’s economy and protects a wide range of rights, on which UK citizens rely when they undertake the myriad transactions of everyday life. The Minister responsible for consumer rights, Margot James MP, said that “when we leave the EU we will be leaving a system of consumer rights and protection … which sits very well with the needs of consumers in the United Kingdom.
Much of the acquis will be implemented into UK law via the EU Withdrawal Bill. However, the report notes:
[Witnesses] were concerned about [the Bill’s] inability to address the potential loss of the EU’s reciprocal systems for coordinating cross-border information exchange, cooperation and enforcement.
For example, Lewis Shand Smith of the Ombudsman Services referred to the importance of the Alternative Dispute Resolution for consumer disputes Directive (ADR) and the accompanying Regulation creating the online dispute resolution platform. This legislation “requires that wherever there is a contract for the sale of goods and services anywhere in the EU, Member States must provide alternative dispute resolution for consumers if something goes wrong”. He said that it “operates in every Member State”, and, “if customers buy goods online and something goes wrong, they go on the platform and from there they are directed to the relevant ombudsman”.
Will consumers still be able to make use of such the platform post-Brexit?
In addition, the EU makes use of a system it calls RAPEX, where the Commission publishes a weekly summary of the consumer protection related alerts reported to it by the relevant national authorities, such as local authorities and national trading standards bodies.
The Commission’s weekly overview includes information on: dangerous products found; any risks to consumers that have been identified; and any measures taken in the notifying country in order to prevent or restrict their marketing or use. The weekly summary also includes information on those other countries where the same product has been found, and whether any further measures have been taken. Again, future access to this system is uncertain.
Leon Livermore, Chief Executive of the Chartered Trading Standards Institute, told the Committee his “greatest fear” was if the Government’s focus fell on “legislation rather than infrastructure and you try to deal with infrastructure later, we will have missed the boat”.
The Committee has urged the government to clarify its position on future protections for consumers and how it will work with the EU to ensure this. The report states:
The Minister was sympathetic to the concerns of our witnesses about the loss of the EU based reciprocal arrangements that police EU consumer protection law, of which the Consumer Protection Cooperation Regulation is particularly important. Nevertheless, she was unable to provide us with any detail as to how the Government might secure their application to the UK post-Brexit and we question whether the Government has given any thought to finding a solution to this problem.
We ask the Government to provide us with a clear approach as to how it will secure the UK’s post-Brexit access to the EU’s reciprocal cross-border mechanisms, resources and infrastructure that police European consumer protection standards.
Image credit - Image free for commercial useRead more on: CentralDigital government and public servicesRegulation

