
Not too long ago, I spoke with Deb Lavoy, CEO of Narrative Builders on this idea of defining your corporate narrative. While the idea of a company narrative made sense, I wanted to understand more about how you define one, especially if you’re an enterprise company that’s been established for a long time.
Lavoy’s company specializes in helping organizations understand and convey the power of their business, product or idea. She defined a narrative as “a structured examination of the intentions, values, capabilities and importance of what you do.” This isn’t a mission statement, or a manifesto (Lavoy dislikes manifestos); it’s much more involved, and it forms the backbone of your entire business strategy.
You would think this is something every enterprise does from the moment it starts, something they need to successfully drive all parts of their business. But it’s not that simple.
Lavoy says that often older enterprise companies never had a formal narrative. Instead, it is more tacit, within the heads of those who started it, and it’s often been diluted over the years from its original intent. These companies figure out there’s a problem when they decide it’s time to update sales material, or redesign their website, and they don’t know what they are trying to say.
Then there are the companies looking to take their business to the next level, maybe expand into new areas or scale up existing areas. These companies try random things, but there’s no single source of truth (or narrative) that is guiding that innovation or scale, they don’t understand their business well enough to take those next steps successfully.
What these companies need is a clear understanding of their narrative to guide them through all the decisions they make. So I asked Lavoy to walk through the process of defining your company’s narrative.
The narrative hierarchy
Lavoy describes narrative as the “core truths that describe who you [your company] are at a variety of analysis.” You can get to these core truths by defining your narrative hierarchy.

Aspiration – what are you about, why do you exist? Here is where you define your emotional resonance.
Model – What is your approach/ideal model to do this? Sometimes (not always), in the enterprise, Lavoy says this is your key differentiator. Here is where you define your intellectual resonance.
Offer – What is your product or service; is it well-defined (product information, product demo).
Proof – How do you prove that what you say is true, that it works like you say it does? Here you show your key differentiators, bring in analysts or data, and testimonials that show this is true. These are your proof points.


Image from narrarivebuilders.com
An effective narrative needs to have at least one analysis at each level.
To define your narrative hierarchy, Lavoy suggests bringing your executives, product management, and product marketing people into a room and asking them what the business’s story is. You’ll likely find there are many points of view, talking at different levels and the key is to listen to each one and map it to a place in the narrative hierarchy. The hierarchy simply gives you a place to organize those ideas and start to define your define your narrative.
It sounds simple doesn’t it? Lavoy says it can be, but it’s remarkable how hard it is to do for many companies.
I asked Lavoy if she’s ever been in a situation where there are too many different perspectives and points of view, making it hard to narrow down the right narrative. Her answer was no, but she has found there can be subsets, especially in the thought leadership level (model) where there can be more than one key perspective driving the product or service.
She gave the example of a company that builds collaboration software for enterprises. At the Model level two clear points were defined: 1, their approach to how collaboration needs to happen and 2, how collaboration software needs to be delivered to enterprises.
A narrative tells a thousand stories
Your narrative represents the core truth of your company. It’s one narrative for the entire company, your product team, your marketing team, business strategists, your investors, etc. But the stories you tell to those different audiences might be different. Maybe you emphasize different proof points, or you tell the story in a different way, but you use the same narrative. Lavoy:
Stories are nice, but narratives are foundational. Narratives are organizing principles; narratives are strategy. Stories are nice ways of expressing complex ideas, and they can evoke emotional and intellectual responses, but you need something more than that because any enterprise company has a thousand stories they need to tell, not one.
How do use your narrative?
A well-defined narrative is used throughout your company, in different ways. First, it helps you explain clearly who the company is and why it exists. Second, it’s a collaboration tool, a way to align your entire team around the same thinking about your company and products/services. Lavoy says it simplifies communication and decision-making and helps drive product development and customer service.
It’s also a marketing tool that you look to when developing social and content marketing strategies. And it’s a business tool that you can use to improve, grow and innovate.
Lavoy provided a great way to think about what your narrative is – to make it easy to understand. Her example is a sitcom – Happy Days, for example. In a sitcom you have a set of characters (Fonzie, Richie, Joanie and Chachi, Al, etc.), a certain environment – buildings, locations (Richie’s home, Fonzie’s apartment above the garage, Al’s restaurant, the high school), etc. These things don’t change from one episode to the other; the characters act the same way every time and the locations look the same.
But every week there’s a new story, a new crisis, and it might focus on one character one week, and another the next, but you know that no matter what the story is, the characters will act the same. So a sitcom is about showing what each character does in a particular situation. The characters, the locations, the context, and situation, is what creates the story. But the backdrop or the narrative – the characters, how they act, and the locations – they don’t change.
Final Thoughts
This was a great conversation with Lavoy, but it’s only part of the story. Lavoy’s company also has what she calls a Narrative Strength Assessment – a process that helps you understand how strong your narrative is. That will be the focus for next week – so stay tuned.
Image credit – Modern buildings and landmarks © Sergey Nivens – Fotolia.com.
 
Read more on: Digital and content marketingFrictionless enterprise 