
While we didn’t cover IBM’s acquisition of Workday implementer Meteorix, it is clear that specialist groups offering cloud services are proving attractive to the large SIs. The Workday ecosystem is proving especially attractive.
Earlier this month, Accenture acquired Cloud Sherpas which has a multi-faceted cloud services operation. In 2014, KPMG acquired AXIA. Deloitte was one of the earliest movers when it acquired Aggressor in 2012.
While the turn out at Workday Rising from independent implementers like Appirio and DayNine remains impressive, we can expect consolidation to continue in this space. As an aside, DayNine is an interesting company. Formed in 2009 by ex-Peoplesoft implementer folk from Ramos & Associates as a Workday only practice, they have grown substantially over the last six years. They’ve developed their own tools that, for example, include Peoplesoft migration capability.
Why should consolidation spell danger? It is not unusual to see big SIs jump into new technology partnerships but in this case, the main acquirers have been smart enough to realize that forklifting their ‘time and materials’ led SAP/Oracle/PeopleSoft/Siebel folk was not going to work.
In all cases we’ve seen to date, the SIs have been smart enough to ring fence the acquired practices, allowing them to flourish under the larger brand while learning from the practice methodologies they bring to the party. From soundings around the halls, this is working out to be a good customers experience.
The IBM acquisition though represents something of a tipping point.
IBM is not known for getting into small deals but a typical Workday engagement is not going to run the $50 million and up that IBM likes to ink. On the other hand, Workday engagements are becoming increasingly complex with the prospect of implementing many modules rather than ‘just’ HR administration.
New functionality like inventory and more advanced analytics allow IBM the opportunity to come onto the Workday ecosystem scene without necessarily sacrificing too much in margin albeit they have to get used to much smaller contracts. The deals might be smaller but the need to be agile means that customers get the kind of value for money that Workday promises.
This is in stark contrast to the multi-year upgrades that a typical SAP or Oracle customer might have to undertake, with all the costs that go with those projects.
What is less well known perhaps is that IBM embarked on a planned reduction in its commitment to large legacy implementations several years ago, reasoning that the golden age of the $100 million and up ERP implementation were likely coming to an end. That turns out to have been one of IBMs better decisions of the last 10 years.
Taken in the round, and bearing in mind that Titanium partners are inking substantial seven figure deals with Workday for event presence, the danger is not for the health of the Workday ecosystem but for the ecosystems of the legacy players. When attention is drawn away from one technology in favor of another, you have to wonder what happens next. When the big SIs start consolidating the market then you know that longer term, Workday can only move up the food chain.
The image we have used to illustrate this story talks to the forecast $135 billion Salesforce opportunity. We see a similar opportunity emerging for Workday.
We will be watching this space closely to see what happens next. In the meantime, we have astonishing stories of success by ex-Peoplesoft customers that can only bode well for Workday and its ecosystem of partners.
Disclosure: SAP, Oracle and Workday are all premier partners at time of writing. Workday covered most of my travel and expense for attending Rising.
Read more on: The new professional and IT as a service 