
 
Yesterday we learned how Starbucks in the US is benefitting from investments in its customer loyalty card program and is making investments in its digital customer experience. And today, on this side of the pond, we are told that Costa Coffee owner, Whitbread, will also be making multi-million pound investments in digital up until 2016.
As well as Costa Coffee, Whitbread also owns popular hotel chain Premier Inn here in the UK. And it’s CEO Andy Harrison didn’t disappoint with the group’s full year results, when it beat market expectations and announced pre-tax profits of £488.1 million to 26th February, up 18.5 percent on a year ago.
Reuters states that analysts expected an average forecast of £478.7 million for the period. Harrison said:

We are continuing to invest in strengthening our brands and organic network growth, including in selected international markets. Our capital investment will rise to c.£700 million in this financial year, up from £565.3 million in 2014/15. Our investment programme has created around 3,000 new UK jobs and around 1,000 apprenticeships.
We are delivering good returns on our investment, with return on capital rising to 15.7%, up 0.4% pts from the prior year. Our combination of rapid organic growth and good returns is generating a strong operating cash flow of £714.2 million, up 17.8%. We are on track to deliver our 2016 and 2018 growth milestones.
Trading in the new financial year has begun on plan, with good momentum for Premier Inn and Costa, and our restaurants business is trading slightly ahead of a subdued market.

However, despite having raised the group’s stock market value by almost £10 billion since joining from budget airline easyJet in September 2010, Harrison also took the opportunity to announce that he would be stepping down from the position. Whitbread said that the process to find a replacement is underway. Harrison said:

I am 58 in two days’ time. I have been a chief executive of three public companies for 18 years. It is time to do something a little bit less demanding.

Digital investments
But Whitbread also took the opportunity to explain how its planning to ‘improve its customer propositions’ with digital investments. For example, it said that it would be making a multi-million pound investment in digital capabilities up until 2016. The company said:

We are focused on continually improving our customer propositions. In February 2015, we launched our free upgraded Wi-Fi offering and in 2015/16 we will increase the number of full room refurbishments to around 4,500 rooms, complete the roll out of our “best ever” bed and install around 2,300 air-conditioning units.
We will also continue to increase our revenue investment in technology and process improvements as we grow our digital capabilities and evolve our systems to support future growth. These revenue investments will amount to approximately £15 million incremental spend in 2015/16.


Whitbread is also intending to push its presence in China, growing its presence from 344 to 900 coffee shops by 2020. Alongside this, the company said that it was going to be investing in its “international and digital talent capabilities, store formats and in food and beverage innovation”.

And finally, Whitbread said that over the last four years it has invested heavily in its online capabilities and to improve its ‘direct digital distribution’, which it now claims is a “significant competitive advantage”. Whitbread said:

As a result, Premierinn.com is our customers’ preferred booking channel and now represents 80% of bookings, up from 63% in 2010/11. Visits from mobile devices continue to be one of the fastest growing channels increasing 34% year on year to account for 45% of all traffic. Our online strength is a significant competitive advantage and allows us to manage a greater part of our customer experience.

My take
Putting a figure on digital investments is always a good thing; and its good to get some more detail on where it has made improvements. However, unlike Starbucks, there is notably a lack of information on customer loyalty and data initiatives. And as we know, this is where the forward thinking retailers are making their biggest investments.

Read more on: Retail e-commerce and the omni-channelUse cases 