

The UK Court of Appeal has ruled that supermarket Morrisons is “vicariously liable” for a huge data breach that saw a disgruntled employee leak the personal information of around 100,000 members of staff.
The supermarket chain is now facing a vast compensation bill. While this class action was brought by 5,518, the remainder of Morrisons roughly 100,000 employees will also be entitled to compensation.
On a wider scale, if the ruling handed down by the UK Appeals Court this week stands, it will a frightening shot across the bows for data protection officers at other organizations in the UK and beyond.
The root cause of yesterday’s ruling dates back to 2014 when the payroll data of Morrisons staff – including names, addresses, bank account details and salaries – were leaked online and sent to the media by Andrew Skelton, a senior IT auditor working in the retailer’s Bradford HQ.
While Skelton was caught and jailed in 2015 for 8 years, the 5,518 Morrisons employees went to court to argue that the company was responsible for the breaches of privacy and data protection laws, even though it was an individual staffer who had committed the crime. For its part, Morrisons countered that it could not be held vicariously liable.
An earlier ruling from the High Court found that Morrisons had lived up to Data Protection Act (DPA) responsibilities directly, but sided with the claimants on the charge of vicarious liability.
Appeal rejected
The supermarket appealed, but yesterday that appeal was rejected by Master of the Rolls Sir Terence Etherton, Lord Justice Bean and Lord Justice Flaux. In their ruling, they wrote:
We consider it is clear, however, that whatever the position on the first ground of appeal, the vicarious liability of an employer for misuse of private information by an employee and for breach of confidence by an employee has not been excluded by the DPA.
Anya Proops QC told the court Morrisons now faced “compensation claims on a potentially vast scale”, but the response from the bench was not sympathetic:
Ms Proops submitted that, given that there are 5,518 employees who are claimants in the present case, and the total number of employees whose confidential information was wrongly made public by Mr Skelton was nearly 100,000, this illustrates how enormous a burden a finding of vicarious liability in the present case will place on Morrisons and could place on other innocent employers in future cases. These arguments are unconvincing.
They added:
There have been many instances reported in the media in recent years of data breaches on a massive scale caused by either corporate system failures or negligence by individuals acting in the course of their employment. These might, depending on the facts, lead to a large number of claims against the relevant company for potentially ruinous amounts. The solution is to insure against such catastrophes; and employers can likewise insure against losses caused by dishonest or malicious employees. We have not been told what the insurance position is in the present case, and of course it cannot affect the result. The fact of a defendant being insured is not a reason for imposing liability, but the availability of insurance is a valid answer to the Doomsday or Armageddon arguments put forward by Ms Proops on behalf of Morrisons.
Nick McAleenan, a partner in the media law team at JMW Solicitors, who was representing the claimants, said the ruling was an important precedent:
These shop and factory workers have held one of the UK’s biggest organisations to account and won – and convincingly so. This latest judgement provides reassurance to the many millions of people in this country whose own data is held by their employer.
The judgment is a wake-up call for business. People care about what happens to their personal information. They expect large corporations to take responsibility when things go wrong in their own business and cause harm to innocent victims. It’s important to remember that data protection is not solely about protecting information – it’s about protecting people.
For its part, Morrisons is not ready to concede to the claimants. A spokesman for Morrisons said:
A former employee of Morrisons used his position to steal data about our colleagues and then place it on the internet and he’s been found guilty for his crimes.
Morrisons has not been blamed by the courts for the way it protected colleagues’ data but they have found that we are responsible for the actions of that former employee, even though his criminal actions were targeted at the company and our colleagues. Morrisons worked to get the data taken down quickly, provide protection for those colleagues and reassure them that they would not be financially disadvantaged.
In fact, we are not aware that anybody suffered any direct financial loss. We believe we should not be held responsible so that’s why we will now appeal to the Supreme Court.
My take
If Morrisons is indeed heading to the Supreme Court, then no final conclusions can be reached until a verdict comes down from there. But at this stage, regardless of the outcome there, if data protection officers and HR people up and down the UK are not feeling their collars nervously today, then they’re not keeping an eye on the ball. This is a wake-up call on an alarming scale – and post-Facebook privacy scandals, couldn’t have come at a worse time for Morrisons in terms of public sensitivity to personal data abuse.
Image credit - MorrisonsRead more on: Data privacyGoverning identity privacy and securityHCM and the digital future of workRegulationSecurity 