
Reminiscent of the very early conversations around Government-as-a-Platform that occurred within Whitehall’s Government Digital Service, there appears to be an increasing appetite to consider how police forces in the UK could adopt a more platform-based, or common, approach to their technology.
Although nothing has been mandated (from what I can see), and although it isn’t explicit in terms of strategy, both the Home Secretary and a report authored by Her Majesty’s chief inspector of constabulary recently hinted at things heading in that direction.
Again, just to reiterate, this is purely speculation on my part, but the language being introduced and the ideas being floated certainly do suggest that those with influence believe that a platform approach, or at least a common standards approach, to police ICT is the way forward.
And it’s not particularly hard to see the appeal. For decades now police forces have adopted a ‘local’ approach to ICT, as that’s what made sense at the time and has been a pretty common approach to public service delivery. However, this has left forces with technology that isn’t interoperable and doesn’t allow for cooperation, which is needed when crime (particularly cyber crime) doesn’t stick to just one area.
Disjointed services
The ‘State of Policing’ report written by Her Majesty’s chief inspector of constabulary, which was released this week, speaks to this exact point. It notes:
Today’s technology also allows those who intend to break the law to plan and organise themselves in ways which were unthinkable even 25 years ago. While that may be of help to them, such planning using the internet and digital technology often provides an evidence trail for the police to follow.
Much hinges on the extent to which the police themselves have the authority, expertise and experience to know how to identify and retain such information and evidence. Using technology to the police’s advantage is essential if today’s criminal is to be thwarted and apprehended.
 It goes on to say that there is only a “minority” of forces where police officers and policy community support officers are able to complete all the tasks required whilst out on patrol without having to return to a police station. The report complains that “the sea change that is required has not taken place”.
On the idea of local policing and local technology, the report urges a rethink. It reads:
However, in too many respects, forces continue to purchase different equipment and applications with the consequence that there is only limited ability for one force’s systems to link effectively to another’s. In such cases, it is as though each force regards itself as standing alone. However, every police force shares a border with another.
In England and Wales, there are 97 contiguous land boundaries between the 43 forces, with some forces having five neighbouring police forces and one having as many as eight. When operational relationships with forces more distant are added into the equation, the number of interfaces rises considerably.
The public needs and expects a seamlessly efficient and effective police service – what in other public services is sometimes called a network. A victim of crime does not care about the artificial boundaries that exist between police forces – be they geographical, procedural or systemic.
Uniting in a common information technology programme which facilitates simple and immediate communications between officers and their stations, between stations and their headquarters, and between forces is the very least that is required.
It is essential, therefore, that police and crime commissioners and chief officers commit to working collaboratively with the Police ICT Company radically to improve their combined capability to procure information technology systems to make this a reality. The public has the right to expect a coherent, efficient and effective single system of policing which respects local accountability but acquires, maintains and develops all the benefits of an integrated and modern network.
Notice the language? Common. Combined capability. Effective single system.
None of this should be a major shock, but it’s important to consider that this could be the future direction of policing ICT.
The importance of data
In addition to this, Home Secretary Theresa May gave a speech at the recent Police ICT Company Suppliers Summit, which hinted at moves towards common infrastructure and a rethink on how data is organised (which again, is very reminiscent of the data register discussions happening in Whitehall at the moment).
May took to the stage to speak about the progress of the Police ICT Company to date, which was
Home Secretary Theresa May
set up to help forces procure ICT more effectively and to help them act as a single customer.
The Home Secretary highlighted how successes had already been had. She said:
I believe that the Company will deliver for policing as a whole, as well as for individual forces – and it has already started doing just that.
Thanks in large part to the positive engagement from IBM, the Home Office and the Police ICT Company were able to consolidate 122 contracts for analytic services with more than 50 government organisations into a single contract, releasing multi-million pound savings.
It’s worth stepping back and thinking about that number. Not 43 contracts – one for every force. But one hundred-and-twenty-two – the equivalent of nearly three for every police force IT department in the country.
It is precisely this type of opportunity that I think the ICT Company can grasp for policing – working as a single, intelligent customer for police technology, and consolidating contracts and licenses. Not of course that all police forces need or want identical solutions; but the work that the ICT Company is driving to develop common standards is crucial. Shared standards facilitate interoperability and data sharing and make life easier for suppliers too.
Equally, as I noted above, the Home Secretary went on to talk about cleaning up forces’ data and understanding better how data should be organised. This sounds very similar to the registers idea being touted by the Government Digital Service, which promotes a single source of truth for different data sets (e.g. addresses, company names, countries). This also ties directly into Government-as-a-Platform and how digital services will be built.
May said:
Sometimes elaborate business processes compound problems with basic IT. For example when force shift and rostering systems are so complex, compared to other sectors, off the shelf systems are incapable of handling them without expensive bespoke adaptations.
Multiple systems mean very mundane things can be crucially important. How one describes hair colour in a crime report may not seem that important. But not having a single list of hair colours for identifying suspects or convicts and describing victims, agreed across all forces, makes automated comparison of records impossible. One force lists the colour maroon which other forces don’t recognise, while others disagree on whether a hair colour is brown-auburn or simply auburn.
And over the years the architecture of forces’ IT systems has grown so confused and archaic that we know of one case where a simple domestic Actual Bodily Harm case required – from call out to court – the suspect’s name to be handwritten or re-keyed no fewer than 20 times, and the victim’s name 12 times.
These practices just cannot make sense – in the modern age or in any before it. They show that the necessary changes do not need to be complex.
Some can be simple – like ensuring names do not need to be rekeyed endless times, and having a single version of hair colours that all forces use.
My take
Something to consider and I wouldn’t be surprised if this forms a more coherent strategy in the near future. That being said, will it link to the central government Government-as-a-Platform? Or will we be looking at Policing-as-a-Platform?
I could be looking too much into it, but I think there is something there…
Read more on: Digital government and public services

