
Rob Bernshteyn, Coupa
Like many other enterprise SaaS vendors, cloud-based spend management specialist Coupa is securing ever larger contracts as it continues its rapid growth. While 2014 marked the sixth successive year in which it doubled revenues, the year was notable for a step change in the scale at which it was now able to deliver, CEO Rob Bernshteyn told me yesterday.
We’re starting to win as well as deploy some really large multi-national projects. We’ve closed deals where we’re dealing with dozens of countries, all with different sets of configuration options, security requirements, currencies, and so on.
Projects that there’s only a handful of companies can handle, we can handle. That is a big shift.
Among those projects are wins from SAP subsidiary Ariba, such as French healthcare giant Sanofi, which Coupa won after demonstrating significantly higher user satisfaction.
We’re in the process of replacing a global Ariba deployment, we’re currently live in three countries now.
Significant names signed during the year include Royal Bank of Canada, Swiss Re, Veolia and others. In total, 100 new customers came on board in 2014, with 70 going live during the year.
Coupa’s procure-to-pay suite encompasses procurement, sourcing, invoicing, open business network, expense management and inventory. Having all these functions operating as a single integrated suite is an important part of its appeal, said Bernshteyn.
These companies really want an integrated organic suite of products. One big differentiation for us is, customers don’t want to have to integrate all of these things.
They’re astute enough to know that having ‘one throat to choke’ doesn’t mean products are interoperable.
Collaborative procurement
That range of capabilities is still being rounded out. Last month Coupa acquired San Francisco-based ZenPurchase, a two-year-old startup that applies team collaboration technologies to procurement and RFP processes. Coupa plans to apply the ZenPurchase capabilities across all facets of procurement, expense management and invoicing.
Commenting on the acquisition, supply chain analyst network Spend Matters speculated the move may also have been an ‘acqui-hire’ of the startup’s co-founders. It noted that Coupa has more to do before it can claim to be a complete sourcing solution:
Coupa has been in need of more sourcing substance for some time — sourcing is not its meat-and-potatoes line of business, and even if the tool has gone beyond its earlier rather perfunctory ‘3 bids in a box’, it’s not a sourcing toolset that can hold its own against a best-of-breed sourcing provider. So this is a natural step in the process toward a ‘true’ source-to-settle suite, and we really look forward to coming innovations from them.
My take
One other aspect of yesterday’s conversation that impressed me was Bernshteyn’s evident delight in the way that SaaS makes it possible to focus on the business outcomes that customers achieve, rather than getting bogged down in technology discussions. He told me:
There’s no games any more. I’m giving you a subscription to value. I want to deliver value on a recurring basis. That’s one of the beauties of SaaS.
Coupa likes to call this “savings as a service” — with the implication that if the product is not continuing to deliver procurement savings, then it’s not earning its subscription.
Meanwhile, Coupa’s ability to land increasingly complex, global contracts with this proposition is another proof point in the maturing of enterprise SaaS solutions.
Disclosure: SAP is a diginomica premier partner and Coupa is a diginomica partner.
Image credits: Dollar and euro © Dominique – Fotolia.com; headshot by Coupa.

Read more on: Cloud platforms - infrastructure and architectureSpend management 