
Rob Bernshteyn, Coupa
Coupa CEO Rob Bernshteyn wants to redress the balance in the business world between buyers and sellers, and his company is backing a new three-letter acronym to lead that effort. Business Spend Management (BSM), as defined by Bernshteyn, brings together various previously siloed spend functions into a single set of unified processes and pooled intelligence.
Speaking at today’s Inspire18 conference in San Francisco, Bernshteyn spoke of the massive investment that sellers put into capturing ‘share of wallet’ and called on buyers to respond in kind:
We have a chance to completely flip the script because we have control as spenders. The power is really with us. We have all the wallet of the companies that we serve and that wallet has hundreds of billions of dollars in it. What if we together could know more about those selling to us than they even know about themselves?
What if we could collectively combine our intelligence of the community of hundreds of customers, of hundreds of billions of dollars in spend data, and use that community intelligence to help us become smarter and smarter about the suppliers that we’re working with? After all, we have the control, don’t we?
All we have to do is take all of these different processes that we have inside our organizations — many of you are already doing it together with us — and pulling them all together, centralizing them, creating one handshake from the other side.
Business Spend Management as a rallying cry
In part this is a manifesto for Coupa’s own cloud-based spend management product set, highlighting its reach across source-to-contract, procure-to-pay, travel & expense, suppliers & risk, and spend insights, as well as its use of machine learning and analytics to leverage the pooled data of its customer community. But it is also a call to arms for buyers, in which Business Spend Management becomes a rallying cry to put technology to work on their behalf. Speaking to diginomica after the keynote, Bernshteyn elaborates:
This space has really not yet seen its day and so we wanted to name it properly and we will work vigorously to build our way into it, one customer at a time.
It’s so amazing to me. How is it that the people that are selling to you have more information about you, than you have information about those selling to you? You’re the one with the money.
So control is shifting to the spenders. If we can empower these spenders with these tools and these platforms and this community insight, I think we’re going to be on the right side of the equation. At minimum we’ll be able to uplift this area of Business Spend Management to at least be on par with the sellers, if not more important. I think that’s the case …
There’s so much energy, intensity, being applied to the sales side of the equation. We now have the control to apply information technology to the spend side of the equation.
Buyers deserve our own TLA
Giving the category its own three-letter acronym puts the spend function on a par with other core activities in the enterprise, he argues:
This is not a far reach. It’s not like we created some crazy name. We’ve been talking about spend, we’ve been talking about management. What we’re saying is, let’s get a simple three-letter acronym that defines what it is that we’ve really been doing together. We’ve been delivering for businesses, measurable value around how they manage their spending. Let’s just call it what it is.
It’s very hard to argue that. You could almost say, well, haven’t we been doing that? We have. We just haven’t given it just such a simple three-letter acronym. All these spaces have these three-letter acronyms. We deserve one too.
Coupa’s own customers are already expanding their usage across the broad spectrum of spend functions the company offers, says Bernshteyn, with the average number of applications per customer rising three to four in the past year. Most start by addressing just one pain point, whether it’s automating a paper invoicing process, replacing an antiquated expense tracking system, streamlining PO processes, or getting control of sourcing or supplier risk. Then they move on to add others.
It’s very encouraging for me to now see we’re averaging four applications per customer … It’s happening because they are the spenders. And they decided, ‘Hey, I’m getting value here. I’d like to turn on other things.’ So that supports our hypothesis in many ways.
Customers are also much more ready to adopt Coupa’s processes rather than building their own, he adds — a sign that they’re finding value in what Coupa has to offer, he believes:
More and more companies are coming to us and saying, ‘We don’t want you to automate the nest of crazy wires we have all hanging all over the place. We want you to prescriptively tell us what is the best practices way to deploy your solution to get fast time-to-value.’ That’s music to our ears that they say it.
[We’re] not making you happy and satisfying you with doing it the way you always did it, but doing it in a way that is going to lead to measurable results for you. So you can go to the CEO and CFO and say, ‘Look at what we just did here, we delivered a best practice way of doing this.’
It’s not that our platform is not flexible — we can rewire the same way you had it wired before, but that’s not going to be a transformation. That’s not going to be a step to the next level. We want to take you to the next level.
My take
Looking back at my coverage of last year’s Inspire conference, I wrote that with the expansion of its functional footprint, “Coupa no longer fits neatly into a single category.” So perhaps it should come as no surprise that this year Coupa has decided to define its own category to fit into.
While this is something that technology vendors are prone to do ad nauseum, on the principle that if you can define a category that only you fit into, you instantly become a leader of it, I think the business spend management moniker has more merit than most self-defined categories. Indeed, when I wrote about the redefinition of enterprise applications for the cloud era five years ago, I reserved one of the five key categories for “spend and resources” — so I’m on the same wavelength here as Bernshteyn.
I’m also conscious of the tendency of digitalization to cut across old functional siloes and automate processes that in the past were simply too disparate to aggregate and automate. This has been particularly noticeable in the field of quote-to-cash, on the sales side, so it’s hardly surprising that a similar trend should now become visible on the buying side.
I’ll have more tomorrow from Inspire18, where the keynote focus will switch to product announcements, including details of a new move by Coupa into payment processes. And I have some more thoughts on BSM, which I’ll return to in a follow-up post.
Image credit - via the authorDisclosure - Coupa is a diginomica premier partner and contributed to the author's travel costs to attend Inspire 18Read more on: Spend management 