
Cox Chat
It seems like an inconsequential change but no. It isn’t. Once a wifi router has been hooked up to Cox Communications systems then it is stuck in that location. Unless you want to pony up $60 for the pleasure of moving it from one room to another in the same property. That’s what I discovered today, much to my chagrin.
Is it possible to be fair with near monopoly providers when it seems that they want to bilk the consumer at every turn?
The clues were already there and I have expected something of the sort. Going onto the Cox site, there’s a nice chat feature that is accessed after you enter the original query. When I saw the URL for support includes “sales,” I smiled wryly. So they’ve already wasted my time with a non-answer, but I just knew it’s going to be a case of BOGU (scroll down for the definition) at some point.
The very helpful person at the other end of the line starts out the conversation saying that once she’s resolved my problem then she’d like to review our services. Of course – another sales pitch coming but I’m already prepared for that one.
So we go through the rigmarole of physically trying to connect in the alternative location only to be told that it hasn’t been activated and for which I need to pony up $60. She is very apologetic about it but, seriously, what can she do? Cox has me by the short hairs so while I’m not going to get mad at her, what was a moderately pleasant experience leaves a very sour taste.
I could always say ‘no’ and get a bunch of Powerline adapters but that will end up costing even more money so I have to admit they’ve priced this particular wrinkle to perfection.
Of course we get to the obligatory ‘How’s the service working for you?’ question, the answer to which is ‘OK’ albeit we rarely get more than one third of the rated download speed. I might well address that with the engineer when he visits. In the meantime, we once again find ourselves being bilked for fees. And if that wasn’t enough, I apparently qualify for some sort of cable service but then I never watch television so that’s a waste of time and even if I did, US TV would be very low on my list of priorities.
The upside is that I do have a VERY large usage cap so even if Jude watches all her soaps (3 hours per night) and I deep dive into a 10 part season of something on Netflix at a weekend then we still don’t suck up all that usage capacity.
The experience leaves open an interesting question. Could I switch provider at lower cost? Probably not. The cartel nature of near monopolies is such that once you’re sucked in, the degree of lock-in makes getting from underneath an enterprise software license look trivial.
This leaves open the question of disruption. Google Fiber? Not anytime soon it seems and what with Cox having just opened a mega office block not far from my location, I doubt they feel the need to be overly worried about consumer resentment. At least not today.
Image credit: Leadership or Business Failure © ptnphotof – Fotolia.com
 
Read more on: CRM and customer experience 