

A number of speakers took to the stage at the Enterprise Digital Summit this week in London to talk about overcoming the core challenges and issues facing organisations when attempting to undergo a ‘digital transformation’ and establish an enterprise-wide ‘social network’.
One of the key themes throughout the day centred on how companies can shift their culture towards becoming more digitally minded and ensuring that an environment is created that allows for agility, iteration and innovation.
However, before cultural change can be addressed, the concept of what a digital ‘strategy’ means to your organisation first needs to be decided. Laura-Jane Parker, a consultant at agency PostShift, said that organisations often say that they have a transformation strategy in place, when actually they haven’t got a clear or specific vision about what that actually means. She said:
I think leadership and bottom up [are both needed] for stable change, one without the other often fizzles out over time. We like to work with leaders to absolutely understand and define exactly what it is that they are trying to strive for. That’s really important.
So many organisations have this idea that they want to be digital, but they haven’t really defined what for and why. Once we’ve got that we then really like to define what that means in terms of capabilities – so trying to become more agile or more responsive, what skills does that need? What does that mean in terms of the skills and people you have now? What are the strengths of the organisation? What can we build on?
Belinda Gannaway, director of culture at digital agency Brilliant Noise, agreed. And said that the quicker those at the top understand this, in years to come it will hopefully mean we won’t have to talk about ‘digital strategy’ anymore. She said:
The key point for me about where you start with this transformation is a really, really big issue. If your CEO doesn’t care or doesn’t care enough, then nothing will happen. I think it’s about alignment of all the strategies – so it’s not about having a digital strategy, or a digital mission, or having a business strategy.
I think they need to become one and the same. At this point in time we are still struggling for every organisation to have a digital vision, or to at least articulate it. Over the next couple of years you just won’t talk about digital strategy, it will just be your business strategy.
Culture is a big issue
 Speaking alongside Gannaway and Parker was David D’Souza, head of London at CIPD – the professional body for HR and people development. D’Souza admitted that HR as a group hasn’t been quick to keep up with the changes in the market, which has had an impact on employees and the culture of the organisation. Which in turn, stifles digital development. He said:
HR has got a bit of catching up to do. Historically we have been quite risk averse and not a particularly technologically friendly community. Our ability is to put organisations into a place where we are enabling them, rather than restricting, constricting or controlling them. You hire someone because you see a spark in their eyes and a richness about them, you want all of that to come into the workplace. And then you pile on policies that restrict the things that they can contribute.
I think we should be at the forefront, but we have got a journey to go on to help support that digital journey. One of the things that we can do is help adjust the mindset and the culture around this – I think that’s absolutely key to this.
If we look at HR 15 years ago, the issues we faced then were around collaboration, keeping that talent and making people feel engaged and passionate about the organisation. They still remain, but the tools we have to enable that are far greater than we had before.
Parker agreed and said that the culture of the organisation needs to change in a way that allows businesses to be far more responsive to the people that are working for them – they need to ‘humanise’ again, as opposed to just striving for efficiency. She said:
Businesses need to operate in a far more adaptive, responsive, sentient way – a more human way in many ways. That is not the way we built businesses. We have actually dehumanised businesses over the past 100 years. We have made them more machine like, more efficient. That works in a very predictable world. But that’s changed.
We need to figure out what the new ways of working are for businesses to make them thrive and thrive in the 21st century, using technology. So in that human approach we look to find ways of networking and organising businesses to capitalise on what humans can bring to the organisation to achieve what those goals are. Very much pushing out the autonomy of decision making to the edges of the business.
Fertile soil
Gunnaway said that this shift in culture to allow organisations to become more adaptive and responsive requires people to work in a different way. But to allow for this to happen, it’s the leadership that needs to create and environment that isn’t restrictive to change and failure. She said:
I think to have a change of culture, as you say, you need to have people doing things differently. One of the key aspects of a digital culture is having a very collaborative environment. But that’s not something that can be dictated from above, you can’t say go forth and collaborate. It’s just nonsense. I think the role of leadership, the role of the vision, is to create the environment or the ecosystem where people feel safe and have enough information to collaborate around something.
The key aspect of a digital culture is for leadership to create this environment, where trust, autonomy and transparency are key. I think by creating that fertile soil, it will allow people to come to together to create collaborate networks, to innovative, to try new things, to fail – all the good stuff that we know is vital. But unless that fertile soil is created from leadership, it seems it just won’t happen.
Janet Parkinson, founder and CXO of consultancy Agile Elephant, agreed and said that leaders need to ensure that this ‘fertile soil’ is so that it allows employees at the edge to not require approval for absolutely everything they do. And then they should also not be lambasted if their decisions fail. She said:
I think cultural blame is a big issue. I think when you are a company that needs to move agilely and very quickly, you (as an employee) don’t always have the time to back yourself up to get a confirmation of what you are about to do is correct.
Therefore those on the edge need to feel that they can act without worrying too much in case they do get it wrong. If they get it wrong, they need to feel that the people behind them are supporting them. That they did the right thing at the moment. Building that psychology into a whole company structure is a big ask. But it is possible.
So how do you convince those at the top?
How do you get HR to change its way of thinking before changing the entire organisation’s culture? D’Souza’s advice: scare them. He said:
I spend a lot of time talking to HR professionals about the shifts that are coming. The best way to go is to really scare them quite a bit. Whether you start talking to them about dinosaurs, or whether you start talking to them about being an organisation that is relevant, whatever you language use. The fact is that the technology is present everywhere. So scare them.
I will come in and talk to them about the fact that they won’t have jobs in ten years time unless they get with the changes.
Gannaway agreed, but added that whilst scaring is a good tactic, it’s also important to include examples to show them how the transition could be easily achieved. She said:
If you scare them, have something strong to follow up with that makes it easy. We are working with a lot of leadership teams that typically turn their back on digital because they are terrified by it, so they delegate it to somebody else and they just hope that it will happen if they give it to somebody else.
There’s a risk in scaring people. We talk about the digital mindset, about being aware. If they are using digital tools in their social lives, they’re kind of half way there already. They’re kind of on the road anyway, so make it more accessible in terms of thinking about the digital mindset. What aspects does that person already have? Start the conversation on territory that they are familiar with.
Read more on: Future of work 