
Ed Vaizey
Slipped out the door this morning while no-one’s looking, the Cabinet Office is asking Joe and Jean Public what they want to see as the next stage of “the UK’s digital revolution”.
On the face of it, it’s a nice piece of crowd-sourced policy-shaping inclusion, until you pause to realise that almost no-one in the UK is at work, but instead is chasing bargains in the sales or busy catching up with Downton, Doctor Who and Dickensian on the TV.
And the window of opportunity to contribute to this national economic policy debate is limited to say the least. Get your ideas in by 19th January. I’ve seen breakfast television competitions with a longer time-span than that.
Still, let’s take it at face value and look at what’s being asked. The starting premise is that:
In the last five years, the UK’s digital economy has changed beyond recognition – and in ways few people would have predicted.
The UK is now truly a ‘Tech Nation’ with more than 70 per cent of digital businesses now based outside of the capital.
What’s now wanted is:
a new Digital Strategy for the UK for the next five years. [The Government] wants the UK to be synonymous with digital – a place where digital technologies transform day-to-day life, the economy and government.
So ideas are needed about what to prioritise. The Cabinet Office has a few suggestions to get you started, such as education:
In education, universities and colleges are already using massive open online courses – MOOCs as they’re called – so lectures and courses can reach a much wider audience, costing less. Could schools benefit from similar innovations?
Then there’s the NHS:
It’s already moving from a largely paper-based system to a digital-by-default. What more can we do to make our health system more efficient and joined up, so that our amazing doctors and nurses can spend more time saving lives and improving care?
And of course there’s the headline-grabbing bit about sci-fi becoming real, who’d have thought it, where are the hoverboards from Back to the Future? etc etc :
From driverless cars to deliveries by drone – the future imagined by far-fetched science fiction films from only a few years ago is rapidly coming true. How can we make sure the UK is at the cutting edge of these developments?
Minister for the Digital Economy Ed Vaizey says:
Every part of the UK economy and our lives has been digitised – from how we shop and entertain ourselves to the way we travel to work and manage our health. This digital fever exploded from the cluster in east London, and has spread to every part of the country, making the UK truly a ‘Tech Nation’.
But we need to work hard to make sure we continue to take advantage of the benefits digital transformation has to offer. Come 2020, undoubtedly the UK landscape will have changed to be firmly in the digital age. But how do you want to shape that? Let’s show the rest of the world how it’s done.
He adds:
UK plc is one of the most developed digital economies in the world – it’s boosted by around £145 billion a year from digital technology, with the average British person spending around £1,500 online for goods each year.
This revolution has been led by entrepreneurs but supported by Government in creating the right environment for ideas and businesses to flourish. Tech City UK has done sterling work in supporting businesses who are embracing the technological revolution, and we’ve changed the way we operate in Government too, including by establishing the world-leading Government Digital Service.
We’ve helped accelerate digital advancements, including opening up more than 20,000 government held data sources to the world, now used to underpin apps like CityMapper and Zoopla. And we’re making it easier for smaller businesses to bid for government contracts and sell services to the public sector via the Digital Marketplace we have created.
Action areas
Vaizey identifies four action areas that need to be addressed:
Unlocking digital growth:
We need to take bold steps to create an open and flexible environment for digital innovation that crosses country borders. This means pushing for the completion of the Digital Single Market in Europe, which could create a €415 billion boost of economic growth for the region.
But this isn’t even just about the ‘tech’ sector. Every business can benefit from using digital technology – from hairdressers and corner shops to the big car makers, and everything in between. So how can we make sure we support businesses to make the most of this potential?
Transforming government:

Government services need to be as good as the best consumer services. My colleague Matt Hancock is bringing renewed energy to this agenda, driving a transformation to create what he calls a ‘smartphone state’. Renewing your passport should be as easy as buying a book online, so what more can we do to make sure interacting with government is as simple and seamless as possible?
Transforming day-to-day life:

New technologies are changing every aspect of our lives. We need to make sure that wherever government is involved – as the service provider, regulator, or a major buyer – we are making the most of it.
Building the foundations:
We need to get the fundamental areas right to make everything else possible.
On connectivity we’re on track to deliver superfast broadband to 95 per cent of the UK by the end of 2017 – and we’re planning to make it a legal right for every home and business in the UK to request fast broadband.
My take
OK, I’m being cynical, but slipping this out the door on 29th December gives the impression of it being something that’s either done for gesture’s sake or something that someone’s realised they should have done earlier in the year and it’s being shoved out before the year-end.
With the horrific flood damage in the north of the UK grabbing all the headlines for the foreseeable future, this digital pitch isn’t going to get the attention it deserves.
Never mind a good day to bury bad news. This is a bad day to bury a relatively good idea.
But once you’ve maxed out the credit card and watched And Then Were None, if you’ve got any ideas you’d like to chuck in the pot, send them to [email protected] by 19 January 2016.
Read more on: Data privacyDigital government and public servicesEducationG-Cloud and the Digital MarketplaceRegulation

