

At MSC Cruises, marketing director Andrea Guanci says that there are two key pillars of his strategy for working with travel agents: revenues and visibility. 
In other words, he needs to know not only how much money each travel agent generates through selling the company’s cruises to its customers, but also how effectively they use the brochures, flyers and posters it provides to them to market those holidays in their bricks-and-mortar branches. That, after all, is what governs which marketing materials, and in what quantities, are sent to them in the first place. 
This strategy is important because around 90% of the company’s revenues (€1.5 billion in 2014) still come from third-party travel agents – and in Italy, where Guanci is based, a visit to a high-street store, whether part of a chain or an independent local business, is still a really popular way to select and pay for a cruise, even if prior research is done online. MSC Cruises sells through around 9,000 travel agencies in Italy alone. But until recently, one of those key pillars – visibility – was shaky, he admits:

The situation was like this, ‘OK, I’ll send you materials but are you going to use them or am I just wasting my money to produce them and to deliver them to your shop? Will they just stay in the box? Do our posters even fit in your windows? Are they right for your store?’. We always had doubts here, we always had questions.

Sure, he says, he could ask his team of 25 Italy-based sales staff, who each visit three to five stores in person daily to make some spot checks:

But that’s not what they’re visiting these stores to do. They are there to talk to travel agents about our new products, our new ships, our new itineraries – to promote our company and to maintain good relationships. 
If I asked them to file reports on the visibility of marketing materials in each store, I would never know if they’d done it in a proper way or just telling me what they think might be right, but without data. We send out materials every month, sometimes every two months. It would be a huge job – and I can’t expect them to be inspectors as well as good sales guys. Either they don’t do it, or if they do, it takes away time from other things.

Gigging
Eventually, Guanci’s answer came from the ‘gig economy’ when he found out about an Italian company, BeMyEye, that crowdsources labour for simple tasks via a mobile app. Much like Gigwalk’s ‘Gigwalkers’ in the US, BeMyEye’s ‘Eyes’ are regular smartphone users who are happy to earn money as real-world data gatherers, and are guided by the app through a series of simple observational tasks at specific locations.
In MSC Cruise’s case, this involves them visiting local travel agents and checking, for example, if the company’s brochures are easily accessible to customers in the store, as well as taking photos of each agency’s shop window, to show that its holidays are clearly displayed there – and, if they are, which competitors are also being promoted. 
Guanci refers to this as ‘snack’ research – as in, quick and easy to digest, just like fast food: 

It’s simple but precious information. Using BeMyEye, I can perform this research activity in a fast and inexpensive way, because it gives me what I need and nothing more. Typical market research is expensive and gives me too much information. I don’t want senior experts giving me deep analysis. I just want facts: a photo, a simple answer to a simple question.

Simple it might be, but that data feeds some pretty complex and sophisticated analysis back at the office. MSC Cruises kicked off its work with BeMyEye with a full audit of all 9,000 Italian travel agents, and plans to follow up each year with three smaller exercises, timed to coincide with periods of intense materials distribution or promotional offers. These subsequent campaigns are targeted at limited, but statistically representative, groups of Italian agencies. 
By combining the visibility information generated by the ‘Eyes’ with revenue data, Guanci can now see, for example, exactly how travel agents are performing in terms of displaying the company’s marketing materials and the impact that has on their sales. It also alerts him to any problems: using BeMyEye, MSC Cruises quickly discovered that around a third of travel agents weren’t displaying its brochures in-store, relying instead on customers to ask to see them. 
Guanci can also send out marketing materials to individual stores based on their revenue contribution, location, footfall and window size. His sales team are now set KPIs based on visibility for their individual territories and they have the data they need to encourage travel agents to boost their own sales by displaying MSC Cruises materials more prominently. And there’s an added incentive for them to do so: they know they’re being observed, he explains:

All activities we do within BeMyEye are always declared to the travel agencies. It’s very transparent. Now that travel agents know they will likely receive a visit from an ‘Eye’, they are more willing to display our materials – but it’s a win-win situation, because better display strategies means higher sales for them and we share the data with them.


Image credit - MSC CruisesRead more on: Digital and content marketingDigital enterprise in the real worldUX and application design 