
Carolyn Everson
So much of what Facebook does centers around Mark Zuckerberg and Sheryl Sandberg, inevitably so as they are the public faces for the firm and Sandberg in particular is such a persuasive advocate of the bigger picture trends.
That said, it’s nice to get an insight into what’s going on further down the food chain with the people on the front line. Such a person is Carolyn Everson, Vice President of Global Marketing Solutions at Facebook, who spoke earlier this week at the 43rd Annual J.P. Morgan Global Technology, Media and Telecom Conference.
Everson’s role is manage Facebook’s relationships with what are referred to as “thought-marketers” (shudder!). She’s got an impressive track record, having been Corporate Vice President of Microsoft’s Global Advertising Sales and Trade Marketing teams as well as Chief Operating Officer and EVP of U.S. Ad Sales for MTV Networks.
In other words, this is someone well-versed in the changing trends in the marketing and advertising space and who has, in her four years at Facebook, seen the nature of the firm’s engagement with clients mature. When she started in the role, she says, Facebook was seen primarily as a social media tactical investment.
Today it’s a very different sort of conversation, she says:
We’re talking about how we specifically drive our clients business and we say very directly to our clients and agencies that they should not invest a single dollar unless we’re driving measurable business results for them.
Sometimes those measurable business objectives are brand related, sometimes they’re actually driving product off the shelves and everything in between, but we’re very focused on being a business that grows other people’s business.
A key factor in this conversation is the more mature targeting capabilities that Facebook can offer. Four years ago, the ability to target at a granular level just wasn’t there, concedes Everson, whereas today there are initiatives such as sp-called look-a-like audiences, where marketers are able to find customers that look like their existing customers in order to create custom audiences.
Everson explains:
We used look-a-like audiences, as an example, for Banana Republic this Holiday season. Banana Republic has a very clear understanding of who their customer base. What they did is a profile of their existing customer base and said, ‘We need to find more people that look like this existing customer base’. We were able to target them and they had a 4X increase in conversions using lookalike audiences.
As for the concept of custom audiences, there’s a big selling point here in pitching clients with the idea of helping them to find “customers that have been customers of theirs”. That sounds simple enough in principle, but the benefits can be significant, says Everson:
The way custom audiences works is it allows a client to take a list of their customers and be able to see if they are on Facebook and if so we can ret-target them
It is very effective and we find that marketers are using it in a variety of different ways. Sometimes it’s to reinforce the message. Sometimes it’s just re-thinking, Instead of doing direct mail where they traditionally have spent, they will actually now find those customers on Facebook where customers are spending a majority of their time. We focus on custom audience adoption across all of our client base and we work very hard to educate the market about what this capability is.
No more cookies!
Educating marketers on how to adapt to a multi-device reality is also critical, argues Everson, and that includes moving past the current cookie-based approach to measuring success. Everson posits:
For the last 20-plus years, the internet has been based on cookies and cookies really were the currency on desktop and it worked when consumers had one desktop that they predominantly used. Fast forward to today and over 30% of people are using almost three devices in [the US] and in some markets people are using even more than three devices.
So what you have is a situation where it is not unusual for consumer to wake up and look at their phone right next to their bed, get to work, be on a desktop or laptop and then in the evening they maybe consuming contact on a tablet or an iPad. From a marketing perspective that presents some challenges – figuring out how to serve an ad, at what time, to ensure that you’re actually hitting that person if they’re on these different devices.
The cookie-based systems that are out there are not very accurate. For example on gender and age, they’re about 59% accurate and so that leaves a lot of unknowns as to whether or not you’re actually reaching a right person.
Cookie-based also overestimates reach. It will tell you you’re reaching more people when in fact you might be reaching that same person and then it underestimates frequency. So it overestimates reach by about 46% and it underestimates frequency by about 31%.
Cookies crumbled
The alternative approach is to base measurement around people. This is where Facebook’s Atlas technology comes in, mobile-based and allowing marketers not only to target on different devices, but also do the follow-on measurement. Everson explains:
We’re able to tell a marketer now that they can serve an ad to a consumer in the morning. If you take a quick service restaurant like McDonalds or Burger King or Wendy’s, they may have a message that they want to get to in the morning about shopping in for breakfast. That message will be very different later in the day and in the evening and so we’re able to allow the marketer to target different points of the day on different devices and track whether that consumer is receiving a message.
Engagement with major brands like Banana Republic is also symptomatic of how Facebook is now perceived as a marketing/advertising channel. Everson says:
If you think about Coca Cola, Proctor & Gamble, Unilever, Nestle, any of the largest marketers that you would think of as brand, they of course care about their brand affinity and how consumers are going to have a preference for their product versus someone else’s, but they also very much care about driving growth and driving sales. So what we’re seeing is much more of a blending between those two objectives.
But the big brands are still struggling in many cases with the move to mobile outreach, Everson argues:
It is a fact that getting the traditional brand marketer budget that has been traditionally spent in more TV and print forms to move not only to digital, but to mobile takes time.
There has been an established way of working for decades and by the way, a way that has worked for many of those marketers and so we’re in the early days of really getting brand marketers to understand the dramatic shift that consumers have had to mobile. This shift is really dramatic over the last few years, which is causing marketers to rethink their mix, rethink how they develop their creative.
Consumers spend 25% of their time on mobile. We at Facebook with Instagram get about 20% of their time. That would lead you to believe that we could garner about 5% of marketer’s budgets and we’re not there yet with the large brand marketers.
My take
I’m rather taken by the plea to move beyond the cookie as a instrument of online measurement. The emphasis on education is also of note. So often with new advances in technology, there’s the urge by big brands to be on the bleeding edge of modernity without necessarily an accompanying awareness of the full implications of such investment. The shift to mobile and video (and mobile video) may be slower than many would wish, but maybe that’s for the best?

Read more on: Analytics planning and data analysisCloud platforms - infrastructure and architectureCRM and customer experienceDigital and content marketingMobileSocial 