
Mike Lawrie
It’s one of those ‘worse kept secrets’ that occur in the tech industry, but services giant CSC has confirmed its intention to break in two – CSC Global Commercial and CSC US Public Sector.
The firm will spin off its $4.1 billion US public sector business as a standalone company by this October. It will employ 14,000 people dedicated to the government sector. For its full year just ended, CSC’s public sector work in North America earned it operating income of $591 million, versus $567 million for the rest of its business.
The other, $8.1 billion run rate company will house the remaining 51,000 employees and will focus on commercial customers.
So far, so logical. Except for the bit where it turns out that non-US government customers are to be bundled in with the commercial arm. Why? Who knows?
According to CEO Mike Lawrie, the ‘get fit’ phase of CSC’s turnaround has now been completed and this is the next obvious step:
CSC began its turnaround three years go. That turnaround has progressed strongly, and our focus now turns to positioning the business for long-term growth and leadership.
The best way to accelerate that transformation is by separating the company into two businesses, each uniquely positioned to lead its market by focusing strongly on the needs of its clients.
Our analysis shows significant benefits of going with a pure-play strategy. We expect this change to enable both businesses to enhance innovation and improve delivery, in ways that are consistent with the rate and pace of the markets they serve.
On a conference call with analysts later, he insisted the split was a better strategy than selling off part of the business. Earlier this year, Capgemini was rumored to be interested in making a bid for some or all of CSC. Lawrie said:
As we were turning around the business, market shifts began to accelerate, creating in some cases diverging opportunities and diverging challenges..Believe me, we’ve done a thorough analysis over a period of time and looked at different options. We felt that right now, at this point and time, this was the best option or transaction that could unlock value.
Despite cuts in government spending, CSC’s public sector business has been outperforming the commercial side. By breaking out a smaller, dedicated unit, Lawrie hopes that the firm will be able to respond more quickly to opportunities as they arise:
This separation will allow both companies to respond to changing market dynamics with greater agility. As the government market continues to improve, CSC will be well-positioned to leverage its deep client relationships to realize its growth and leadership plans.
Certainly there’s still a lot of room for improvement on CSC’s part. Yesterday the firm reported fourth quarter earnings of $9 million, down from $270 million a year ago, on revenue of $2.91 billion, down 12.6% year-on-year. For full year 2015, it turned in a loss of $8 million on revenues of $12.2 billion, down 6.3% year-on-year.
CSC’s move is just the latest in a trend of splitting in two, with eBay/PayPal, Symantec, and Hewlett-Packard all adopting similar strategies.
My take
Ok, this makes sense, even allowing for the fact that non-US government business is somewhat strangely lumped into the Global Commercial arm.
Lawrie’s done a good job over the past 3 years in turning around a company that was frankly dying on its feet. He’s cleared up a lot of the mess left his predecessor, but as yesterday’s numbers show, there’s still a way to go.
But with the share price on the up despite the losses, it’s clear that Wall Street at least approves of this latest course of action.

Read more on: Cloud platforms - infrastructure and architectureInfrastructureOutsourcing 