
I like December, and not because it’s my birthday month. I like it because it’s a time when we stop and take a deep breath and look at everything we’ve done, take stock of what worked and what didn’t, and then look forward to a new year and new opportunity to improve the customer’s digital experience.
So I reached out to some industry people to get their perspectives on the industry, what’s working and will continue to work and what mistakes they say and how the technology will evolve. So let’s get on with it.
What CXM trends had the most focus/attention in 2016? Which one(s) hold the most promise for an organization’s success going forward?
2016 was the year of personalization as several pointed out. Of course, not everyone is doing it, or doing it well. Things are changing, and personalization capabilities in terms of technology will get better. But personalization is also just the beginning.
The need for personalization goes hand-in-hand with the rise of AI in the digital experience. While no DXM vendor currently has extensive experience with AI, marketers realize it’s unrivaled personalization power and the DXM space will be racing to add AI into their offerings. This forward push in technologies will provide organizations with a plethora of untapped opportunities, and early adopters of AI, and the refined personalization engines it powers will benefit greatly.
– Tjeerd Brenninkmeijer, CMO of Hippo, a BloomReach company.
David Hillis, VP Business Development Ingeniux Corporation notes that 2016 saw the unbundling of customer experience management:
People are realizing customer experience cannot be delivered in a box. It’s a coordinated effort across multiple customer touchpoints, applications, and business groups. So CXM has really become an integration strategy that includes web CMS, marketing automation, customer portals, CRM, knowledge, help desk, and other apps.
This idea was echoed by Deb Lavoy, CEO of Narrative Builders who said that there has been a recognition that the platforms are causing as many problems as they were designed to solve and it is forcing organizations to take a more “step-wise, modular approach to technical progress.”
Another key point that Lavoy made is that organizations are spending more time understanding how everything must fit together to tell a story and that the stories are what drive customer experience:
[The] recognition that piecemeal messaging, web, content, and social strategies are very hard, very expensive, impossible to maintain, and usually ineffective. There is an antidote to that, however, and it is narrative. A good narrative will help you tell a thousand stories and make all that content cohesive and meaningful.
What CXM strategies and trends do you see for 2017? Are they different from what orgs are doing today?
In 2017, I expect the focus will shift to intelligent personalization, such as marketing accessories after a purchase rather than continuing to sell something a consumer has already purchased. Omni-channel will likely become an increasing area of focus as organizations attempt to connect experiences across channels.
– Ryan Donovan, SVP of Product Management at Sitecore.
Orgs are starting to use things like Narrative, Journeys and Design Thinking to help keep the user perspective on experience, to build empathy, which is really the key to improving their experience.
– Deb Lavoy
I think the hot trend for 2017 will be Customer Portal. Customer self-service is king. The key is connecting customer service applications into one seamless experience available on any device. Also, the same type of cognitive intelligence that has been applied to the marketing side of the business has equal value in the customer service organization. I think we will see more customer intelligence solutions that support cross-selling, engagement, and content personalization to resolve issues and lower service costs.
– David Hillis
In 2017, DXM will take a page out of the eCommerce playbook in that content creation will be expected to support data-based goals that directly impact revenue. With the rise of machine learning and predictive analytics, it will be easier for organizations to spot trends in their industries, gain insights into what content their audience will need, and have the data to see how this content is performing and impacting revenue. Machine learning will be incredibly valuable to organizations because it can go beyond today’s analytics, which are only able to look at past behaviors, and combine that with predictive algorithms that give businesses a look into the future of their market.
– Tjeerd Brenninkmeijer
In terms of the technology that enables CXM, how will it evolve or adapt in 2017? Is there some new tech that organizations will buy into?
One theme that seemed consistent was that of AI and what it means to digital experiences. Brenninkmeijer says that DXM vendors will start to get into AI in 2017. He believes AI will enable organizations to look ahead at market trends and define a better intelligent content strategy. This approach follows in the footsteps of the ecommerce industry and what it has been able to do with personalization.
Hillis also sees the potential in AI:
The one technology I will be watching keenly are Bots. My kids are the Siri generation. Their concept of interacting with technology is voice and conversational. Moving the interface from visual UX to voice has huge impact, and may change the way we think about managing and creating content.
But it’s not just about AI. Donovan believes the omnichannel mindset will drive much of what happens with technology in 2017 and will result in many organizations re-platforming to consolidate and integrate technology (or integrate existing systems).
For Hillis, the focus is also on evolving existing applications to support broader CXM use cases:
The Web content management systems, traditionally a marketing platform, will play a transformative role in customer service. …Similarly, web CMS software needs to stop trying to be all things and focus on being the Hub of customer experience. Your CMS should connect content, data, and customer applications into a unified customer experience.
Did you see any major challenges or mistakes this past year from organizations? Were they able to move past them?
The responses to this question were very different and at the same time, very similar. And they all relate to the technology.
“The most common thing I see is companies that hang their entire effort on technology, or those going for cheap quick and dirty fixes.” – Lavoy
“I’ve seen organizations run into this past year arise from the implementation of systems that seem easy but ultimately limit business agility.” – Tjeerd Brenninkmeijer
“Here’s the thing: the web changes too fast, and most organizations have too large of an investment in legacy and line of business applications, to make the Web Experience Suite work. Once they get into these projects, they often end up building custom code and applications. “ – Hillis
But challenges with the technology is only part of the story:
“Non-intelligent personalization is probably one of the biggest annoyances of consumers when interacting with brands CXM solutions. For example, consider a consumer purchasing a Microsoft Surface, and then being endlessly marketed to purchase it again – an occurrence that happens far too often.” – Donovan
“More than ever, organizations are relying on content as the backbone of their marketing strategies, but measuring ROI in a content driven environment is still a challenge. …The role of data in enterprise content will continue to increase, as will the analytics and machine learning capabilities of DXM solutions.” – Tjeerd Brenninkmeijer
“[Orgs are coming around to] Phase 2: getting serious. Getting serious means doing the hard work to really figure out who you are, what you’re selling and to whom. It means understanding the language of your market, engaging all employees in the process. It means understanding that you have many audiences – customers, markets, employees, partners, investors, and they each need to be comfortable with where you’re going and why. This takes work, but it is absolutely achievable.” – Lavoy
My take
Technology has played a major role in how well organizations have succeeded in improving the customer experience. But that role hasn’t always been a positive one. All of the responses from these industry experts make sense:

Organizations need to tell the right story, and it needs to be a cohesive message across the board.
Customers are demanding personalized experiences, but how that personalization is configured and delivered isn’t always working. New technology will help.
Customer acquisition is only one part of the customer experience, and the strategies and technologies need to take a broader view and support the entire customer lifecycle.

It’s interesting to note that three of the industry voices are in the same market – digital experience, and while some of their insights are similar, their approaches to working with the market are very different. All that tells me is that the customer experience market is broad and there’s no one way to do customer experience right.
Image credit - Future, past - wooden signpost © 3d_generator - Fotolia.com.Read more on: Content marketingCRM and customer experienceCustomer service managementDigital and content marketing 