

Ciaran Martin
He may be sitting in one of the hottest seats in UK cyber-security, but Ciaran Martin, deputy director in charge of cyber-security at UK spy central GCHQ (Government Communications Headquarters), had two very straightforward pieces of advice for business users during his keynote presentation at the InfoSecurity conference and exhibition in London today.
Acknowledging the increasingly accepted wisdom that some security breaches are inevitable, he recommended that users make sure they know the minimum level of key data that their business requires to stay in operation, and then defend that really well:
Our original thinking was about preventing attacks, but that is almost impossible, and many attacks aren’t always that serious. So reducing attacks and controlling their impact is a more appropriate target now. By all means make it harder for them to get in, and you can do a lot to dissuade the casual attacker. But a determined attacker will probably get in.
So the key decision for business managers is to work out what is the most important data they need to protect so that the business can be kept running. Or as Martin put it: what do you care about the most?
Only once you’ve answered that question is it possible to decide what is the best or most appropriate solution for defending that data properly. Having made such decisions, the final part of the equation is to assume that chosen security options may well fail at any time and should be treated accordingly:
So test, test, test, and challenge, challenge, challenge.
Martin also addressed the issue of social media, and in particular the way that employees can be quite lax about the way they reveal valuable about themselves without realizing. He suggested that staff need to be constantly advized about what they are giving away, especially when communicating with what they consider to be a limited peer group.
Just to be clear, he was not suggesting that employees should be banned from using social media, but that they are made fully aware that what they communicate about themselves – for example, signing off social media with their full job title and employer details – can cause future problems.
For example, analysis tools are just as available to cyber-criminals as mainstream business managers, and it is remarkably easy to then tie together personal and business-related information that could be posted months or even years apart.
In Martin’s view, what users need is what he termed a “totality of defenses”. Yes, there is still a need for perimeter defenses, though these are by no means a complete answer, and yes, there is also a need for comprehensive internal operations.
Top scarer
Martin also used the keynote presentation to outline what he sees as the overall threat picture, from the perspective of his role as the nation’s “top scarer”, a job he is often asked to fulfil at events like InfoSecurity.
With that in mind, he actually ended up being not very scary at all, not least because he set out to contextualize his views with observed facts, rather that talking up threats in order to appear more `relevant’:
This is about what is happening on a daily basis. We do see new threats emerging on a daily basis, though I don’t want to say too much about who is doing what unto whom. The real question for every user is why they are doing it.
Divining that can often help users determine what the best strategy is in dealing with the threat. For example, it is a fact that some attacks occur simply because they can be done. Most, however, are driven by three main motives: money, power and propaganda.
Money, of course, is a big lever on security threats and as Martin said, any organisation with money is going to be an obvious target:
But cyberspace changes the types of crime, especially when it is transnational crime. This becomes difficult to track, making arrests more difficult. Cyber-crime maps onto trans-national crime gangs particularly well. It also goes well beyond stealing cash, for intellectual property is becoming a major target as well.
He estimated that the cost of each breach is now between £65-70k even for small businesses.
In these days of cyber-terrorists as well a cyber-criminals, attacking businesses and organizations as a way of exercising or gaining power in some way is becoming a regular occurrence. It came as no real surprise here for Martin to say that it was increasingly common for perpetrators to be other states organising attacks at a national level:
Countries use it to gain economic or political advantage, but also for destructive purposes. One of the problems here is the lack of appropriate international norms of behaviour in this area.
Finally, Martin argued that hacking is being used as a vehicle for out-and-out criminal purposes, but for pushing propaganda. He said that the cyber option is being increasingly used, not least because it can be a powerful tool, ranging from national attacks through to those perpetrated by the hacktivist community.
Spook-central GCHQ
He also put in a plug for GCHQ as potential partner for the business community. It has been working with businesses for a while now, conducting security surveys for companies and, he said, usually finding that some security bases are not being covered, even amongst expert users.
This has built on national developments GCHQ has been involved with, such as the preparation of national cyber-security legislation in 2010, whch was followed by the production of the 10 steps to cyber-security in 2012. Most recently, a guideline document on common cyber security attacks, and how to reduce their impact on a business.
He also announced that the organisation has just launched a new Cyber-Security Professional Services operation for working closer with both the vendor and user communities. He wants to hear more from them.
My take
There was a feeling that this was a rather lightweight presentation, and not very scary at all. To an extent that was probably true, but considering Martin’s job, going much further would most likely have led to him having to kill the audience.
And in the end, though hardly original, his advice was well worth the restating.
[mailmunch-form id=”14637″]
Read more on: Analytics planning and data analysisData privacyDigital government and public servicesIdentitySecurity

