
Click on cover to register and download
Today sees the launch of the latest iteration of diginomica content – the d•book.
These are downloadable digests of a particular topic in the digital enterprise that is of importance to today and tomorrow’s CXO decision-makers.
Each d•book will provide an in-depth look at its particular subject matter, providing a practical guide to understanding and managing crucial technology and business topics.
Each d•book will also be a ‘living document’ which will be updated periodically to reflect changes and developments in the business market or technology sector.
And the best news is – they’re free for diginomica readers to download!
The first d•book in the series is Transform your business with the XaaS Effect.
Authored by Phil Wainewright, this d•book is a practical guide to delivering Everything-as-a-Service and provides CXO decision-makers and thought-leaders with a head start in harnessing a technology-enabled  revolution in customer engagement and business operations.
In The XaaS Effect:

We dig behind the hype of digital transformation to show the true impact of connected digital technology.
Readers will learn how businesses are adding a continuous cycle of engagement, monitoring and improvement to all kinds of product or service.
You’ll find real-world examples drawn from our extensive coverage of digital adoption in the enterprise.
CXOs and those who work with them will benefit from a practical framework for harnessing today’s fast-moving technology and business trends.

Why choose this as our first topic?  It matters because XaaS has the potential to either transform your business or enable a competitor to come out of nowhere to capture your market. Wainewright explains:
This is a vitally important topic where we felt a longer read would help us join up the dots in a way we’ve not seen covered elsewhere. We often see businesses digitizing products and processes, building customer engagement, or moving to subscription models.
In The XaaS Effect, we draw all of these strands together so that you can see the big picture of how technology is changing business today, and understand the practical steps you can take to harness its full potential.
To get your copy of The XaaS Effect, all you need to do it register here. Trust us – it’s very quick and easy to do!
Future d•book titles will be revealed in due course. In the meantime, we’d love to get your feedback on this first publication. All suggestions and comments welcome.
Image credit - Chris Middleton Read more on: Analytics planning and data analysisCloud ERP financials and supply chainCloud platforms - infrastructure and architectureCRM and customer experienceDigital enterprise in the real worldDigital transformation - frictionless enterpriseUser experienceUX and application design 