
MailOnline meets Yahoo!
By this time next week, the bids will be in from those who fancy taking on Yahoo! – and the list of runners and riders is expanding as the 18th April deadline looms.
Eyebrows were raised on the UK side of the Atlantic this week when it was confirmed that the publishers of right wing newspaper The Daily Mail, Daily Mail and General Trust (DMGT), is a contender, with an eye to expanding the US profile and advertising opportunities for its Mail Online internet operation.
The US version of Mail Online launched back in 2012 and has 66.7 million monthly unique visitors. But Yahoo!’s reach far outstrips that and would enable DMGT to scale up its US presence significantly. In February, it was the third most visited online platform in the US, attracting more than 204 million people, according to research firm Comscore.
The DMGT publishing group’s US ambitions are plain to see. It bought Elite Daily, a millennial-focused website last year for a reported $47 million. It has also formed a partnership with the American personality Dr Phil McGraw to create the DailyMailTV show.
Scuttlebutt suggests that there are two possible ways DMGT would approach this. The first would see DMGT acquire the media assets of Yahoo! – eg Yahoo! News, Yahoo! Finance, Yahoo!’s video arm, Katie Couric etc – after a private equity group took on the ownership of the full company.
The other option that appears to be on the table would be for a private equity group to acquire Yahoo!, then spin-off a new company (with DMGT as majority shareholder), merging Yahoo!’s news and media assets with Mail Online.
Rival bids
Whatever approach is taken, DMGT faces some stiff competition. On the face of it, Microsoft has an interest in making some form of a bid, probably in partnership with a private equity firm, in order to secure its existing search deal with Yahoo!. That currently results in around 50% of Yahoo! search traffic being delivered via Microsoft’s Bing.
Despite this, it’s believed that Microsoft won’t participate in the first bidding round, having been bitten twice before. Back in 2008, Microsoft offered $45 billion to take out Yahoo!, a 62% premium for the latter – which promptly rejected the deal. Three months later, the offered price was $50 billion, also rejected. Today Yahoo! is worth $33.4 billion.
In the universe of what-might-have-beens, had that merger gone through, it would potentially have left both Yahoo! and Microsoft better placed to compete against the rise of Google.   For its part, Google has kept its powder dry on the prospect of making a bid for Yahoo!, althought it’s widely believed to be in play, although the anti-trust attention such a bid would attract might well be enough to deter it.
But the front runner as the first bidding round approaches remains Verizon, which last year bought AOL and for whom Yahoo! would present an opportunity to scale rapidly in the mobile advertising space. Yahoo! and AOL both have a programmatic ad business that Verizon could combine with its mobile video business to build a stronger mobile offering with content.
The largest US phone carrier has been in the frame since last December when it publicly stated it would be interested in purchasing some or all of Yahoo!.
Verizon is the favored candidate with market watchers. Robert Peck, an analyst at SunTrust Robinson Humphrey, notes:
We continue to believe that Verizon is the leading contender, as it can afford to pay the most given potential for cost savings. While there has been concern expressed on the health of the core, we expect a robust bidding process due to the underlying value of the pieces.
We think the value to a strategic acquirer could be much higher, given the cost overlaps. Verizon, for example, would have little need for most of Yahoo’s sales force or G&A (general and administrative functions).
Peck estimates that around 1000 jobs – on top of the 1,600 due to go by the end of this year – would result from a Verizon victory.
Whatever happens with other Yahoo! staffers, if Verizon does successfully win a bidding war, it would likely be the end of the road for Yahoo!’s embattled CEO Marissa Mayer. Verizon CEO Lowell McAdam is on record as stating that merging Yahoo’s assets with AOL assets under AOL CEO Tim Armstrong would be a good thing for investors.
For her part, Mayer has reportedly been working with private equity firms herself to create a deal that would keep her at the top.
My take
Verizon is the one to beat.
Read more on: Content marketingMobileSocialUser experience 