
Damian Green, First Secretary of State
The results of the UK’s general election last week brought many surprises for members of the Conservative Party and Prime Minister Theresa May, most obviously the loss in a majority in parliament with a number of MP seats going to the opposition.
One of those shock losses of the night was in Ipswich, where then Cabinet Office Minister Ben Gummer didn’t secure enough votes to hold onto his constituency.
As I wrote on Friday, this surprise loss could bring more uncertainty to the government’s digital agenda, as those implementing digital plans now find themselves faced with their third new political lead in the space of just two years.
Gummer was seen as being fairly influential in the Prime Minister’s office, having had a say in the creation of the Conservative Party’s (mostly disastrous) manifesto. His departure will have been unexpected for those working around him.
The uncertainty surrounding political leadership within the Cabinet Office is amplified by the fact that the Government Digital Service, the department run out of the Cabinet Office that is charged with the digital implementation, has also experienced a volatile period over the past two years and lost a number of leaders and experienced staff.
It is assumed that the recently revealed, but rather lacklustre, Transformation Strategy – which focuses on digital change across government – will remain in place. However, it is early days and nothing should be taken for granted within the context of this political climate.
A new political head
As a result of losing her majority in parliament, despite expecting a landslide just a short few weeks ago, Prime Minister Theresa May didn’t have the expected authority to undertake any sort of major reshuffle of her cabinet this weekend.
However, given the departure of Gummer, a new Cabinet Office Minister was needed, and the position has gone to the Prime Minister’s close ally Damian Green, previously Secretary of State for Work and Pensions.
In fact, Green has been given an even higher status than Gummer in the Cabinet Office, having been given the position of First Secretary of State – not quite Deputy Prime Minister, but of a position of a similar ilk.
Green is a close political friend of May’s and has served as a Minister or a senior figure across a number of departments in the past, including the Home Office (Theresa May’s old stomping ground). May and Green also attended Oxford University together in the 1970s.
The impact of Green
But what does this mean for the digital agenda, the Government Digital Service and the department’s Transformation Strategy?
In short, it’s too soon to tell.
The Cabinet Office has been missing some serious political clout to drive effective change since the departure of Francis Maude a few years ago, who was seen as a relentless campaigner and fierce supporter of the digital agenda.
Those that have followed have been criticised for not having the same savviness to get things done within the context of an organisation that is so resistant to change.
However, Green is perceived to be popular within the Tory party and it could be useful to the Government Digital Service to have a political leader that has the ear of the Prime Minister. Theresa May has been accused of running Downing Street like a bunker in recent months and unlike the previous Prime Minister and Chancellor, little has been said by May and her team regarding the importance of digital.
Having done a little bit of research on Green, he also has also shown some interest previously in changing the way government works through new digital tools. For example, when serving as Justice Minister back in 2013, Green took responsibility for making courtrooms fully digital and improving IT systems across agencies.
At the time, he said:
If we are to win in the global race this must change; it is time we move the court system into the 21st century.
This investment will help us get rid of our outdated paper-based system, and turn our criminal justice system into a digital and modern public service.
This will help provide swift and efficient justice, treating victims and witnesses with the care and consideration they deserve.
It can’t be said just yet whether digital forms a central part of his interests and agenda for the Cabinet Office, but some previous track record is good.
However, that being said, given the political climate and Theresa May’s need to keep her political friends close, following a bruising campaign and election, it could well be that Green is called upon to be an aide on a number of broader political issues facing the Prime Minister and the country. This is particularly the case, given that May has had to sack her two closest aides following the results of the election, for their part in the poorly received Tory manifesto.
Green is also a strong supporter of remaining in the EU and will likely push May for a ‘softer’ Brexit, something that the Prime Minister has clearly suggested will not be happening. A close ally and someone with strong opinions on the country’s relationship with the EU, could all mean Green has a lot on his plate in the coming months.
In other words, Green could well be kept very busy helping May fight off any opposition from within her own party, as well as advising on a number of issues, including the complicated process of Brexit.
These distractions could leave little breathing space for digital, but ultimately it’s too soon to tell. Throw into the mix that there could potentially be another general election this year and it looks like it’s going to be an interesting few months.
The worry is that all of this political drama leaves digital ambitions unfocused and by the wayside.
Image credit - Images free for commercial use Read more on: CentralDigital government and public services

