
When looking at the e-commerce market of late it’s been impossible not to factor in the supposed threat from the advance into western markets of Chinese giants, such as Dangdang and Alibaba. Some conventional wisdom suggests that the threat from the east will be formidable, even when taking on global behemoths like Amazon.
But conventional wisdom isn’t always right as the plummeting share price of Dangdang yesterday shows, with the company turning in an unexpected first quarter loss in the face of competitive market pressures and higher marketing and technology expenses to promote e-books and mobile content.
Dangdang turned in a first-quarter net loss of 60.2 million yuan ($9.7 million) rather than the 20.5 million yuan profit that Wall Street had been expecting. While the share price tumbled 15%, Chairman Peggy Yu Yu was in defiant mood:
Dangdang successfully delivered on our guidance achieving strong top line growth which further entrenched Dangdang as the market leader in China’s books and media market. Although we posted a loss for the quarter, it was primarily the result of marketing and technology initiatives and expenditures related to e-books, mobile and content. We believe these initiatives will set the stage for the future healthy development of our business.
Certainly away from the inconvenient reality of the quarterly loss, there were some positive stats to point to:

Active customers grew 18% to 10.2 million.
The number of new customers reached 4.1 million, up 46% year-over-year.
Total orders increased 29% year-over-year to 21.3 million.
Mobile orders accounted for a record 41% of total orders for the quarter, compared with 14% this time last year.
Monthly active users on DangDangs’s mobile app increased more than 2.5 times the year ago levels.
Repeat purchases on mobile now exceed those on PC by “a wide margin”.

The success of the mobile initiatives was pointed to by Yu Yu as an example of how the firm is managing its operating costs:
By effectively utilizing multiple channels for advertising and the promotions, we are able to keep our mobile customer acquisition cost among the lowest in the industry.
The mobile footprint also helps Dangdang to grow its overall customer base, she added:
The 4.1 million new customer which went up a great deal from a year ago, a lot of them we develop them from our mobile end. Mobile customers tend to buy more in daily necessity fashion items and their concentration on general merchandise is more so than that of our PC customers.
And while the need to market and support digital books was being blamed for the quarterly loss, Yu Yu was adamant that this investment is essential and is delivering payback:
As the dominant player in China’s books and media market, we see enormous potential in the digital book market. During the quarter we continued to add more digital SKUs. We also made enhancements to our e-reader app designed to ingrain Dangdang into our customers’ digital reading habits.
E-book downloads nearly doubled from the fourth quarter and monthly active users increased about four times from year ago level. Our newly launched original content app offers fresh and appealing content and allows readers and authors to interact with each other via popular social networking platforms. The app makes the digital reading experience feel more similar to traditional paper book reading. It also steers light readers to more in-depth content on the topics that interest them the most, offering additional opportunities for monetization.
She added:
We think as the largest bookseller in China, providing content both in paper format and the app format and mobile phone format, it is important to stay in tune with the younger and mobile sticky customers. We think that the stickiness and the attractiveness among younger readers or new readers are very good.
Envy
But what Dangdang aspires to do is to transition from being seen purely as an online bookshop and to become recognized as a more generic marketplace. This is starting to happen, insisted Yu Yu:
Cross-selling between book buyers and general merchandise customers and also marketplace, we see those cross-selling opportunities to begin to materialize. And mobile orders or PC orders and people are coming for Dangdang’s books and they are also coming for Dangdang’s general merchandise products. We do see more and more cross-buying from the customer side.
Peggy Yu Yu
But the reality is that other ecommerce sites are turning in higher levels of growth, something that Yu Yu admited she “envies”, but added that Dangdang is in a different place:
When I look at Dangdang, Dangdang is a company that our largest segment of the business, thebook business itself, doesn’t grow as fast as some other types of merchandize because we have been operating this business now. We have very high market share of this business and we probably have 50% of the total books sold online. So this segment itself doesn’t grow as fast as some other segments in which ecommerce penetration is much lower, say like in refrigerators or in TVs or in mobile phones that are sold.
The book is a business that Dangdang harbored for a long time and has very high market share. So because this is the largest segment of our business, that somehow caps our growth rate. In developing newer categories such as baby maternity, fashion and apparel, we do see decent growth rat, but by comparison a big chunk of our revenue comes from a relatively steady, although respectively growing business, our growth rates pale.
My take
While the reported losses gave investors a shock, Yu Yu’s insistence on the importance of investing in the digital book and mobile spaces is a longer term proposition. If she’s right in her beliefs, then the long game benefits will be significant.

Read more on: Digital and content marketinge-commerceMobileRetail e-commerce and the omni-channel 