

Tanfeeth
We had loads and loads and loads of data…we thought that by showing that we had a lot of data, we’d impress our leadership.

But the reality, according to Giovanni Everduin, head of strategic HR, communications and change at Dubai-based shared services company Tanfeeth, was rather different. While it was true that HR tracked nearly 600 million data points a year, the value squeezed out from the data mass was minimal, as Everduin explains:

We had all of this data, but the one thing we didn’t have was insight.

So when at the regular management meetings the CEO would ask the not unreasonable question ‘What’s the attrition rate?’, it actually took six people, a week’s time and a lot of digging around in Excel to come up with an answer. 
And of course, by the time that answer was presented to the CEO, the information was out of date.
To make matters worse, when the CFO came up with a different numbers, there was little doubt which leader was more likely to be believed, says Everduin: 

If the CFO says one thing and HR says something different, typically people believe the CFO, particularly when it comes to numbers.

Tanfeeth, a subsidiary of banking group Emirates NBD, was set up just five years ago and employs roughly 3,100 people. It has grown fast, and across the company there were about 10 or so systems holding HR data, which ranged from Oracle through to Excel and Word documents. 
With data dispersed among so many systems, it was difficult for HR to make sense of the data. So Everduin and his team looked at how they could simplify and improve the HR people data and insight for business users.
The first thing they did was to take a close look at those 10 sources of data. What they found was a lot of mismatches – there were fields where people had no job titles or where people were allocated to the wrong units. Addressing these data inconsistencies was a clear first step, says Everduin:

The most important part in this type of journey – and unfortunately the least sexy part of the journey – is cleaning our data, but it’s very important.

The next stage was to fix data entry and ensure that the inputted data was accurate. At the same time, a framework for data governance and controls was created to ensure any mistakes are spotted quickly. 
Everduin explains:

So now we have clean data, we have a process to ensure that the data that goes in is clean and that the data that stays in is clean… but you need a set of questions that you want answered. 
Data by itself, even if you have the most fancy solution, is not going to give you any insight. If anything, it will death by insight because none of it will be relevant.

Bible
Tanfeeth had identified a handful of pertinent questions that would ensure the company’s sustainable growth, and then structured the data in a way to make easy to extract. The company was left with a single source of truth – “the HR bible of truth”, says Everduin. 
They had consistency – but that still didn’t meant that the insights were right. And it still took a long time to come up with those figures for the CEO. 
The company realized that Excel was no longer up to the job, so it enlisted the help of Qlearsite analytics software. Now unit heads can easily access the both the basic figures about the number of people in a team, or slice and dice the data in any number of ways. Everduin adds:

It means HR no longer has to be the middleman delivering basic HR insight to the business.

It was an easy sell to business leaders who were keen to take hold of the fancy dashboards to help them get a better handle on people data  – their only problem with it is wondering why they didn’t have this kind of information available earlier. But it was a different story inside HR, as Everduin points out:

The most difficult people to convince are your HR colleagues.

Using Qlearsite makes it easy for HR and management to look beyond the headline figures. Revealing not just the overall attrition rates, but pinpointing sections of the business where there are far higher levels of leavers, for example. 
The range and depth of people data HR can offer to business managers is far richer, current and informative, but Everduin is well aware of its limits. Providing predictive analytics is still a way off, he admits.
But while predictive analytics is still beyond the horizon, HR is starting to make inroads into analysing unstructured data found in exit interviews or  in engagement surveys, for example.
This analysis goes beyond simply counting the number of instances of individual words and instead pinpoints trends by looking for patterns: correlating the instances that the word ‘unsustainable’ for example is used in conjunction with hours or with managers. 
By using these machine learning concepts Tanfeeth is beginning to look beyond the numbers and explore the reasons why people are leaving or dissatisfied at work. 
The company is making huge progress in its quest to squeeze more insight from its vast mound of HR data – but it’s not there yet. What’s important, says Everduin, is to take it one step at a time:

Don’t get crushed by unstructured data. One step at a time: fix your data, organize your data, figure out what you want to find out from your data and then find a system to help you get there.

Read more on: Analytics planning and data analysisHCM and the digital future of workUse cases 