
Prime Minister David Cameron made a guest appearance at the Confederation of British Industry’s (CBI’s) annual event today to talk about how his government has created an environment for Unicorn businesses to grow and thrive, claiming that four out of ten in Europe are now based out of the UK.
However, he also admitted that whilst the UK has managed to foster the odd Unicorn here and there, we also haven’t been able to scale a business to the size of those found in Silicon Valley. Cameron also conceded that the UK’s digital infrastructure needs work – but promised a future where everyone and anyone could get access to basic broadband.
The comments were echoed by CBI Director General John Cridland, who prior to introducing the Prime Minister to much applause, said that Britain needs to work on scaling up digital companies, as well as focusing on fostering skills. Cridland said:
This year our theme is global ambition. Building on the sound foundations of a broadly based recovery, selling our goods and services to the new middle classes of the emerging economies. From Jaguars to Adele’s new single Hello.
Compared to those early days of the 60s and 70s, our entrepreneurial culture is now flying. We have [gone from] start-up Britain, to score-up Britain, with a focus on the forgotten army, the dynamo our economy – medium sized businesses. I say today that the next step of what I call ‘Scoring Britain’, needs us to build new national champions of our economy. I’d love to see the next Facebook being a British company. We sell-up our scale-up companies far too early. I want to see more national champions develop naturally from our economic mix.
Our economy, as successful as it is, has an achilles heal. It’s called education. At it’s best it’s world class. But too many 16 year olds leave school every year let down by the system. I ask every entrepreneur in this room to think what more you can do to get more involved in primary education. I know you’re involved in secondary education, but we need to change attitudes to education earlier with much and better careers advice, with multiple learning pathways.
Britain is stronger
David Cameron took to the stage and said that he welcomed Cridland’s idea of a “Scoring Britain”. He said that over the past five years his government has put Britain in an “immensely stronger position” and that there are now 900,000 more businesses in 2010, as well as 2 million more people in jobs.
The Prime Minister said that the past five years have seen “entrepreneurial spirit really get going again in Britain”. He said:
I’m not going to dazzle you with statistics, but it is notable that we have got unicorns – now you might think, what the hell are unicorns? I did when I first read this statistic. But a unicorn is a start-up that has already reached a £1 billion in value. Four out of 10 unicorns in Europe are based here in Britain. Businesses like Shazam, like Just Eat, like ASOS. Compare with 2010, venture capital is investing 10 times more in Britain than it did five years ago.
You can see it in the fact that the last five years that 191 new companies have decided to headquarter here in Britain, far more than any other country in Europe. These have been years of enterprise. Go to Tech City – it is an extraordinary thing that just five years ago there were 250 businesses in Tech City. There are now over 3,000. It is Europe’s tech hub. I think these have been years of enterprise. They are years of dynamism.
 Tech City is the name for a hub of a technology/digital businesses based out of the East End of London. Although the hub was forming naturally, the government took an opportunity back in 2010 to highlight it as ‘the place’ to do technology in Europe. Whilst some question the success of the government’s involvement in the area, it can’t be argued that it helped raised the brand.
Cameron took the opportunity to highlight that his government has also cut corporation taxes to the point where Britain now has the lowest rates in the G20. He has also taken £10 billion of regulation off of businesses. The Prime Minister said that he was to create the “most enterprise friendly government anywhere in Europe”.
But he admitted that “there is so much more to do” and that the government hasn’t got it all right. In particular, Cameron noted that Britain’s broadband infrastructure needs work. The government has been promising ‘world class’ broadband for all of the population for years, but many argue that it has failed to deliver. He said:
Some of the problems remain: we are still not exporting enough, we still don’t have a balanced enough economy and we have got a particular issue with some of our infrastructure, including broadband.
A big focus for us is going to be broadband. If you are a business, or you’re an individual, or you’re a household, and you’re not connected to broadband, it’s like not being connected to the road network. Or not being connected to the electricity network. So today I can say what we are going to do next. We’ve taken this country from 2010, about 45% of homes passed, to now 83% of homes passed, we are on track to get 95% of homes passed in 2017.
But one of the ways that we are going to get to the next step and go beyond it is to treat broadband in the same way that we treat telephony, and the same way we treat electricity, and that’s to have a universal service obligation. We are going to consult with Ofcom about how best to deliver, but I’m absolutely determined that absolutely minimum of 10Mbps for every household, that should be delivered through a universal service guarantee.
Cameron also noted that despite all the Unicorns and all the investment in technology, the UK hasn’t quite managed to keep up with the US in terms of tech growth. He said:
In Europe we are definitely doing better than others at trying to create a pro-tech, pro-entrepreneurial, pro-venture capital market here in Britain. I think where we have fallen behind the US, is that whilst we have got some of the unicorns, we haven’t had some of the absolutely mega businesses that the British equivalent of Google or Facebook. I think we need to have that sort of ambition. What more can we do to help build this sort of world? I’d say pretty much everything we can do, we are pretty much doing.
For instance, teaching coding in schools, we have now got a queue of European countries coming to see us to work out what we are doing in terms of ICT and coding and the rest of it. I think in terms of venture capital, in terms of encouraging people to invest, it’s a much better climate than it was five years ago. I think in all these areas we should permanently be asking ourselves – how do we do better? So if you’ve got ideas, you come to us.
My take
I’m sceptical, but time will tell…
Read more on: Digital government and public servicesEducation

