
David Wadhwani, CEO AppDynamics
Earlier in the week I said that I would address the appointment of David Wadhwani as CEO AppDynamics. Those paying attention to the application performance management (APM) space will know that I recently met with Lew Cirne, CEO NewRelic. The comparisons are inevitable but misplaced.
While AppDynamics, New Relic and Dynatrace are all considered directly competitive – and there is truth in that – I see AppDynamics as addressing a much larger market than the other two and, specifically, the gnarly, complex and often messy world of large enterprise.
It is clear from our discussion that Wadhwani was brought in to execute against two things: bring a fresh approach to marketing and get the company to IPO. The former, if it is a problem at all, appears to be about managing growth expectations that allow AppDynamics to position itself as a genuinely differentiated ‘unicorn’ such that the IPO is a success.
Some might argue this plugs a potential weakness but I see this very differently. As I said earlier:
He [Wadhwani] comes from Adobe where he led the transformation of its lighthouse products Photoshop, Lightroom etc from boxed product stacked in stores to subscription pricing. I’ve lived through that transformation as a customer and it was far from plain sailing.
Wadhwani has the very rare experience of successfully implementing business model transformation as part of a genuine digital transformation inside an iconic company that, at the time, was going nowhere, but which has since seen its fortunes improve dramatically.
Does this mean that AppDynamics needs a touch of its own disruption? Yes and no. Wadhwani explained it to me this way:
There used to be a very comfortable place where the CMO knew that they were the marketing arm, or actually, the product team or the IT organization would create something, they’d throw it over the wall, the marketer would market it and the sales guy would go out and have the conversations, and the CEO would know how to look at, in metrics, to look across those silos. I believe that as we are moving to an increasingly digital world, those silos are breaking down in a very material way. If you think about the fact that your software experience is now quickly becoming the best vehicle for marketing, then you have to recognize that the role of product and the role of marketing is actually starting to merge. More and more information is disseminated within product.
Isn’t that product marketing? It is, but Wadhwani has a very specific view on how this works. He talks about how campaigns are normally created outside of the product which in turn hopefully fuel a sales funnel. Wadhwani’s experience is that doesn’t work as effectively as other methods. Referring to his Adobe experience:
What we realized is that for every minute that someone spent reading an article about us or on our website or looking at an email we sent them, they spent thousands of minutes in Photoshop. The model and the conversation around marketing fundamentally changed.
This is an interesting perspective because it plays directly to the business model AppDynamics has kind of operated. Users can check out the solution for free and then buy. That is what Xerox did in a massive Medicaid related project about which I will say more in a later story.
Once customers have bought the solution, AppDynamics deliberately reaches out to see how customers are progressing at specific time based milestones, looking for where value can be added. Waitrose discussed this model with me and say that it not only helps them get the most out of the solution but it also provides a degree of comfort that is normally absent from other vendor relationships. How does this work?
When you look at the traditional relationships with the vendors CIOs source from, those relationships are truly vendor [transactional] relationships that have been, I think, ground down over generations in terms of pricing conversations and things like that. Here we are, interestingly, finding ourselves in a position where I can call up and get time with virtually any CIO in a major bank, or any CIO at a major retail company, or any CIO in a government agency, and I can spend some time with them because they recognize that maybe there’s an opportunity for a fresh relationship for us to actually be an advocate for them as a opposed to a vendor relationship.
All good so far but what’s missing is a feedback mechanism that allows customers and potential customers to share or surface learnings. Is that even desirable?  I argue yes and am supported by customer conversations where there is a common  thirst for knowledge across and inside industries. That after all, is one of the core functions of a user conference. But as I have argued with many marketing and PR departments, the concentration of effort on the big annual event is often a huge waste.
Vendors put great store by these events, get media organizations like ours to record what we see and then go into radio silence mode until the next big shindig. Far better in our view to continue the drip feed of information and experience sharing into both the public domain and the buyer channels that Wadhwani envisages.
Are AppDynamics buyers ready for this? The answer from the technology side of business is an unequivocal ‘yes.’ The ripple effect of disruptions in retail from the likes of Amazon and Alibaba run wide and deep. That in turn means that those with responsibility for topics like e-commerce  find an urgency for agile IT investment that cuts across the silos to which Wadhwani refers.
That same enthusiasm is not quite so apparent in other parts of the organization but I can see the logic of AppDynamics providing a forum for the CIO to become business champion and the lightning rod around which digital transformation is both organized and executed.
My remaining concern is with the business itself. IT knows it has a valuable role to play and, in my experience, the best practitioners intuitively know how to work across the silos of power. But that’s not common. Too often I see business leaders who view IT as little more than plumbers. That attitude is changing but it is a slow march. What does Wadhwani see here:
I believe very strongly, and I’ve spent a lot of time in my previous role meeting with a lot of executives from some of the world’s largest brands, they all know change is imminent. What they’re trying to figure out is what is the right way to change, and how you do it.
I have no doubt that is true but as we also know, past success is a drag on change. AppDynamics clearly has plenty of runway in its core verticals but as Wadhwani sees a much larger opportunity, I have to wonder how well that same message will play in markets that cling to older models of internal and external engagements with customers.
My best guess is that outside of the genuine innovators, the initial pain points that drive change in most scenarios will cascade change through industries. If Wadhwani can prove the conversational model across retail, financial services and government then he will have a firm foundation upon which to propose similar models elsewhere.
I like this idea a great deal. It’s an extension and nuanced view of how we see progress in technology adoption and shift from cost to enablement of better things. It comes with gotchas because it fundamentally challenges the idea of marketing and content marketing. My hope is that Wadhwani is able to craft a ‘Media as a service’ (MaaS) approach that allows AppDynamics to surface value at each customer touchpoint.
We will be watching this one closely to see how it works out.
Disclosure: AppDynamics covered most of my travel costs for attending AppSphere 2015.
Read more on: Analytics planning and data analysis 