
Earlier this week I cast a (slightly skeptical) eye on Scotland’s ambition to add £13 billion to its Gross Domestic Product (GDP) through digital transformation of the private and public sectors.
Yesterday, as the World Economic Forum in Davos kicked off, Accenture released the findings of a global study that looked at the same subject – how exploitation of digital can boost the GDP of both individual countries and the world economy as a whole.
The top-line numbers are, inevitably, impressive. According to Accenture’s Digital Disruption: the Growth Multiplier report, digital tech could power $2 trillion of global economic output by 2020.
The study, which looks at 11 developed national economies in total, notes that today more than a fifth (22%) of global GDP can be attributed to some form of digital skills, capital, goods or services.
Unsurprisingly, the US is the dominant digital economic powerbase today, with digital revenue making up a third (33%) of output. The UK and Australia follow close behind on 31% and 29%, while China brings up the rear on 13%.

The study looks at the value added to GDP by hardware, software and related technologies and by workers who need these digital assets to do their jobs. It also calculates the value of intermediate digital goods and services used in production.
The study also looked at industry sector breakdowns in terms of their digital contribution to national and global GDP. For example, in the US, Financial Services is the largest digital contributor (57%), followed by Business Services (54%) and Communications (47%).
But it’s not just data-centric sectors that are delivering digitally. At a global level, 22% of the retail industry’s output comes from digital, as does 28% of the healthcare industry and 20% of consumer goods.
Scoring
While providing an interesting snapshot of digital economic activity, the study also exists to push Accenture’s Digital Density benchmark scoring, which:
tracks the extent to which digital penetrates a country’s businesses and economy. This includes digital skills and technology, as well as broader enabling factors such as the ease of access to finance and the openness of a country’s regulatory environment.
For example, a 10 point increase in the overall digital density of the U.S. economy would result in a $368 billion uplift to 2020 GDP, 1.8 percent higher than current forecasts.
Mark Knickrehm, Group Chief Executive at Accenture Strategy, comments:
Businesses and governments are turning to digital to secure faster growth amid an uncertain global economic outlook, but the size of the digital economy is no guarantee of growth.
Organizations need to act aggressively in shifting the focus of their digital talent and technology from making efficiencies to creating entirely new business models. That requires not just greater digital investments, but broader organizational and cultural transformation in order to yield the greatest returns.
According to Accenture’s scoring, the countries with the greatest opportunity for improving their overall digital performance are Brazil (6.6%), Italy, (4.2%), China (3.7%) and Japan (3.3%).
But even the more digitally mature economies can do better. For example, the UK’s digital economy currently accounts for nearly one third of GDP, equating to £626 billion. That percentage could increase to 34% by 2020 with the right investment in place. Meanwhile in the US, the GDP contribution could be boosted by 2.1% or $421 billion by 2020.
One way to accelerate growth is to transition to a Platform Economy. That’s defined in Accenture’s 2016 Technology Vision as:
Industries such as healthcare, virtually at breaking point in many parts of the world, are being entirely reshaped and reignited using a platform model— offering benefits to the public and governments along the way. Using platform ecosystems, organizations can tap into resources and capacity that they do not have to own.
The shift toward ecosystem- driven value creation has implications for economies worldwide. Uncoupled from the constraints of traditional business models, Europe’s incumbent industry players can find new routes to value creation—embracing disruption to become the new leaders of the digital economy.
The Accenture report recommends three action items that it argues will drive higher levels of productivity and growth:

Prioritize digital investments based on value opportunities.Assess carefully the balance of digital investments so that an optimal combination of improvements to skills and technology can maximize returns on digital investment.
Compete using an industry-specific digital strategy.Be clear on which platform, what roles, and which data are fundamental to compete successfully in your industry.
Create the right environment for digital transformation. Improve your “digital IQ,” teaming with government to open up cross-industry relationships and change the rules of competition.

My take
An interesting hors d’ouevre to nibble on as the main courses at Davos are laid out, with digital’s economic potential top of the menu.
Clearly anyone can quibble with the precise numbers, but as a high-level snapshot of the status quo, this is an interesting jumping-off point for further discussion.
Read more on: Digital transformation - frictionless enterprise 