
 
I have never been to Mobile World Congress (MWC) before; a trade show that attracts nearly 90,000 attendees on an annual basis and carries with it a significant amount of hype. However, this year, for the first time, I find myself in Barcelona experiencing the madness first hand.
And reflecting on the first day, I kind of feel like I’ve just been to see a sold out concert for a band that had some really good hits about five or six years ago, but doesn’t really know how to be 100% relevant anymore.
Don’t get me wrong, the show is like nothing I’ve ever really seen before. The company stands are the size of some expensive work spaces in central London. There are attractive people everywhere. It’s all very glossy. Lots of money has been thrown at it. Press releases are hitting my inbox at an unprecedented rate. It’s an event that feels like it should be very, very important.
However, I think MWC could be in somewhat of a transition phase and as a result has lost some of its excitement.
Despite headline-grabbing announcements from the likes of Samsung – which has just launched its latest flagship handset, the Galaxy S6 – it feels a bit like the hype around traditional ‘mobile’ buzz is dying down.
Yes, it will all be covered globally. And yes, the Galaxy S6 looks pretty damn good. But is anyone actually that excited? The Android platform is now pretty mature. The handsets have reached a level of sophistication that matches that of Apple’s leading products. And for the past couple of years we have been waiting to be ‘wowed’ by something new on the traditional mobile scene, and to be frank, it hasn’t really arrived.
But that’s all normal. Maturity curves work like that – as anyone familiar with Gartner’s famous graph will be aware. ‘Mobile’, with regards to consumer devices that are connected to the internet, and BYOD, and mobilising the Salesforce, and to some extent UI, has reached a level of maturity that means it is now quite hard to get excited about the ‘new’ stuff.
Which is why when walking around MWC today, I don’t just see handset providers everywhere – I see connected home providers, car manufacturers, consultants, IoT and the connected ‘everything’.
Mobile World Congress is becoming a mecca for anyone that is interested in things connected to the internet. Not that that’s a bad thing. It’s just a transition and it’s a different way of perceiving the event.
I’ve just had a very interesting conversation with Jim Bailey, global managing director, Accenture Digital – Mobility, who admitted that this is something that Accenture’s business is beginning to recognise internally. He said that Accenture faces a challenge where ‘mobility’ no longer means ‘mobile’, because companies understand that as a trend a lot more than they did five years ago.
‘Mobility’ now essentially means the Internet-of-Things, and this is a transition that Accenture is having to make itself. Bailey explained that in the insurance and financial services industry, for example, he has clients that are wanting to connect everything to the internet, because they see it as an ‘insurable’ opportunity.
Equally, Bailey is having to explain to the same clients that as we move to a ‘mobile’ and ‘sharing economy’, where companies and consumers no longer really own anything themselves, this has real implications for their financial services clients’ business models.
Those are very different conversations to what were being had a few years ago, when it was all about rolling out iPads with the latest mobile salesforce applications. Those conversations are still happening, sure, but they are happening because everyone is now doing those things and it’s a big market opportunity. And if you’re not doing those things, then more often than not you’re going to be left behind.
The conversations around IoT are more important for MWC this year, and I think this will be the case for years to come, because IoT opportunities will be the opportunities that will help companies  to differentiate. It is also where we will see new industries and business models springing up.
My take
Mobile hype may be dying at MWC, but that’s okay. We aren’t quite there yet, but the next phase is coming. Whilst a move away from ‘mobile’ as we know it may be problematic from a branding point of view, at least it’s a move on to something more interesting.
It’s also worth highlighting that whilst I’ve found the ‘mobile’ element of World Congress a bit misplaced this year, it is also the first year that I’ve felt compelled to attend. And that’s because the industry discussions are moving away from handsets and on to how internet everywhere can change the future models of business.
But I’m only on day one. Let’s see what tomorrow brings…

Read more on: Internet of ThingsMobile 