
 I was pinged this morning about an angry piece written at LinkedIn by Tim Rodman, ERP Systems Analyst at The Robbins Company. The target of Rodman’s ire is Sage and specifically a Sage 500 price increase. He says:
I got an email yesterday informing me that Sage is raising prices on Sage 500 ERP by 4%.
The new price affects new sales as well as maintenance renewals.
Sage 500 ERP is a product that has received little to no attention from Sage over the past 10 years. There is no possible way to make the case that this price increase is due to an increase in value that the product provides. If anything, there should be a price DECREASE.
Sage X3 prices, however, are NOT INCREASING. Sage is raising prices on a product that they don’t pay attention to, yet keeping prices the same on their fastest growing, most high profile product. Basically, Sage is now financing even more of their Sage X3 development on the backs of Sage 500 customers.
This price increase is a further reason to support the Case For Ending Sage 500 ERP Maintenance (note: the document says 2017, but Sage has since changed to 2020).
The emphasis is not mine. It is unusual to see a customer go so public on these issues and in case anyone has any doubt about the author’s credibility, his LinkedIn profile says:
I started my career as a Big 4 Auditor but have been working in ERP since 2005. Within ERP, I like to focus on business process improvement and enterprise reporting because I think that they are closely related. The ERP products that I know best are Sage 500 (MAS 500) and Dynamics GP (Great Plains). However, since April 2013 I have been learning a Cloud ERP product called Acumatica which I believe will dominate midmarket ERP in 5-10 years.
I’m currently blogging about Acumatica ERP @ www.AcumaticaReports.com
OK – so there’s an ax to grind here and he is writing for a Sage competitor albeit he is a Sage user. That’s somewhat unusual because careers are often made and broken upon software experience.  The more interesting aspect of this comes in the Case for Ending Sage 500 ERP that he makes earlier.
No beautiful sunsets
As noted, Sage 500 is moving into sunset stage but has X3 as its alternative. The customer says it is not ready to shift to X3 and in any event is evaluating other options. Sage for its part is using the oldest trick in the incumbent book. Crank maintenance prices on product that’s being retired in the expectation that the customer will simply jump to the new as a cost saving tactic. Either way it wins.
It is what I call the ‘legacy of the entitlement brand.’ It might have worked five or ten years ago but not today. More to the point, even if X3 is a great alternative, will the customer have the appetite to switch? Vinnie Mirchandani sums these problems up well:
Fool me once, shame on you. Fool me twice, shame on me.
In this case, Rodman isn’t prepared to be fooled again and despite what any vendor will tell you, there are LOTS of those kinds of customer out there. Many are angry at the way in which their otherwise beloved supplier has turned into the familial equivalent of a mysogynistic brute. They talk longingly about getting away from their suppliers but often feel trapped by a legacy that has all the allure of cement boots.
I take a more strategic tone: is your supplier offering you a pathway that will carry you forward in the 21st century? If not then you don’t have a choice. You have to find an alternative. That’s often one of the most painful yet liberating things a customer will hear and the good consultants – forget the VARs – will say exactly that.
You what?
In his piece, Rodman kindly referenced something I wrote about the X3 launch back in 2010. I remember that event as though it was yesterday.
Then CEO Paul Walker keynoted the launch. Afterwards he told me that this was his first company product launch. By that stage he had been CEO for 16 years. You could have knocked me over with a feather. I stared at him open mouthed in disbelief. I might well have mouthed something like: “Are you feckin’ kidding me?” to his PR handler who looked horrified at his boss’s gaff.
What CEO doesn’t attend product launches? Rodman provides the answer:
At it’s core, Sage is a mutual fund for software, not a software development company. They can acquire products, but they don’t know what to do with them once they have them.
And that’s how Walker came off, with little grasp of the fundamental need to invest wisely in R&D. It would seem to be the sentiment of others including Prodware, where:
France-based ProdWare has decided to get out of it. The company this week announced the sale, citing what it termed the software’s “restrained platform development at the international level limited its deployment.” The X3 practice had 28 employees and annual revenue of about $4.6 million. ProdWare continues to offer Sage 100 and 100, the products in the French market, along with payroll and HR packages.
France – X3’s home turf – tells you all you need to know. And that despite on-off protestations from the X3 team that they’ve significantly enhanced the product in the last few years.
In a recent conversation, a senior financial analyst wrote off Sage as a ‘value play.’ That’s shorthand for ‘We’ll keep it on the books and take the dividends until its sold or broken up.’
Harsh critique
Readers who used to follow my AccMan blog back in the late noughties will know that Sage was a regular target for harsh criticism. I repeatedly warned buyers that Sage has no intention of moving to modern cloud technologies and that sooner or later, customers would have to move. Sage hated me for it but deep down they knew it was true.
In the meantime, we’ve seen the likes of Xero rise to prominence as the leading cloud player for small business. It eats all of Sage’s potential growth lunch. Sage for its part has to impose price increases in order to demonstrate ‘organic growth.’ It’s an illusion.
My take

Sage price increases are never welcome. When they relate to product scheduled to be sunsetted, you have to question the sanity of Sage’s pricing people in a time of ubiquitous media.
Rodman may complain about bloatware, but there are few alternatives in the mid-range that can compete well in the functional bake off. If his company decides to shift then there is significant risk attached to that decision. It is possible, provided that compromises are made in a purposeful manner. A shift is not the only strategy, especially if core ERP is humming along. At the very least, his company should consider actively switching to alternative maintenance options and shrink the commitment to Sage.
Sage still has a monumental problem with cloud as an architecture going forward. The new CEO may want to change that but to do so will require investor buy in, a dramatic switch in R&D funding and a brake on some marketing. That’s not something any new CEO faces with relish.

Image credit: Angry teacher in glasses pointing out © darkbird – Fotolia.com

Read more on: Cloud ERP financials and supply chain 