

Earlier in the day I heard that a colleague had passed away suddenly. It was a shock that gave pause for thought. I’ll not name the person out of respect for the grieving family and friends. That person was well into their 60s and still doing incredible work around the world.
As I said to one colleague, in thinking about our mutual friend, the expression ‘We stand on the shoulders of giants,’ came to mind. Such was the impact which stretches down the decades. Most readers will never have heard of the person but it matters not. What matters is that the person commanded the kind of respect reserved for true genius.
Emergent ageism
Reflecting for one moment, that person would have almost certainly been unemployable into the current technology culture and especially the emergent startup culture. Ageism has become a major issue over which people like Marc Canter are finding expression on Facebook. Canter, who will be 60 next year, is no stranger to invention or genius. From his wikipedia entry: 
The company [he founded, Macromedia] created the first multimedia player, the first cross-platform authoring system and the world’s leading multimedia platform. Partly due to his work with the company, Canter is considered one of the founders of multimedia.
That’s a massive achievement, given that also today, Mark Zuckerberg, CEO Facebook talked about the global future of video. That’s 32 years after Canter founded his eponymous company and before Zuckerberg was born. Today, Canter is co-founder of Cola, a messaging startup that uses the strapline: “Slack for the rest of us.” For the record, I started thinking about diginomica when I was closing in on 60 years of age. So exactly who is it that believes people over [pick your age here] are redundant?
The last couple of years there has been a slow trickle of articles talking about the issue of ageism. In March 2014, Noam Scheiber said: 
Silicon Valley has become one of the most ageist places in America. Tech luminaries who otherwise pride themselves on their dedication to meritocracy don’t think twice about deriding the not-actually-old. “Young people are just smarter,” Facebook CEO Mark Zuckerberg told an audience at Stanford back in 2007.
Adult supervision
I wonder whether Zuckerberg came to eat his words, because in March 2008, he hired Sheryl Sandberg away from Google to join as his COO. Sandberg was on the cusp of turning 40 at that time. Zuckerberg was 24 at the time. Despite the plaudits that are heaped upon Zuckerberg, there are plenty who will tell you that it is Sandberg’s operational smarts that have got Facebook where it is today.
Then there is Google. When Larry Page and Sergey Brin founded Google in 1997, both were 24 years old. They hired in Eric Schmidt as CEO in 2001. Schmidt was 45 at the time and brought, by everyone’s admission, ‘adult supervision’ to the company.
SAP was founded 44 years ago by a group of ex-IBM’ers. One was Hasso Plattner who was 28 at the time. SAP is a bit different to the other companies I am mentioning because the founding group had different but complementary skills that helped keep the company on measured growth at a time when competition was not as big an issue as today. Plattner is still active around a company, which for all the criticism it attracts, runs the back office functions of many global industries.
Larry Ellison co-founded Oracle in 1977 when he was 33. He hired in Ray Lane, who was 46 in 1992, to turn around a near bankrupt business.
Do you see the pattern here? Technology companies started up with people were relatively young but which (mostly) required the hand of someone experienced at a crucial point in their lives. In every case, the person brought in was older than the co-founding CEO and by some margin in some instances.
Age is not about being smart, it’s about wisdom that can only be brought to bear through experience. But that’s not the way much of Silicon Valley seems to view things. Instead, we see an emergent millennial culture that seems (to this observer) intent upon squeezing every second of life out of its workforce, nurturing the idea that work and private lives are inextricably linked.
There is no place for older people, however you choose to define that. My sense is that’s because older people are smart enough to know that life is too short as it is for there to be little or no room for adventure, creativity, life and family outside the workplace. And younger people know that too and so you have an immediate culture clash where someone is going to come out badly. What gets lost along the way for some of these companies is the ability to access the kind of wisdom that is often necessary for building diverse, sustainable businesses.
Hubspost and Dan Lyons
Hubspot flirted with the idea of older hands when they took on Dan Lyons, ex-Newsweek veteran and author of the satirical Diary of Steve Job. To get a flavor, check out his RIP post where he said:
Jon Ive says you inspired people
but you could also be difficult at times.
A bit unkind of him, I think.
What genius isn’t difficult?
Picasso was a jerk. So were Tolstoy and Beethoven.
So was Michelangelo, I bet,
though to be honest
I really don’t know anything about Michelangelo
because I missed class on the day we discussed him.
But based on his work
I’d bet he was a total dick.
Lyons’ 20 month stint at Hubspot didn’t work out and being thoroughly pissed off with the experience he did the only thing that comes naturally. He wrote a totally biased book entitled: Disrupted: My Misadventure in the Start-Up Bubble. I am desperate to get my digital paws on the Kindle version (hint to Amazon – get your game on dudes!!) so the best I’ve got are the many excerpts and critiques around the book.
In essence, it seems Lyons landed into a culture which to him was beyond unfamiliar. it was alien to the point of hostile. The average age of Hubspot employees was 26 at the time and company staff made no secret of calling him ‘grandpa.’ Personally I like it when the kids call me ‘granddad’ and am now waiting for the youngest to get his nascent tonsils around ‘great-granddad.’ But the term seems to have offended Lyons along with what he describes as a work AND play monoculture that he suggests deludes fresh college grads into thinking they’re building something important when in reality they are cannon fodder for a transactional based business where culture serves to preserve the cult.
Lyons raises many more objections but it is the combination of cult-ure and blatant age-ism I find fascinating.
We see that play out in the way Hubspot co-founders eventually responded to the book. While I agree they took the high ground on some topics and chose not to ape Lyons’ acerbic style – that really would have been foolish – they utterly fail to address the heart of Lyons’ argument. In that response, they demonstrated the arrogance of inexperience while reflecting in the glory of running a $100 million business. They think that’s big. It’s peanuts and a near rounding error on the accounts of true enterprise scale businesses.
Instead, we get, as Fortune analyzed:
In their response, Halligan and Shah [Hubspot co-founders] begin by saying that they want to provide their “honest take” rather than a “take-down” of the book. And while it is true that they take the high road vis-a-vis Lyons, they also do not respond to some of his more serious complaints.
For example, there is no response to (nor even a mention of) the ageism claim. They do note that the average employee age is 29 and that Hubspot employs 85 people over the age of 40, but doesn’t add that those “85” comprise just 7% of the company’s total workforce.
There also is zero mention of the two former executives Mike Volpe and Joe Chernov who are mentioned in the book’s epilogue, nor of any of Lyons’ specific experiences at the company (save for his hiring).
I’m not going to get into the PR assessment. I leave that to experts like Jeremy Pepper. Even so, I found the Hubspot response pretty lame and self-serving which, to me, reinforced some of what Lyons was saying. What is equally curious though is the outpouring of support for Hubspot, many of which are customers. This is where things get sticky because you can certainly advance an argument that says: if a company is serving its customers well then WTF does it matter how life is on the inside. Something’s got to be right because unhappy cultures show up quickly in shoddy customer service.
Who is right?
Who is right? diginomica has flirted with becoming a Hubspot customer and found the pre-sales and inbound sales experience to be remarkably pleasant. We didn’t get close enough to a deal to understand how that might change in the deal making but we can’t complain. That’s a world different from answering the question of whether I’d want to work for a company like Hubspot but then I get queasy when I realize just how much my investments in Apple kit have been built off the back of labor that may well have been badly mistreated.
I do believe there are far too many newish companies out there making fundamentally stupid mistakes that could be readily solved with the application of the common, as in sense, that comes from experience and, inevitably, decades of learning. The extent to which those companies get that will be predicated on the same company’s ability to keep their collective heads above water long enough that the avaialbe talent pool isn’t burned out.
Are we any better?  That’s a good question. We make very clear that you can’t come work with diginomica unless you know WTF you’re talking about. That inevitably means you must have at least 10 years’ experience although there have been the odd exception. In theory that should make ‘us’ a more measured and pleasant place to work yet you you wouldn’t always know that from some of the fights we have.
But then I’m equally aware the lives we lead are not for everyone and so of course there are tradeoffs, some of which are very difficult. But would I automatically exclude or treat differently someone who is young enough to be my son or daughter and then some? No. And therein lies the difference between acquired wisdom and simply getting older. Acquired wisdom wants to be shared. It wants to be given away, often for no  obvious reward.
In the meantime, it doesn’t go un-noticed that since Lyons’ book was released, and the Hubspot response was published, its share price has been hammered by 14%. Someone’s taking notice.
Image credit - Featured image: Grandfather and grandson playing chess on the grass © ruslimonchykDisclosure - SAP and Oracle are premier partners at time of writing. Read more on: Diversity 