
In the world of financial services, big banks and fintech startups are often depicted as mortal enemies, banging heads and clashing swords in the battle for customer loyalty. The popular narrative is a ‘David and Goliath’ story of plucky upstarts standing up to larger, more established bullies.
Indeed, some start-ups have enthusiastically embraced this narrative: peer-to-peer currency exchange specialist TransferWise, for example, frequently criticises cross-border bank charges – not without good reason – and presents itself as offering a better alternative for customers.
In reality, however, the situation is more nuanced. Alliances and collaboration between banks and fintech companies are by no means uncommon. The venues where their closest collaborations take place are, more often than not, the ‘innovation labs’ established by the big players in financial services.
So at Web Summit in Lisbon earlier this month, I was interested to attend a debate on this topic. The title of the session didn’t pull its punches: ‘This house believes that innovation labs will not save traditional banks.’
In one corner, speaking for the motion, was Mike Laven, CEO of fintech start-up Currencycloud, which enables companies to manage global payments. In the other, speaking against the motion, was Claire Calmejane, director of innovation at Lloyds Banking Group.
A confrontational start
Laven kicked off in confrontational style, arguing that the big banks are structurally and culturally unsuited to innovation and are held back from embracing new technologies by their legacy systems.
We all know the fintech story: the world’s now social, the world’s now digital, the world’s [about] big data and that digital natives and millennials do things differently. So the real question here is, can innovation labs help banks transform themselves to meet that new world? If you know anything about banks, then the answer to that is, ‘Absolutely not.’
Mike Laven
The structural issues, he said, make it virtually impossible for people from different departments and different groups in a bank to work together. In IT terms, new applications must be forced to ‘talk’ to between 100 and 200 legacy systems. So even where innovation labs do produce good ideas, he said, banks are seldom in a good position to implement them.The cultural issues, meanwhile, make banks risk-averse in a way that discourages real creativity or disruption:
Do we really want the banks to be innovative? Banks are a trusted repository. In the start-up world, we’ll accept that one third of new ideas will fail, a third will just do OK and another third will do really well. But do we really want a third of all bank systems to fail? How would [customers] feel about [being told]: ‘I’m sorry, you were part of an experiment.’
A measured response
In response, Claire Calmejane outlined the value that she sees Lloyds’ innovation lab bringing to the banking group. For a start, she said, it’s a catalyst for change – and, importantly, for change that happens from the inside, out.
Second, it’s a place where experimentation happens, for the ultimate benefit of Lloyds’ customers. Do not underestimate the ability of banks to experiment and deliver innovation, she cautioned, in something of a ‘killer punch’ argument:
We should not forget that the biggest innovation of the decade is mobile banking. And mobile banking was brought to you by the banks.
Today, she added, Lloyds’ digital division, led by Zak Mian, is focusing on rethinking customer experiences across the hundreds of individual interactions they have with Lloyds, from opening an account to applying for a loan.
From this experimentation, we see incremental improvements for customers delivered on a regular basis.
Third, she said, the innovation lab is a place where Lloyds meets with fintech companies, for the
Claire Calmejane
mutual benefit of both sides. The collaboration that ensues, she said, helps the bank work out what customers want and need and exposes its employees to new ideas. In return, start-ups learn from Lloyds’ own subject matter experts and their expertise in regulatory issues.
Closing arguments
Laven was quick to dismiss the collaboration argument. Fintech start-ups find ways to comply with regulation all the time, he said. And collaboration, he added:
…is the term banks use when they feel that they’re losing. Banks collaborate with fintechs because they can’t come up with new ideas themselves.
Collaboration might help start-ups, but not the banks. [As a fintech entrepreneur], a bank may give you space to work on new product and introduce you to investors and that’s a good thing for you. But does it really help them? The only thing it’s going to help them with is PR and with retaining some employees who might stick around and help them work out how to evolve, because outside of that, employees who are creative will go to fintech start-ups where they come up with great ideas that will disintermediate the banks that came before them.
But according to Calmejane, wholesale digital transformation of the financial services market simply can’t be achieved by start-ups alone. What’s needed, she said, is a joint effort by a whole ecosystem that includes start-ups, certainly, but also banks, venture capitalists and technology giants.
My Take
In this debate, Laven certainly had the snappier arguments and delivered them with greater force – but Calmejane made some excellent points in a more measured style. Both arguments had their merits and the truth, to be fair, undoubtedly lies somewhere in between the two.
I was particularly interested in Calmejane’s point regarding the role of a wider ecosystem in financial services disruption. This strikes me as important – but not necessarily for the reasons she meant. In short, as tech giants including Apple and Google increasingly gain traction in mobile payments, they look certain to seek out new areas of financial services to disintermediate. And these companies arguably have more innovation clout, more spending power and bigger customer bases than the banks and fintech companies combined. A newer, much bigger wave of disruption, in fact, could soon be on the cards.
Image credit - Images sourced via author and Lloyds Banking Group. Read more on: Financial services and fintechFintech 