
Clare Moriarty
Everything changed in the UK on the morning of the 24th June last year. Whether on the Leave or Remain side of the debate, the vote for Brexit set in process a chain of events that will impact on everyone. For Clare Moriarty, Permanent Secretary at the Department of Environment, Food and Rural Affairs (Defra), that’s something that she’s seen in the day-to-day workings of her department:
Clearly life changed for us on the 24th June. We thought we were busy before that, but from the 24th of June we have had one huge priority which sits alongside what we were doing already. The things that have come along have not displaced things that the government was doing already, but they do mean that we have had to work out the priorities.
As a department, Defra has by necessity had to co-ordinate a lot of its work with the administration at the European Commission, something which will have to continue in some form post-Brexit, albeit that no-one is clear at present how that will work in practice. But Moriarty sees opportunity ahead:
The good news is there is an opportunity to design data and digital into the way that we think about our future in a way that we never expected to happen. If you try to put underfloor central heating into a 16th century barn, it’s quite tricky from a technical point-of-view. If you’re building a new house and you design underfloor heating into it from the start, it’s much easier.
In other words, as the old structures and order is pulled down and the UK is presented with a requirement to build a nation-state operating model, there’s a chance to score some wins in what, if not exactly a greenfield site, will be at least something resembling a relatively blank slate.
It’s at this point that it strikes the more cynical among us that Moriarty doesn’t fit the mould of the popular notion of the British Permanent Secretary. Sir Humphrey in Yes Minister never wanted to do anything differently from the way things had been done in the past, on the basis that if you do something right once, you might have to do it again!
Moriarty concedes that while government is built around structures and precedent, she argues in favour of ‘undesign’ thinking:
‘Undesigning’ for open government is exactly the kind of thing we should be talking about. It’s suitably un-Permanent Secretary like… In government, we like design, we like plans, we like structure – and there’s good reason for that. We need to do things right and we also need to be publicly accountable for what we do. We need to be able to show that our policies and our decisions are evidence-based, so there is a really important place for plans and structure and order. I’m a mathematician, so my brain is wired that way. But as I reflected on the things that are making a difference in terms of open government, the ones that come to mind often have an element of ‘undesign’ about them.
As a department, Defra thinks increasingly in terms of being a group made up of more than 30 organisations, ranging from the Rural Payments Agency through the Environment Agency to Kew Gardens. Many customers of the department find themselves interacting with more than one organisation. For example, a farmer will deal with the Rural Payments Agency, but may also have to work with the Animal and Plant Health Agency.
This has lead to overlap and duplication, acknowledges Moriarty, and awareness of this was already influencing the direction of digital transformation prior to the Brexit vote:
For the past 18 months, we’ve been working to understand this and how we can improve the experience of our customers by organising ourselves and our services better. We’re trying to put much more focus on outcomes, outcomes for customers, outcomes for the environment. Digital transformation has been at the heart of everything we’ve been thinking about around this. We know that this is the way we can streamline, give customers one point of access, do things better and also in a more efficient way.
Digital and data will be absolutely central to how we look at [Brexit] within Defra. One of things that we have historically not done well is to think about delivery right at the beginning. We’ve tended to think, ‘Nice policy, nice policy, gosh, how are we going to deliver it?’. We’re now absolutely making sure that the delivery process is factored in right from the beginning.
New thinking
That requires some cultural mindshifting perhaps and some questioning of assumptions, says Moriarty, as well as an awareness of the existence of some genuine barriers to ‘undesign’ thinking:
We can do open data and we understand why that’s a good thing. We can do open government and we understand why that’s a good thing. But it all comes down to open culture. It’s about a state of mind, a state of mind of openness. It’s good for outcomes, it’s good for customers, it’s good for decisions.
There are some real, good and genuine reasons why some people’s version of open government is difficult to achieve in the type of political system that we have. I used to work in the NHS at local level. There are some things that are really quite easy to do in an open way at local level that are really difficult for national government to do. We have to recognise that and then we have to make sure that we don’t use that as an excuse to say we don’t do anything. The mindset piece is being honest about where the genuine constraints are, then constantly looking for different ways of doing things.
As a case in point, she points to the announcement in the weeks following the May 2015 General Election that Defra would release 8000 data sets into the public domain for third parties to access and use to enable the creation of new digital tools and services:
Normally before to get to that point there would have been months of work. We would have calculated exactly how many data sets we had, which ones we could release, which ones we couldn’t release. We would have spent a lot of time working out what we meant by a data set. It didn’t happen like that. There’s something about the first few weeks after a General Election where you sometimes get opportunities to do things quite differently.
The ‘designed’ procedure didn’t happen here. Instead staff at Defra simply went off and, without the ‘benefit’ of extensive planning and procedures, found data sets that could be released. This ‘undesigned’ approach worked, declares Moriarty:
We ended up releasing over 10,000 data sets by the end of June. If you now go onto GOV.UK, you will find at least 13,000 Defra data sets which can be used by anyone. People have taken the data and they have built digital tools and services with it. Our ‘undesign’ process is allowing other people the space to innovate. That is design in a way. There’s the Steve Jobs principle that the most important thing in design is to say no. So taking ourselves out of the way has allowed space to be created for other people.
She provides the example of the creation of interactive maps connected to river level gauges that provided invaluable during the flooding of last year:
When we were trying to understand what might happen and whether York was going to be inundated or not, actually having that information visible to everybody, interactive maps, that was fantastically useful.
Nonetheless, in a political system where failure in IT programmes leads to a public humiliation at the hands of MPs on the Public Accounts Committee, leaving behind the ‘comfort blanket’ of process and structure must be terrifying for some Sir Humphreys. Moriarty sees a balance to be struck:
It’s not about complete ‘undesign’. It’s not about chaos. It’s about creating the right conditions rather than a rigid framework It’s about recognising the realities of government with a place for plans and structure, but also about creating a space where curiosity, challenge and connection can thrive and flourish.
My take
A genuinely interesting perspective of how government can be ‘undesigned’. A final point made by Moriarty is the need to spread the gospel around this and that in itself means a mindset in government towards telling stories of successes in order to show others that better things can be done. At diginomica/government, an underlying principle, especially when talking to vendors, is ‘show, don’t tell’. Use cases are the best proof points. Sadly that’s a philosophy that still isn’t the norm in government circles, where the temptation remains not to go public or to attempt to provide as little and as anodyne information as possible. That’s something that has to change. If that ‘not talking’ culture can be ‘undesigned’, that would be a major step forward.
Image credit - Think Digital Government Disclosure - Moriarty was speaking at Think Digital Government, a conference organised in association with diginomica/government's events associate Think Digital Partners. Read more on: Digital government and public services

