
As little as a decade or so ago, Dell Computers was possibly the most hated company in tech-land. So hated in fact that when US journalist Jeff Jarvis posted a blog entitled “Dell lies. Dell sucks” in 2005, he unwittingly unleashed a firestorm.
The subsequent series of blogs entitled “Dell Hell”, which documented his customer service woes with a lemon laptop purchased from the company, ignited similar passions among equally frustrated buyers who responded in their thousands, creating an entire anti-Dell social media movement.
To make matters worse for the besieged PC vendor, the New York Times picked up the story and ran with it, speedily followed by Business Week. Which meant that, almost overnight, Dell also had a spectacular public relations nightmare on its hands. As Allison Dew, the firm’s vice president of client solutions marketing, pointed out at the firm’s Women’s Entrepreneurship Network (DWEN) Summit in Cape Town, South Africa, earlier this week:

We became the poster child for all that was wrong in the tech industry.

An initial fix was to have 14-year company veteran Lionel Menchaca open a dialog with customers via a blog. But three years later when Dew joined the firm from Microsoft, she decided that the time was right to explore the meaning of its purpose and brand.
This led to the inclusion of a simple question in an employee survey: “Are the best days ahead or behind the company”. 
A shocking 70% plus said “behind”. 
A comprehensive global study of external attitudes towards the supplier followed. This research revealed that, despite a desire to be seen as providing best value, in most regions of the world the firm’s products were considered neither cheap nor reliable. Dew recalls:

I sat down with Michael [Dell, founder and chief executive] to share the findings with him. We’re very data-driven as a company and I was brand new to Dell, so it’s why I’m still here. If you want to get people to hear what they’re not going to want to hear, data is vital. It’s about being able to very objectively take the emotion out of things. So what does the data say and what’s the gap between your own and the market belief?

But changing the focus of the company and getting workers to act out the brand’s values, once discovered, does not happen overnight. As Dew points out:

It was a multi-year change management agenda and we never knew how hard it was going to be. Dell had been a high growth company for many years, but there were many pockets of the business that didn’t think about how they all fitted together. So it was really hard work working out what we actually did and why. At the time, there was no external focus on the idea of purpose, even though it’s seen as de jure now.

Group therapy
As a result, the first stage of the change process involved holding discussions with key stakeholders in everything from customer service and communications to the supply chain in order to work out what the company’s real purpose and brand values were, and to affect change based on the findings. Dew explains:

When we asked why Dell was great, people said things like, ‘Because we sell direct’ and ‘We’re a tech company’. But when we asked, ‘What are the things we deliver?’, it was that ‘We’re giving people the technology to do what they want to do’.

The next step was to undertake a series of global workshops with the workforce, some virtual and some face-to-face. Dew says: 

For the first 20 minutes, they were epic bitching sessions from staff. It was like group therapy. We trained up VPs to do the workshops and take time to hear those things, even if they were difficult. People were so frustrated and mad – it was a cumulative effect. Michael talked about it in large forums and then senior managers took the lead because we knew the employee issue was the biggest one we had.

But effecting positive change was not just about listening. The vendor was also careful to act on, and be seen to act on, employees’ problems and challenges in order to make improvements in everything from working practices and software tools to the wider work environment. It likewise started to talk about the positive uses to which its technology was being put as “one way to bring it to life”, explains Trisa Thompson, vice president of corporate social responsibility (CSR). 
An example of such usage is Dell’s involvement in the Translational Genomics Research Institute’s trial on precision medicine to treat pediatric cancer.  But Dew warns that, while this kind of activity if shared with staff is likely to generate a feel-good factor, caution is required when communicating with the wider public:

If we talked about it externally, we were aware we could be seen as doing it just to make the brand look better, in the same way that companies do when greenwashing their products. So you have to be careful.

As a result, case studies of this type are now mainly employed by sales people rather than the marketing department in order to demonstrate the benefits of cloud computing to customers and prospects, for example. But other shifts have also come about in how the vendor talks to customers, including the type of language it uses. As Thompson says:

Engineers love speeds and feeds and don’t want to change their language. But it’s necessary because the biggest tech buyers are women and they don’t generally care about that kind of thing.

Long-term transformation
Another important move for the company, meanwhile, was evaluating whether it was actually measuring the right outcomes and not simply giving staff perverse incentives to act in non-productive ways. Dew explains: 

People are very rational and they’ll figure out how to get off the phone quickly if they’re being measured on that. The problem in a lot of companies is that there are a lot of hidden rules that end up creating unintended negative consequences.

But just as vital throughout the whole transformation process was using data to underpin decision-making. Dew says:

We changed things by being data-driven. People said “tell us why brand reputation matters” and so we did research on purpose-driven brands. The bottom line is that, if people like you, they’re more likely to do business with you, and if they don’t, they won’t, but the data gives you a way to demonstrate that.

Equally as key though was to embed change into the organisational culture by setting a long-term strategy. In Dell’s case, this involved launching its formal 2020 Legacy of Good Plan in 2012, which consists of 21 organisational goals. These include guaranteeing that the good the supplier’s technology does socially and environmentally is 10 times higher than the resources taken to create and use it.
And in order to find an objective way to measure such an apparently subjective aim, Dell also became a founder member of The Net Positive Project in early June, along with the well-regarded Forum for the Future, Sustainability and Health Initiative for NetPositive Enterprise or SHINE and the Business for Social Responsibility as well as others.
But again Dell found that devising these long-term goals was far from a swift process. Thompson, who was formerly the company’s corporate lawyer, started the ball rolling in 2010 by meeting with the heads of different areas of the business in a bid to pull together a formal sustainability strategy from existing strands. Interviews were also held with the supplier’s top 100 customers in order to gain their insights too. Thompson says:

By the time we went to the executive leadership team, everyone knew what our goals were, and they owned them. So the departmental managers came up with their own goals in a process that took two and a half years. They analysed the problem, did the materiality and found the issues. We had to start at the bottom because you can’t just tell the business what to do. And there are also financial implications as you have to remain competitive.

The Sustainability Operating Council, which includes between 40 and 50 participants, still meets about six times per year and follow the same process of cascading information up and down the organisation, which in its entirety employs 100,000 staff. Thompson also has a team of around 17 dedicated CSR staff that provide support if required. She concludes:

My best advice is to set long-term goals. When you set lofty goals and allow people to find ways to meet them, it drives intra-preneurship. They get creative and they also get happier as it drives innovation. In fact, the thing that makes me proudest is that every time we publish an update on our goals, I get emails from employees saying that’s why they come to work and that they’re proud to work at Dell. And that’s worth it.

My take
In a world in which people, especially of the Millennial generation, are both increasingly keen to buy from and work for organisations that live out their ideals and can demonstrate a positive social purpose, it makes sense to grasp the CSR nettle.
Not only does it make it easier to recruit staff, which in a tech industry universally starved of skills is no mean feat, but it also tends to make employees happier, more fulfilled and, therefore, more productive when they’re at work too.
But there are other benefits as well. For instance, events like DWEN, which aims to help women entrepreneurs who are already using Dell’s technology and benefiting from its support, to network with other women from around the world, are a great way to build relationships from the ground up. That way, it is not only possible to keep an eye on emerging trends, but also to spot potentially interesting partnership and acquisition targets. Or just to be there from the outset as the small company becomes a big one.
Image credit - via DellRead more on: CRM and customer experienceHCM and the digital future of work 