
The much telegraphed rumour that Dell is bidding to acquire EMC became a fact today as Dell formally announced its offer that values EMC at an eye watering $67 billion. Bankers and founders are the winners but employees and customers will lose out as two companies that represent a bygone age endeavor trying to assure each other’s survival. Here’s why.
Both EMC and Dell were darlings in a pre-internet/cloud age. Both are rooted to the on-premises world of owned or managed data centers where, in EMCs case, it could get handsome premiums for storage, and where Dell had become the de facto ‘pizza box’ server supplier of commodity hardware but at thinner margins.
In 2011-13, Dell found itself swimming against a tide of exploding mobile usage and the rise of Facebook, Google and Amazon as the next wave pioneers in computing. Facebook and Google figured out how to build vast data centers based upon an architecture they could not only define but could also build at fractional cost, leaving Dell with scraps. In 2013, Dell took itself private in an attempt to get out of the public gaze and re-organize its business. That deal valued Dell at $25 billion and put to bed an ugly period for the company.
EMC became a conglomerate of companies that include Pivotal and VMWare. But even that carefully crafted combination could not avoid the onslaught of newer ways of providing compute and storage from the likes of Amazon, Nutanix, Pure Storage (which recently IPOd but fizzled) and Formation Data Systems.
You get a flavour of just how tough it had become for EMC and its buddies from blatant attacks on competitors like this from EMC attempting to sue former employees who joined Pure Storage. Or how about this from VMWare having a go at Nutanix? Our position has always been that these types of attack are symptomatic of companies in trouble. As if all that wasn’t bad enough, VMWare today gives us an early look at its Q3 results, to which the market reacted by giving the shares a 10 percent haircut.
Where’s the upside? The bankers who are said to be lending as much as $40billion in the deal will make out like bandits as they usually do. Founders, activists and early investors will also lap up some of the gravy. That’s about it.
The deal will take time to consummate. Reports suggest it may take as long as a year to get all the details ironed out. That’s plenty of time during which much can happen.
If history is a teacher, then Dell’s first order of business will be to look at how much it can cut the EMC workforce. That could amount to as many as 35,000 jobs, or about 20 percent of the combined workforce. You can bet that most of the casualties will be on the EMC side in a ‘winner takes all’ scenario.
That action will have a short term impact on profits but a long term benefit in creating a leaner organisation. But as always in these circumstances, line managers will be keen to protect their turf and that always means a certain loss of A-list players. If Dell is smart, it will ensure that’s not an issue, but it is incredibly hard to pull off.

You will find more statistics at Statista
Looking at the graphic above, of the eight largest acquisitions shown in this graphic that were consummated, five have not gone well. Dell will have a job on its hands to ensure the integration between the two giants goes well
Customers will be faced with uncertainty as the combined organisation tries to figure out who sells what and where and to whom. This can only be good news for EMC/VMWare competitors which, while fragmented as a group, continue to eat away at both companies’ core businesses.
There are other uncertainties. What does the combined business do with its VMWare and Pivotal investments? Do they liquidate in order to relieve the debt burden or somehow manage a quasi-public/private persona? I can’t see the latter option proving attractive to Dell investors.
All of which leaves me with a burning and unanswered question: how does this combination ensure that both survive in credible, profitable form given the seismic shifts we see in compute and storage rather than become part of the walking dead?
There’s plenty of runway for both companies so plenty of time in which to figure out their joint place in the world. While we tend to gaze in awe at what Amazon, Facebook and their ilk have achieved, those companies are still bit players on the worldwide enterprise cloud stage. Remember when client/server came along and every man and his dog thought mainframes were dead? It didn’t happen and is still playing out more than 25 years after client/server became mainstream.
A privately held Dell/EMC can do a lot behind closed doors to pivot their business model and come up with new offerings that reflect a new reality. That is CEO Michael Dell’s hope for what he describes as a flexible and agile organization.
We shall see.
Images via Forbes and Hollywood News
Read more on: Cloud platforms - infrastructure and architectureInfrastructure 