
Deloitte is withdrawing from bidding for Whitehall contracts for six months, after it angered Number 10 over a leaked memo that criticised the government over its approach to dealing with the result of the EU referendum.
In somewhat of an unprecedented step, according to The Times, the Prime Minister is taking action against the consulting firm, which could see it lose out on tens of millions of pounds worth of work, due to being personally affronted by the leaked memo.
Whilst the government has paused bids from certain companies in the past – such as G4S and Serco – this was after they had proven to have mishandled contracts and wasted taxpayers money. It seems that Deloitte is being placed on a temporary blacklist for angering Prime Minister Theresa May personally.
When the Deloitte memo leaked to The Times back in November, it claimed that Whitehall would need an extra 30,000 civil servants to deal with the additional work presented by Brexit and that the government was dealing with 500 Brexit-related projects.
It was also claimed that cabinet splits were delaying the agreement of a negotiating strategy and that Prime Minister May was “drawing in decisions and details to settle matters herself”.
At the time May said that Deloitte was “touting for business” and euro-sceptic MPs dismissed it as “nonsense”.
The consequences of the memo – which Deloitte claims were never meant to be seen publicly and were intended for an “internal audience” – have also drawn criticism from industry sources.
A plan
The consequences of Deloitte’s indiscretion over the leaked memo became apparent last night, where, according to reports, the consultancy firm feared a more “draconian punishment” if it didn’t make the offer to stop bidding for government contracts for a set period of time.
Deloitte said that it had a “plan for working with central government to put this matter behind us” and that it “regrets the publication of the two-page note, and has apologised for the unintended disruption it caused government”. It added that it was “not a Deloitte point of view”.
Credit: Tom Evans
Withdrawing from government contracts means that Deloitte will miss out on the opportunity to win tens of millions of pounds of public sector work – both from the Brexit department and elsewhere -across a number of projects covering IT, digital, HR, procurement and finance.
The agreement was reached between Deloitte and civil service chief John Manzoni and cabinet secretary Sir Jeremy Heywood. It has been questioned whether Heywood would have traditionally taken this approach, which may add to tension between the cabinet secretary and May’s cronies.
Industry sources told The Times that civil servants have been trying to placate the situation between Number 10 and Deloitte, but that May and her team were “determined to punish the firm”. Adding that it was “government by rage”.
One consultant likened the decision to a “Stalinist state” and said that you want an advisory market that is not scared to be thinking about these things – stating “we all do what Theresa May woke up this morning thinking is the right thing to do because we are all too scared to challenge her”.
My take
Brexit is going to provide a number of challenges for government departments going forward, particularly as we take into consideration the much delayed/canned ‘Transformation Strategy’. Whilst Whitehall departments struggle to get to grips with their digital efforts, it’s likely that Brexit will prove to be a distraction that could pull resources away from much needed modernisation projects.
The government already has a huge challenge in attracting talent to the civil service, and efforts are likely going to be placed on Brexit negotiations going forward.
When I met with Government Digital Service director general Kevin Cunnington recently, I asked him about the Brexit challenge and whether or not he was concerned. He took a very long pause before answering, when he eventually said:
It’s often really hard to talk about Brexit. It’s not yet clear, I think. We’ll wait to see.
I don’t foresee this being smooth sailing.
It also concerns me that Deloitte appears so afraid of Number 10 that it is willing to pull out of bidding for government contracts for six months. A decision it won’t have taken lightly. Governing through fear never ends well, in my experience.
Image credit - UK flag Brexit stormclouds from EU balloons below © meatbull - Fotolia.comRead more on: CentralDigital government and public services

