
Strategic risk management sounds like a course requirement in an MBA curriculum. While it is the topic of academic study, it’s also something that business executives need to regularly address in our times of technology-driven change. Unfortunately, a recent study by Deloitte found that most business leaders are not sufficiently prioritizing the myriad of new risks that can significantly damage an organization’s reputation, culture and information assets.
The assessment comes from a survey of 400 CEOs and board members from U.S. firms with at least $1 billion in annual revenue. According to Chuck Saia, the head of Deloitte’s Risk and Financial Advisory unit, he designed the survey to understand how business leaders think about and prioritize strategic risks, particularly those he hears most frequently in client engagements: reputation, culture, cyber and extended enterprise risks. In introducing the survey, Saia notes that (emphasis added),
When I meet with C-suite executives and board members, it’s clear that these threats are the most difficult to understand, identify, and navigate. There’s frustration in not having the right answers, but also in not knowing what questions to ask. They realize that their approach to strategic risks can be the difference between being a disruptor in their industries and being disrupted by a competitor.
The business headlines in a single week are littered with examples of companies that end up on the wrong end of a strategic shift, which can turn successful companies that were once predators into prey and, eventually, roadkill. Disruptive strategic risks don’t discriminate and can affect both old, failing businesses and the seemingly invincible new economic elite.
Deloitte’s survey provides insights on the areas business leaders should be concerned about, some disturbing data on their preparedness and advice on improving risk preparation.
What is strategic risk?
As a discipline, strategic risk management is an outgrowth of enterprise risk management (ERM), but one focused on the perils most threatening to an organization’s long-term health and survival. The Risk Management Society, RIMS, defines it this way:
Strategic Risk Management (SRM) is a business discipline that drives deliberation and action regarding uncertainties and untapped opportunities that affect an organization’s strategy and strategy execution.
Being strategic requires that the risk assessments happen at an executive and board level and span organizational silos. But as an interesting paper on the topic points out, SRM can’t be sporadic but requires continual assessments as part of strategy execution. It’s not enough to bridge organizational gaps, since as Deloitte’s analysis points out, today’s risks are complex and interconnected, and can interact in ways that magnify the uncertainty and danger, or alternatively, the business opportunity and competitive advantage.
Survey highlights
As this list enumerates, organizations can face many types of strategic risks, but, Deloitte’s survey focuses on competitive, technological, innovation, security, reputational and change management. In Deloitte’s words, they target attitudes and actions towards:
Brand and reputation

Culture
Cyber and technology
Extended enterprise

As with many other business challenges, the survey finds a dichotomy between leaders’ understanding and actions. While almost all leaders acknowledge that their organization will face serious disruptions in the next two-to-three years, most of them primarily react to current, tactical or isolated risks. They are not planning for strategic changes. Deloitte identified four significant themes from the data:

Reputation risk is under-appreciated, with only half of the respondents having any programs to manage their firm’s reputation.
Likewise, culture risk is mostly ignored; two-thirds of organizations don’t have any programs to identify signs of cultural stress even though Deloitte claims there are ways to detect and monitor cultural problems using technology.
While cyber risk gets the attention of executives and board members, only 38 percent of CEOs and 23 percent of board members are “highly engaged” in their cybersecurity programs.
Extended enterprise risk management doesn’t get the same attention or priority as that for the organization itself; most don’t make their business partners adhere to the same risk standards used internally. Furthermore, there’s a disconnect in the C-suite regarding the safety of their extended enterprise, with more than half of board members feeling that their risk management policies for external partners are equivalent to their own, 25 points higher than the response from executives.

The risks from business partners have become acute with the increased use of contractors, outsourcing, managed service providers and cloud products. MSPs and cloud providers are particularly effective at helping organizations respond to new competitive threats, such as changing business models or consumer tastes via data analytics, AI and advanced infrastructure. However, the survey found that only 36 percent of respondents listed a program of using managed services to oversee and contain risks from the extended enterprise, it was the lowest priority of the five risk mitigation programs Deloitte identified for this category.
When it comes to cyber risks, respondents cite three chief concerns:

IoT (49 percent citing as a significant risk)
AI technology and adoption (43 percent citing)
Mobile and cloud-based platforms (40 percent citing)

Executives and board members are prioritizing investments cyber risk mitigation in the areas of security operations, cyber digital transformation, and cyber resilience/vulnerability management, with scenario planning at the bottom of the list, which Deloitte believes is short-sighted. The report notes that,
In our experience, war-gaming and scenario planning are among the leading methods of assessing vulnerabilities and improving resilience. Engaging senior leaders in these exercises is key to moving from simply identifying security threats and fixes to also defining business impacts, governance methods, risk escalation steps, and organizational responses.
In summarizing the findings, Saia noted that, as with so many things in corporate life, there’s a divergence between what business leaders say and do. He writes (emphasis added),
We found that senior leaders know threats are on the horizon but, in many cases, are not managing them in a strategic way. They’re not seeing these critical threats as interconnected, complex risks that, when managed correctly, could create opportunities for accelerating growth. Many admit that they’re not fully preparing for threats or prioritizing the investments needed to identify, respond to, and mitigate these risks. Boards and management are often not aligned on key strategic risk decisions.
Looking at these risks strategically takes a shift in mindset. It means  challenging the status quo and being willing to take bold and innovative measures by doing things differently.
My take
While the themes and risks that Deloitte chooses to focus on are not an exhaustive list of the strategic risks facing organizations, they correspond with data from similar surveys, such as one conducted by North Carolina State and Protiviti. That research found executives and board members were most concerned about risks from disruptive technologies, particularly those that could threaten an organization’s core business model. Other identified risks included resistance to change, which could be comforted with Deloitte’s cultural risk category, and cyber threats.
The Deloitte survey points out both the shortcomings of enterprise risk management and the difficulty of treating what is usually a series of discrete events as part of a strategic narrative that has far more significant long-term implications than the media hyped problem of the month.
In future research, I would like to see how such risks can be turned into business opportunities. The most successful enterprises don’t just seek to mitigate risk and minimize the damage, but pull a jujitsu move and use threats, whether from digital transformation, cloud services, cyber attacks or cultural stagnation to turn the tables on competitors.
Whether it’s using cloud services to enable new data-driven product insights or digital business models, or turning an embarrassing, headline-grabbing incident from a reputational disaster to a brand-building asset, the ways that executives can exploit risk are only limited by their imaginations.
Image credit - via DeloitteRead more on: Data privacySecurity 