
Designit, the global design consultancy acquired two years ago by Wipro, has just gained a San Francisco presence with the acquisition of Cooper, a small but influential software design and strategy consultancy. Co-founder Alan Cooper created the visual programming language that was the foundation of Microsoft’s influential Visual Basic software development tool, including the VBX interface for adding third-party components.
He became an early proponent of user-centric software design and pioneered the use of personas to represent the goals, motivations, and behaviors of a target user base. Founded 25 years ago to serve a mainly Silicon Valley client base, the Cooper consultancy specializes in user experience and interaction design and also provides professional training for UX designers.
Focus on user experience
I sat down with Designit CEO Mikal Hallstrup in San Francisco on Friday to find out more about the acquisition and discuss trends in user experience, especially the emergence of conversational computing, fueled by recent advances in AI. The Cooper team brings a lot of new skills, within a shared focus on user experience, he says.
Cooper’s adding a lot of new words to our vocabulary. Like conversational UI … because I guess you work more with this in this part of the world. It’s near where the tech is made right now.
What they’re obsessed with, just like us, is simplifying things — basically because nobody ever asked us to make something complicated. Design is about simplifying things.
As opposed to us they have a certain computer science dimension to them that I think will create a lot of new conversations with Wipro as well … The whole advent of UX usability, the whole computer sciences, even with a deep tech touch, which we don’t have in the same way.
Making an impact
Cooper has a different history than Designit’s background in industrial design, but the whole design business has changed since the advent of digital. “It’s not candle holders and stuff anymore — teacups and chairs,” says Hallstrup. Nevertheless, digital has to coexist with the physical dimension. Hallstrup cites the example of a recent project to design a lounge for Scandinavian Airlines (SAS).
It’s still pretty analog, but we’re always thinking of how you can sneak in more technology to enhance the experience.
In other projects, particularly the larger projects that Wipro is bringing in, the impact of the design consultancy is more behind the scenes. But in either case, the relationship works best when it builds over time, says Hallstrup.
Whenever we land something with Wipro it’s quite a big chunk of work as opposed to many of our design projects. It’s organizational, it’s systemic, it’s invisible in a way.
Many of the smaller projects, say the SAS lounge — new inflight food, packaging for that — remind us that we’re a design firm. We craft things, we shape things. We don’t just do change management.
I think it also comes back to being the change agent, being an influencer. Education is a super-strong tool because the clients that you educate, inspire, teach and so on, they tend to come back to you, and build deep relationships.
That’s what you need if you want to make some ground-breaking new things. It’s not like something you do in a week, in a sprint, but it’s based on long-term relationships with clients — and I think education is part of that relationship.
Education and culture
Cooper has invested in providing structured training and education alongside its consulting services, to help designers and clients develop the skills and mindset needed to be successful with UX and CX. That cultural element is important, believes Hallstrup.
You buy some design and try to implement that and activate it in a market, but very often it fails if you don’t have an organization that can cope with it. The whole idea of training, professional education and all that, that’s what Cooper is really good at. The whole organizational side and how you build capabilities in teams.
Whether the outcome is a physical artefact or something digital, the common thread is helping people to achieve outcomes, he says. That’s something that transcends specific technologies or formats.
The fit we have with Cooper, I think it’s a focus on designing things that really matter. Visible or not. We don’t need this stuff to end up in design magazines, we want it to have an impact out there.
Although Cooper is only 35 people in San Francisco and New York, compared to Designit’s 550 worldwide, the acquisition is going to have an impact, he believes.
I think they’re going to punch above their weight and be like a change enzyme in a way.
This happens very organically in a way. Creative firms, they’re not like prima donnas or territorial. They kind of want to do great stuff and get together, ‘Let’s get going!’
Conversational UI
The advent of more conversational forms of user interface opens up new ways to interact with software that both teams will want to explore.
I think we both realize that it goes far beyond the screen. UI’s been locked down onto a screen and I think you’ve got to open that up much more. Going back to AI and talking about physical spaces and stuff like that …
I think the reason why the design industry, why we’re so obsessed with conversational UI right now, is the whole excitement about designing experiences and things you can’t see.
But it’s early days, he says. For example, most people who have an Echo device at home haven’t worked out how to use the skills that are available to download. People even have to work out how to speak to Alexa, Google Assistant, Siri or Cortana.
It’s like different personalities in a way. You meet someone, you don’t quite get where he or she’s at, and you’ve got to establish some kind of system around the conversation, like context, background — and you don’t have that with AI … So there’s a lot of getting used to, for us as users.
Chatbots are also a lot more limited than they pretend to be.
Right now, I think there’s a skeuomorphism kind of applied to it so it sounds more human, it feels more human, but still you know you lack the intelligence and whole cognitive part of it.
There are also cultural differences in how people interact with artificial intelligence around the world.
When we talk with our colleagues out of Tokyo they have a different take on it. They’re more into the robot kind of space. They want a face. So, Alexa’s not enough. They want blinking eyes and more personality, and empathy and all that, which is kind of interesting.
I guess there’s not one right solution. I don’t think Silicon Valley is going to dominate this totally. There’ll be a lot of different AIs.
The Cooper acquisition is expected to formally close during the current quarter.
My take
For students of Silicon Valley history, Alan Cooper is one of those seminal participants you almost expect to get a cameo reference in Halt and Catch Fire. Having written one of the first business software programs for microcomputers in 1975 — an accounting product called General Ledger — he realized that “making software easy to use was harder than everyone thought” and so began to think about ways to make software more user-friendly. That resulted in him formalizing the concept of goal-directed user personas as the core of his consultancy’s methodology.
Although small, the Cooper team has grown to be highly influential and rounds out Designit’s digital design credentials with some powerful advocates in the user experience and customer experience field. There’s a huge amount of talent on the Wipro design bench now — it’s up to Wipro to make full use of it.
Image credit - Experience concept © cacaroot - Fotolia.comRead more on: CRM and customer experienceMachine intelligence and AIProfessional servicesUser experience 