
When the property market is booming, the pound is strong and consumer confidence is on a high, it’s a great time to persuade shoppers to splash out on big-ticket items like a new sofa.
But with the current UK outlook less than rosy, it’s hardly surprising that Doncaster-based furniture retailer DFS has found trading conditions very challenging during 2017.
Profits are down and while revenues inched up by 0.9% in the year to 29 July, the company warned that sales growth would be even harder to achieve in the year ahead.
A key part of the company’s strategy for weathering the tough economic outlook is broadening its brand appeal and keeping things fresh. With that in mind, it recently launched a range of living-room furniture in partnership with clothing line Joules and last month got the go-ahead by the UK’s Competition and Markets Authority for its acquisition of smaller rival Sofology.
Digital transformation journey
In the IT function meanwhile, keeping things fresh demands a mix of public and private cloud resources, according to DFS group technology director Russell Harte. When he first arrived at the company almost six years ago, from high street pharmacy chain Boots, he found a pretty traditional on-premise IT set-up and a website managed and run on the company’s behalf by a third-party agency.
Since then, he’s brought online operations in-house and transformed the company’s infrastructure into a highly virtualized, multi-cloud environment, using virtualization technology from VMware and public cloud infrastructure from Amazon Web Services (AWS), under management by Rackspace.
Today, a mix of private and public cloud resources run the company’s online operations, which DFS’s management claims attracts over 40% of upholstery segment web traffic in the UK. Its ecommerce website is now powered by IBM Websphere Commerce 8, the latest version, and some 50% of traffic comes from mobile devices.
AWS public cloud resources, meanwhile, run in-store digital signage, as Harte explains:
The in-store signage typically consists of a large video wall in a store, with several smaller screens dotted around, too. And our sales colleagues have tablets to control the imagery on screen, so if a customers asks, they can send a high-quality image of that blue zinc French Connection sofa to the screen and place it alongside a high-quality image of the same model in red, for the customer to view and compare. We may not have the actual model in store, but this allows the customer to still make an emotional connection with the item that they want.
Meanwhile, the company’s recently launched delivery scheduling and routing system for its logistics fleet also runs on AWS. That system was created in direct response to the needs of the business, says Harte, which over recent years has moved its distribution model model away from warehouse space located at the back of individual stores to one based on around 20 dedicated distribution centres around the UK. This new system is also a strong platform for DFS’s data analysis ambitions, which aim to drive new efficiencies in logistics:
For example, we can now see in real time the current capacity of the fleet, how many orders are scheduled and figure out whether we need to use contract resources to help out or not. Being able to see that in real time today, rather than looking at a report that tells us what happened last week, is incredibly powerful.
Boxing Day Challenge
This public/private cloud mix was put to the test when it comes to dealing with a deluge of online visitors on Boxing Day (26 December), attracted by heavy discounting as sales get underway. Traffic to the DFS website during this period can spike by as much as 68% compared to average levels during the rest of the year, but based on last year’s experience, a multi-cloud infrastructure makes that influx much easier to handle, Harte says, noting:
Last Christmas on Boxing Day was our first year on the new virtualized infrastructure and we were able to add extra memory to servers in real time with no impact on customers. We were able to get through the peak period gracefully, with no issues – but if I think back two or three years ago, I would never have taken that kind of risk. We might have been forced to make changes, but we would never have made them during the day, during peak hours.
Since the post-Christmas sales could potentially make a big difference to the kinds of results that DFS will announce following its fiscal year close on 29 July 2018, having that kind of flexibility and confidence to deal with whatever is thrown at the company’s website will be vital. Says Harte:
I truly think things have moved on with virtualization quite significantly in recent years and what excites us now is the idea of being able to virtualize between private and public clouds and scale across those infrastructures to give us even more flexibility. We have got there yet, but it’s the direction that VMware is moving in and it’s something that really interests us, so we can always take a ‘best of both’ approach to infrastructure, depending on what we’re trying to achieve for the business.

Image credit - DFS/Ian GeorgesonRead more on: Cloud platforms - infrastructure and architectureCustomer service managementDigital enterprise in the real worldRetail e-commerce and the omni-channel 