
Some eight years ago, London-based psHealth director and co-founder, Ingolv Urnes, was seeking two things.
One was the right application software with which to solve a customer need for a semi-customised case management solution that went beyond operating on a records-based model point of view and went beyond using dumb databases.
The other was the idea of taking any platform and deploying its domain expertise onto that platform so his company didn’t spend a lot of time working on the core tech. Urnes recalls:
The whole strategy behind PSHealth was to identify it as a platform that can be used along with a couple of people who understood the whole area of occupational health and private healthcare case management. We looked at a lot of platforms at the time and then we decided to use Appian. So that’s how we got into bed with Appian.
The key underlying question was one familiar to all small businesses where time to market is important: how could the company knock out this application quickly. The other was, at that time, the overall lack of maturity of the available cloud offerings. In his view the different vendors varied dramatically, and he felt that at the time, Appian was so much further advanced on the issue of cloud delivery:
We wanted to be a health care software business but we really didn’t want to get involved in the bottom of the tech stack and we didn’t want to host the thing, so the idea became one of taking the Appian platform and for them to deal with all that bit and for us to take our domain expertise.
The objective was, and still is, to provide a proactive workflow management system for healthcare case management that ties together the information that would be collected in database records, which can remain unacted on for weeks and months.  Urnes uses a simple example to outline the process.
A business line manager has somebody injured or off sick for a long period in their organisation. What that manager needs is a portal where the case is referred to and the patient’s progress followed up with relevant medical practitioners.
NHS
The primary target is, to date, providing this as a toolset for private healthcare companies, but now psHealth has turned its eye towards the UK National Health Service with the introduction of a service called ART – Advanced Referral and Triage. 
The concepts are the same but the target this time is the clinical provisioning groups that run General Practitioner services. ART provides the management and workflow of the clinical provisioning groups to help them understand whether the referral that the family doctor is making – for example to a consultant or a local community service of some kind – is appropriate:
What ART does, on quite an industrial scale, is basically help to run a central point of access between the doctor and the hospital or other healthcare options.
This then allows for a triage process, where the referral made by the GP would have the relevant manual processes, diagnostic protocols and policy guidelines added and a triage decision made as to whether the patient fulfils the right criteria to go forward for the requested specialist assessment or treatment. ART automates much of this process, connecting to a number of information sources at the front end and then processes the referral with a rules-based program. 
This can then effectively over-rule the GP’s decision based on accepted best practices, for example deciding that the collective information sources suggest a community service is the normal approach, rather than a hospital visit.   
ART starts by receiving a package of unstructured information. Appian orchestrates using its Robotic Process Automation (RPA), which includes acknowledging the referral. One problem here is that it is typically a letter in PDF form, together with a bunch of attachments. Appian is used to send the information off to an OCR machine-learning solution which structures the information before returning it. 
The next step is then to connect to what Urnes describes as “some NHS business but that’s not so interesting”. Then it is run through the company’s rules engine, before finally moving to an AI engine for the back-end decision making process:
Ultimately, we’re not really making a clinical decision, we’re just saying ‘is what the GP requested appropriate and where should the patient go’. So it’s a slightly different use case.
Stress
This approach does open up some interesting possibilities at a time of considerable stress for the general practice sector of the Health Service. Recent stories of GPs handing back their contracts because of increasing clashes between those classic polar opposites – workload and resources available to provide a viable service to patients. It is now a common complaint that patients rarely if ever get to see a doctor, and most are treated by nurses, not all of which are necessarily trained up to minor illness treatment levels.
The development of ART does seem to hold out the prospect that such a system could a useful and productive intermediary step in the front-line treatment of patients. It could at least provide a pragmatic solution to the ongoing reduction in the number of GP doctors. The nurses would at least be far better equipped to provide a reasonable – and monitored – level of front line service.
Urnes sees that possibility too, though he is aware that it is easy to fall into the trap of taking on too many problems:
Our vision is really to say let’s test the referral on it’s appropriateness, and the long vision is to follow that all the way through to the clinical outcome and the invoice, so you can feed that information back to the people who are paying the GPs, identifying what is not a good use of funds. Right now our vision is to automate and make more consistent and speedy the referral management process. 
The long-term vision is then to connect, if you like, the decision of where to send you. The bizarre thing in the NHS system is that doctors make all these requests but they’re never really connected back to them: it’s never clear from a data collection point of view. 
And where this is so fascinating is that you have something called un-warranted variation. So if you live in an area with a great orthopaedic surgeon, it may be two, three or even four times as likely that you get referred for a hip operation as if you live in an area where there isn’t one. That is very much at the heart of what we’re trying to do, trying to understand why the referral patterns vary so dramatically.
This is where the AI capabilities come into play, for triage is such a variable science it can border on an artform. A referral to see a physiotherapist rarely needs much in the way of clinical triage, whereas someone presenting with chest pains or headaches and eyesight problems will be a far more complex triage problem. So some referrals will pass through without any human intervention, and others may require a significant amount.
The ART solution has been running for about two years, with the target customer being the clinical commissioning groups. The company now has four or five UK groups signed up, says Urnes:
The topic is hot because they’re all looking for ways to use the money more efficiently. But I think what’s been nice is that we come in and solve an immediate problem.
One question for the future is whether Urnes sees a role for clinical commissioning staff, or even GPs themselves, to initiate an information pull, so that a GP can inquire about information that compares a single practice with larger regional or national information sets. In short, they can ask the question: ‘we seem to be getting a lot of…’ and get trend comparison data. Urnes concludes:
That is the optimal solution, so I almost think of this as we are in a cadence that are a set of nice, clear and understandable reports and then goes out via the clinical commissioning group and then you have the mechanism for the GP to log in.
My take
In terms of healthcare this is an interesting example of how AI and machine learning can be used to target a specific application issue, with the objective of both saving tax payers’ money and improving the quality and reliability of the care service that results.
From the point of view of any small business, it is also a good example of how the low code trend can bypass one of the key issues they all face – how to circumnavigate the necessity of getting down and dirty with coding and debugging applications right at the coalface. 
Image credit - PinterestRead more on: Cloud platforms - infrastructure and architectureDigital enterprise in the real worldHealthcare transformationMachine intelligence and AI 