
At the turn of the year, Uber slashed UberX prices in some cities by as much as 30%. The precise rationale was never clear to me although I assume the idea was to keep demand chugging along in the post holiday season. There was just one problem: Uber drivers were the ones who took the hit – big time.
I took numerous Uber Xs in the January/February time frame and without exception, drivers were annoyed although most of them tried to play it down. After all, they still want those five star ratings and you never know the motivation of the guy or gal in the back of the car yapping in your ear. Nevertheless, some drivers were prepared to take their grievances to Uber’s front door:

Now, disgruntled drivers, led in part by Uber driver Kevin McGraham of Mission Valley, will assemble Friday at 4 p.m. at Uber’s Partner Support Center on Miramar Road to protest the price changes.
“Our goal is not to piss off Uber. Our goal is bring attention to the drivers,” McGraham, 39, said.
McGraham, who has been driving for the ride-hail company since November, says that he was making $600 to $700 per week, and had “mostly positive” experiences prior to the fare reduction. The newly implemented rates, which require him to complete more trips to make the same amount of money, now have him questioning Uber’s motives.

Not that it made a blind bit of difference. Uber maintained its lower price policy. During that period, I gave a lot of tips, a practice Uber frowns upon but which only seemed fair when I could see that a $10 ride was worth $2 or less to the driver. Fast forward to a couple of weeks ago.
While I’ve not been traveling so much, I still use Uber because it is the most convenient service and normally arrives within a few minutes of requesting a ride. But this last two weeks, Uber’s service has gone to hell. Drivers canceling inexplicably, surge pricing at weird times of the day and much longer wait times are the three most obvious things I’ve noticed. What’s going on?
Every driver I’ve spoken to says the same thing – Uber’s pricing strategy at the turn of the year pushed a lot of drivers off the road. Some say it is in the 25-30% range. I can’t blame them. But then what about surge pricing? It seems that not only has Uber pushed more drivers off the road, it has pushed too many drivers away. Contrary to the Uber message that ‘demand is off the charts‘ there just ain’t enough drivers on the road to meet demand at more or less any time of the day. In some cases, this means that Uber is way more expensive than Lyft or the ‘normal’ cab drivers. In one case last week, a request was immediately cancelled at normal rates only for me to be told rates were at 1.4x and then a moment later 1.9x the normal rate. It made no sense on a quiet Sunday afternoon. Given that we all have choice and those choices are at our phone enabled fingertips, I wonder what Uber’s next move will be.
Some drivers told me that in an attempt to redress the balance, Uber is currently offering finder’s fees of $750 to drivers who can recruit others. It seems to me that therein lies the road to madness. You can’t chop the economic legs out from underneath the people upon whom you depend one minute and then bribe them back the next when the consequences of doing so are unknown. If what I am seeing is an indicator, Uber has given itself one heck of a business migraine. Riders won’t tolerate onging surge pricing or excessive wait times when they can see there is no-one on the road. On the other hand, drivers need assurance that their incomes will stabilize to a point that makes it worthwhile to continue working as an Uber driver.
Elsewhere, I see my buddy Vinnie Mirchandani is positively effusive (Facebook link – it may not work for you) about the CEO he recently interviewed who gave up driving for Uber:
For my book I did interview with a CEO who gave up his car and started using Uber for his commute. He liked it so much that he now has policy for his 500 employees: prioritize Uber over rentals and taxis. Lots of cost savings and more relaxed commutes
Well yes, I guess so. I’d likely think the same. But if the pattern I am seeing locally is repeated in the other 80 cities where Uber slashed prices, then you have to ask whether the way Uber alters its model is sustainable. Right now, the notion of real time algorithmic pricing is certainly innovative but when pricing policy has a knock on effect into supply AND demand then the longer term consequences cannot be ignored.
How Uber fixes this issue will represent a defining moment in the still nascent network based economy.
As they say – welcome to the age of experimentation, failing fast and…the world of unintended consequences.
Read more on: Analytics planning and data analysisCRM and customer experienceDigital transformation - frictionless enterprise 