
Platforms are the name of the game for many internet companies out there. In fact, even governments are dipping their toes into the platform economy. However, did the BBC – the UK’s publicly funded broadcaster – just propose that it also wants to become a platform?
I think it did.
Director general Lord Tony Hall today set out his ambitious vision for what the BBC should look like over the next decade, ahead of the Royal Charter renewal in 2016. It’s a politically sensitive topic, with Chancellor George Osborne recently criticising the organisation for becoming “imperial in its ambitions”.
However, Lord Hall’s response is that his vision is “not an expansionist BBC”, but one that is fit for the internet generation, is open to collaboration and provides a platform service for those wanting to explain world’s big issues and to entertain the British public.
Lord Hall said:
We’ve always sought to bring the best to everyone. Now we will have the opportunity to bring the best from everyone too.
An Open BBC that uses technology as never before to give our audiences even more.
An Open BBC that works with creative organisations, partners – others in the media – to provide a platform for their work so more people can enjoy it.
An Open BBC that is truly seen as a partner.
An Open BBC where people can learn – from cradle to grave – and explore new ideas.
 The definition of a platform organisation varies depending on whom you speak to. However, my personal view of it is essentially an umbrella company (the platform) that provides a set of utilities, or technology services, that allow organisations under the umbrella to organically spring up and compete on the market. A platform is a fairly open structure that allows services to be created through the use of commodity infrastructure.
So, for example, if the BBC-as-a-platform were to become a ‘thing’, then it may be that a production company could use the BBC’s technology to create a programme and then use its online capabilities as the broadcasting channel. Instead of hiring/buying all the technology itself and then figuring out how to get it out to audiences.
Much of what Lord Hall proposes today fits this idea. His agenda feels very much like a BBC-as-a-platform proposal and sees a far more open, collaborative and democratised version of the BBC as we currently know it.
Lord Hall said:
The BBC is approaching its centenary in 2022, and in that time we have faced much technological change. And each new technology has seen the BBC adapt and prove its value in a new environment.
Yet, in this long history, I wonder whether there has ever been a technological challenge as bracing – and exciting – as this one. As bracing as the challenges – and the opportunities – posed by the internet.
Today we explain how we are going to meet that challenge.
We will show how the BBC will reform and thrive in the internet age to do what has always motivated us – to serve our audiences even better.
I believe our proposals will lead to a more creative, more distinctive BBC, and a BBC which is more personal to all of us. They build on the BBC’s many strengths but remain true to our founding mission – to inform, to educate and to entertain.
Some of Hall’s proposals include:


An Open BBC “for the internet age”. This would be a BBC that is open to partnership and one that works much closer with others. Hall describes it as a BBC that is “more open to our audiences”. He wants the BBC to be a “creative partner”. Hall goes as far to say that the BBC will put its technology and digital capabilities at the service of its partners and the wider industry – a platform.
Streaming news in the palm of the audience’s hand. Mobile is key to Hall’s vision. He said the BBC has a lot more development to do in this area and that mobile provides the best opportunity to deliver a more personalised news service. Hall describes it as “a bespoke BBC News, made to measure for you, wherever you are”.
Opening up the BBC to other news providers, through a new partnership which Hall hopes will help local journalism to thrive (very platform thinking – allowing for ‘big picture’ as well as niche interests). This is very much a result of the continued drive for devolution of both government and the BBC. People feel like the UK is too London-centric at the moment and more powers are being given to local authorities. The BBC wants to reflect that.
An Ideas Service – something Hall describes as an “open online platform”. The service will host content from the BBC, but also from some of the country’s leading cultural institutions, such as the British Museum, the Royal Shakespeare Company and the Science Museum. Hall said “all of these have been playing their individual parts in our broadcast and digital output, but until now we haven’t effectively brought them together to become more than the sum of their parts”. He added it’s as much about the partners as it is about the BBC – i.e. platform.
As well as news and information, Hall recognises that it’s important for the BBC to get entertainment right too. The BBC was one of the first to offer online instant streaming in the form of the BBC iPlayer. But now it is having to compete globally with the likes of Amazon and Netflix with their on demand services. Hall said that others are now “busy building platforms that could become gatekeepers to British content”. He wants to experiment with the BBC issuing “bigger and bolder series” all at once on iPlayer, so that viewers have the option to binge watch.

Hall finished by saying:
Let me be clear, an Open BBC is a million miles away from an expansionist BBC. Indeed it is the polar opposite. It comes from the desire to partner and share. It comes from the recognition that technology gives us the opportunity to do things very differently. It comes from the belief that the BBC must do even more for Britain as a whole.
That’s the direction of travel I favour – to make public service broadcasting better, by modernising it. To deliver a more original BBC. A digital BBC. A universal BBC. A BBC that continues to help Britain be a creative powerhouse, recognised the world over. A BBC that’s creating jobs – in one of the industries that’s a great British success story.
We will strengthen the things people love about the BBC while making them fit for the new age. Because a diminished BBC would diminish Britain. And because the story we tell in this gallery should always be a British story, with the BBC at its heart.
For all those who care about the BBC this is a time to listen and reflect, to make your voice heard – and for us to welcome that debate. The BBC Trust will be consulting on all of this.
Make the right choices now and Britain will enjoy a BBC that excels in a global, digital age, closer than ever to those who pay for it, doing a great and vital job for the creativity of these isles.
The BBC is a great national asset. We are all stewards for the next generation.
My take
If you read Tony Hall’s speech in full, he mentions the word ‘platform’ several times. And although the key message throughout isn’t to create ‘BBC-as-a-platform’, I would argue that everything he proposes will do exactly that. He wants to use the BBC’s assets and capabilities to open up and to allow the organisation to become a lot more dynamic and fit for the internet era.
How that fits with the BBC’s current culture remains to be seen. Can it control everything and keep everything ‘on message’ when it is a platform? Perhaps, if it has a stringent assessment process before it lets people utilise its services. However, that will be a challenge. Equally, a decentralised and open BBC is somewhat different to the BBC we have today.
However, having said that, Hall is on the right track. The BBC has the advantage of all these assets already in place and ready to use. It isn’t building from the ground up like a lot of other platforms out there. If it can figure out how to use these assets to its advantage without being slow to move, then it may just be on to something.
Uncategorized 