
In this morning’s Queen’s Awards for Enterprise list of recipients, it’s great to see UKCloud picking up one of the awards for Innovation – and not just because they’re a diginomica/government partner!
For the uninitiated, or readers outside the UK, the Queen’s Awards for Enterprise are presented annually, on the occasion of the monarch’s birthday, to mark outstanding achievement by UK businesses in the categories of innovation, international trade, sustainable development and promoting opportunity through social mobility.
As well as being invited to a reception at Buckingham Palace, hosted by the Queen, recipients are able to fly The Queen’s Award flag at their main office, and use the emblem on marketing materials, as well as being given a Grant of Appointment. Each award is ‘valid’ for a five year period. Research shows past winners attribute the Queen’s Awards to increased international sales.
UKCloud CEO Simon Hansford says it’s a “huge honour” to be selected as one of this year’s winners:
We remain focused on delivering an innovative, open, and sovereign public cloud, and are fully dedicated to improving our platform in-line with the evolving requirements of the public sector. We’re delighted to have our commitment recognised by such an influential awards body, and look forward to flying the Queen’s Award flag at our Farnborough headquarters.
Julian David, CEO of technology lobby group techUK, says:
UKCloud has rightly been recognised today for its unwavering commitment to improving public services through cloud services and applications. Increased adoption of cloud technologies is key to digital transformation and the improved delivery of public services to citizens. The Government can harness the best of UK technology by working closely with innovative companies, such as UKCloud, to transform services and serve people better.
My take
A welcome recognition of UK tech talent. I’ve worked with UKCloud for several years in various guises and the firm has been a diginomica/government partner from the day we launched this site. I’ve always been impressed by the firm’s drive and, yes, innovation, as well as its stellar public sector customer base. Congratulations all round!
 
 
Image credit - GOV.UKDisclosure - At time of writing, UKCloud is a diginomica/government partner. Read more on: Cloud platforms - infrastructure and architectureDigital government and public services

