
Saying nothing
We haven’t touched on those Salesforce-to-be-taken-over by well, anyone in the tech industry that the analysts can think of, for a few days.
That’s largely because despite the best efforts of Bloomberg, there’s really not very much that’s moved on.
SAP came out with a complete, on-the-record denial of interest, while Oracle’s maintained its position of not commenting directly.
Meanwhile Bloomberg says Microsoft’s in play while Reuters maintains it is not. Microsoft’s still saying nothing.
To date, Salesforce has just maintained a stony silence and watched its share price soar on the scuttlebutt. It’s important to remember that it hasn’t even confirmed the original story that it has hired bankers to evaluate a potential bid.
But it was never going to be possible to avoid addressing the stories forever. The quarterly analyst call is next Wednesday and the rumors will clearly inform questioning on that.
In the event however, the first comments to be made came during yesterday’s announcement of Sage Life in San Francisco, which was attended by Salesforce CEO Marc Benioff.
Predictably enough, the first question during the subsequent Q&A was about the future for Salesforce, to which Benioff gave his own version of the standard ‘no comment’ response required. He said:
I can’t comment on the M&A rumors. That’s the nature of M&A rumors. This isn’t the first time that we’ve been in the M&A rumor cycle and getting swept up into that. That’s obviously where we are right now. That’s the reality.
My dream, and what I’m committed to doing, is the same from the beginning, which is, we’re the fastest software company to $5 billion in revenue and we are going to be – if I have anything to do about it and this is my dream – the fastest software company to $10 billion in revenue.
Benioff added that he was focused on customer success, the company’s philanthropic drive and
setting the stage for the future. That’s what I’m committed to doing before and that’s the same thing that I’m saying right now, which is that Salesforce is a great company, it’s a company that does well by doing good. It’s a company that gives back tremendously to its community as well as developing huge amounts of new technology and new technology platforms, not just for its customers but for ISVs as well. It’s a great company.
That’s what I do every single day. And that’s what I’m committed to doing.
All of which isn’t a yes.
And it isn’t a no.
My take
Let’s see what the analyst call throws up.
Disclosure – at time of writing, Oracle, Salesforce and SAP are diginomica premier partners 

Read more on: Cloud platforms - infrastructure and architectureCRM and customer experienceDigital and content marketing 