
You can’t get through an enterprise keynote without a glowing mention of Uber and Airbnb. Disruption theory sells a lot of software – or at least a lot of keynote fees – but the reality of disruption is more nuanced.
Diginomica has been less utopian about Airbnb than some, questioning its viability for corporate travel and the problem of racial bias on its platform.  But this week, two news stories illustrate how Airbnb is poised to become a more disruptive force, in an ironic/unexpectged way: by cutting deals with their regulatory adversaries in New York City, London, and Amsterdam.
This is a big shift from recent predicaments. As recently as July, storm clouds loomed for Airbnb in New York City after an affordable housing study found that more than 55% of listings in city on Airbnb are illegal, and 30% are listed by commercial hosts. The end result? Airbnb and house-sharing firms reduced New York housing stock by 10%.
This firmed the resolve of regulators, for whom affordable housing in New York City is no joke. In 2014, a story by the city comptroller determined the that median rent in New York City rose by 75 percent between 2000 and 2012. That’s almost two times the national average. Meantime, real income declined.
Up to this point, Airbnb’s approach seemed to be: dispute the results of unflattering studies and pursue legal remedies. But on December 4, Arstechnica reported that Airbnb and New York City buried the hatchet. This agreement means Airbnb will enforce a “one home, one host” rule on its platform – no multiple rental properties allowed. The city will collect fines from individual rulebreakers, not Airbnb itself.
Though the New York Times characterized this as a “victory for opponents of Airbnb,” this represents a practical win for both the company and New York City. A real loss for Airbnb would have been an extended legal proceeding it had no chance of winning, as fines rained down.
Nevertheless it is a striking change of strategy. As per The New York Times:
“This is an astounding about-face on the part of Airbnb, which clearly recognized that this was a foolhardy and frivolous lawsuit,” Assemblywoman Linda B. Rosenthal, who wrote the law that Airbnb opposed, said of the settlement on Friday.
The Guardian assessed similar news in London and Amsterdam (Airbnb regulation deal with London and Amsterdam marks dramatic policy shift).  These agreements are similar in that Airbnb agrees to help enforce local rental limits in these high-demand markets. By policing limits on the number of days per year a full unit can be rented through its system, Airbnb becomes the first short-term rental company to enter into this type of agreement. From fighting regulations to enforcing them in a few short months:
Airbnb, the startup that has fought tooth and nail to avoid regulation in cities around the world, appears to have reversed its attitude toward regulators in a dramatic change of policy.
Some may claim victory for regulators, but The Guardian reported analysts have received the move with “cautious optimism.” A proven approach to working with high-demand cities should reassure investors:
“It’s a positive development for Airbnb, because the more certainty there is around the structure for Airbnb in cities around the world, and the less uncertainty there is about what is legal and what isn’t, [the better],” said Arun Sundararajan, a professor at New York University’s Stern School of Business who studies the sharing economy.
There are detractors. Some believe that a vital force in the so-called “sharing economy” shouldn’t have capitulated to the regulatory status quo. Others doubt Airbnb’s ability to enforce what they’ve agreed to. An affordable housing coalition in New York City that opposes Airbnb is quoted as saying “Airbnb would ‘do anything to keep their $30bn IPO valuation.'” That quote, however, is a concession that Airbnb is playing its cards effectively.
I wrote this in hits and misses yesterday: “Ironically, now that Airbnb has stepped back from scorched earth disruption, it’s far more disruptive.” Solid legal footing in the biggest cities will give Airbnb another edge besides the cultural change in travel that guest contributor Gail Moody-Bird wrote about in How Airbnb’s collaborative economy connects the disconnected.
These agreements don’t guarantee smooth sailing for Airbnb ahead. While I’ve seen some signs of Airbnb impacting corporate event lodging, it’s been a slow creep rather than the crushing blow Uber has dealt some taxi companies.
For corporate travelers, Airbnb is a fundamentally different experience. It’s preferable for a minority, including the budget-strapped, but it’s not ideal for many who prefer the proximity and amenities of event hotels. That corporate travel journey is a long-haul journey for Airbnb. Right now, they’re just trying to get the residential part right, addressing potent issues like racial bias before competitors with a better handle on that gain momentum.
Image credit - dealmaker © goldencow_images - Fotolia.comRead more on: Collaboration sharing and digital productivityDiversityHCM and the digital future of work 