
The future?
To survive in today’s fast-paced world of technological change, the twentieth century organisational focus on “scale” and boosting size to compete more effectively will no longer suffice.
Instead into the future, it will be all about “agility” and learning “how to respond in an agile way”, according to Antony Jenkins, chair of UK charity Business in the Community (BITC), which promotes responsible business. He was speaking at BITC’s ‘The Future of Digital is Human’ event earlier this week in London to mark the UK’s annual Responsible Business Week.
But the problem is that most companies are simply not set up to adopt an agile approach – and doing so effectively comes down to being very clear on what the “purpose and values of the business” are. Jenkins explains:
In the new world, it’s critical to create agility, but when we talk about values, it’s not what we print in the annual report. It’s about what we do and how we do it – that’s the fundamental challenge we have before us.
The issue is that society is approaching a crossroads, where one digital route could take us in the direction of a utopian future and the other towards a dystopian one. On the plus side, digital technologies could help provide better access to education for an estimated 450 million people around the world.
Smart agriculture could help cut global food waste by 20% in 2030. The industrial Internet of Things is forecast to add £244 billion to UK GDP in 13 years time and artificial intelligence to boost the country’s labour productivity by 25% by 2035.
But on the downside, electronic waste – one of the fastest growing types of waste in the world – is expected to reach 50 million tonnes in 2018, up a huge 21% from 2014. Although predictions vary, a particularly depressing one suggests that automation could lead to as many as 10 million jobs being lost in the UK by 2035 (the current working population is about 31 million), with 900,000 alone disappearing in the retail sector by 2025. (All of this data comes from the BIC’s report published in November 2016 entitled: ‘A Brave New World? Why business must ensure an inclusive Digital Revolution’.)
The future is human
What this means in a business sense, pointed out Lord Price, Minister of State for the Department of International Trade and former deputy chairman of retail chain the John Lewis Partnership, is that:
The digital revolution is creating opportunities for some to earn huge wealth, but others are losing their jobs…for me, the great hope is that we can thoughtfully think what this new age means and better engage and work to shape the future in order to ensure value is more fairly and equitably shared.
Some three quarters of all direct and indirect taxation comes from business, he added, which means that it “is a force for good”. But to ensure it remains that way means:
We have to listen to people’s concerns about how business operates.
Amanda Mackenzie, BITC’s chief executive, agreed. She continued:
Responsible business has never been more important as it is now in a tech age where the rules have changed and corporate social responsibility (CSR) is no longer just about philanthropy….The aim of Responsible Business Week is to help you think a few more steps ahead. It’s for all humankind, of which business is a part – or else you’re in danger of letting the digital tail wag the dog.
But Robert Phillips, co-founder of responsible business consultancy Jericho Chambers, took the thought a stage further. He attested:
We shouldn’t make efficiencies at the cost of humans and let the wider responsibility agenda go in the same way that CSR has gone, on a downward spiral into platitudes. A decent company puts people and the environment before profit. Corporate bad behaviour persists and digital can make it worse, but the future is human.
The issue is, said Caroline Fairbairn, director general of the employers’ lobby group the CBI:
If we don’t hang onto the human component, we won’t get the benefits, but they are huge…..and unless it’s all about people, it won’t work. Digital will enable us to do things in new ways…..but it’s about each company being very clear on what digital is – its purpose and mission, and acting transparently.
As to how organisations can go about getting this difficult proposition right, the BITC has come up with four business priorities:
(1) Protect, support and empower customers

Simplify data practices: Make data sharing and privacy clear and visible from the start.
Be inclusive: Build digital access, capability and confidence to allow all to benefit from the digital economy.
Enable better choices: Develop solutions that help people to make more informed decisions on their health, education and finances.

(2)  Embrace the changing nature of work

Prepare employees: Provide digital skills and lifelong learning to create an adaptable workforce.
Anticipate automation: Create new roles, where technology complements humans, and support communities to mange the transition.
Extend employer responsibility: Provide security, job protection and benefits for the growing ‘gig’ economy workforce.

(3) Deliver innovative products and services that serve society

Design with purpose: Ensure technology reflects human values and corrects unconscious bias.
Promote sustainable consumption: Transition to new business models that waste and increase asset productivity.
Partner to solve: Work cross-industry to design and scale solutions that will benefit society.

(4) Drive a transparent, inclusive and productive value chain

Empower suppliers: Provide digital solutions and training to achieve minimum social and environmental standards across the value chain.
Click green: Minimise the environmental impact of operations, committing to 100% renewable energy and zero e-waste.
Track, trace and resolve: Use digital technology to address corruption, exploitation and environmental harm.

As Frances O’Grady, general secretary of union umbrella body the TUC, concluded:
Technology can be used for good and bad…we have choices to make so do we want to be like Japan where they’re using robots in adult social care or do we want the human touch? These are big choices on where we want to be as humans and so we’ll all need to work together to create a shared vision.
My take
It seems to me that encouraging businesses not to make efficiencies at what workers will consider to be their cost could well be easier said than done.
To take a rather embarrassing case in point, the ‘Future of Digital is Human’ conference itself was being picketed outside by workers from one of BITC’s corporate partners, software and services provider Fujitsu, which was awarded the accolade of ‘Responsible Business of the Year’ in 2015.
Disgruntled Unite union members said they were unhappy with their employer over a number of issues. For instance, they accused it of cutting 1,800 UK jobs out of a total of 9,000 mainly by moving them to low-wage countries – despite making big profits in the UK and paying 0% tax.
So it seems clear that, unless employers take their workers – and the rest of society – with them in whichever direction they choose to go, then a dystopian future could well become a reality.
Image credit - Freeimages.com Read more on: Future of workIoT robotics and AIRobotics 