
Phil Shoesmith
Just weeks before Phil Shoesmith joined the Cystic Fibrosis Trust as CIO in April, research conducted by Lloyds Bank and Accenture showed that many UK charities aren’t just struggling with digital transformation – they’re actually sliding backwards.
Between 2014 and 2015, among the most digitally immature charities, the survey found, the proportion of those that do not understand how their websites could boost revenues rose from 70 percent to 78 percent. Those neglecting social media, meanwhile, rose from 73 percent to 83 percent.
The Cystic Fibrosis Trust, which exists to support the 10,000-plus people in the UK with this inherited, life-shortening condition, is doing much better when it comes to getting to grips with digital.
Even before Shoesmith’s arrival, much work had already been done on getting the charity up to speed on digital: according to its 2014 Annual Review, as of April last year, website visits were up 133 percent compared with April 2013, Facebook ‘likes’ were up 20% and Twitter followers were up 36%.
But under new IT leadership, things are stepping up a notch, with an ambitious three-year technology strategy awaiting approval from the charity’s board of trustees. Online engagement and collaboration is a major focus of this plan, Shoesmith says, and not just because the Internet’s a great place to raise awareness and boost fundraising, or because cloud technologies can cut costs internally and get business processes running more efficiently. They’re a big focus because Cystic Fibrosis – or CF – carries with it serious risks of cross-infection.
In short, people with CF often have bacterial infections in their lungs. Although these are rarely harmful to people without the condition, they can be very serious if transmitted to others with CF. What this means, in practice, is that people with CF are discouraged from socialising with each other on a face-to-face basis and, when in hospital, are treated in specialist CF units in single, ensuite bedrooms. As a result, online tools become an absolute lifeline for people with CF who want to interact with other people with the same condition.
Remote working
That’s true, too, for the CF Trust employees and volunteers who have CF themselves, adds Shoesmith. Since they can hardly work together in the same office, the charity is no stranger to supporting remote- and home-working. Earlier this year, for example, it completed its roll-out of Microsoft Office 365  for communication and collaboration. Many of its key systems were last year migrated to the Microsoft Azure Cloud, from where they can be accessed over the Internet by authorised users. Says Shoesmith:
Technologies that let people work effectively from remote locations are a good fit for all organisations – but this cross-infection risk means that they’re particularly powerful for the CF Trust. In particular, we’ve seen very good adoption by staff of the Lync Online tools – now Skype for Business – for instant messaging, voice calls, video conferencing and group meetings.
A recent deal with Docusign, meanwhile, should help the CF Trust in its goal of turning physical 
paper documents into digital information that can be shared more easily. Here, says Shoesmith, the primary goal is to make time and cost savings on printing, scanning, faxing and courier services that can otherwise be diverted instead to providing services to people with CF, campaigning on their behalf and funding research programmes. Take Gift Aid, the UK’s scheme for tax relief on charitable donations, he says:
It’s an incredibly important part of our revenue stream, but in order to claim money back off [HMRC], there are, quite rightly, procedures that have to be followed carefully. The audit trail that would be provided by Docusign is potentially a way for us to introduce new efficiencies and gives us a better guarantee around the success of our claims.
Another very recent initiative has been the late July launch of ‘Hack it Up!’, an online collaboration site for the CF community, based on Crowdicity’s social ideation platform. Here, members get the opportunity to have discussions, share experiences, make suggestions and offer feedback on a range of topics, facilitated by Community Manager Emma Lake who has CF herself.
One of the first topics proposed for discussion on ‘Hack it Up!’ is SmartCareCF , a project about which Phil Shoesmith is particularly enthusiastic. This is the charity’s ‘Internet of Things’ vision, whereby people with CF will be able to stream data relating to their state of health from the equipment they use to stay well – things like nebulizers, portable drips and wearable devices – to their mobile phone. From there, it will be delivered to a CF database in the cloud, where it can be used by doctors to monitor their state of health.
It’s still early days, says Shoesmith, and the future of SmartCareCF is still a matter of some internal debate. As some point in the future, the platform could be handed over to the NHS to run, or alternatively, the CF Trust could establish a separate legal entity to operate and manage it. But for now, he’s happy to have a role in those debates and to be part of the team providing funding and project management for SmartCareCF. He concludes:
One of the main points I’m keen to emphasis as CIO is that IT expenditure can bring all sorts of advantages and benefit the CF Trust in many, many ways. That’s a central message embedded in my three-year IT strategy. IT spend is about reducing other operational expenses and it’s about minimising non-charitable activity expenditure, sure, but it’s also about new ways of working that have a really positive impact on the lives of people with CF.
Read more on: Collaboration sharing and digital productivity 