
10 – Enterprise start-ups defy convention
How WeFarm gives small farmers a chance to grow – no smart phones required
Most PR pitches I receive are yawners – but not this one. Before long, I was on the phone with WeFarm CEO Kenny Ewan, learning about how WeFarm conquered obstacles to bring SMS-driven communities to small farmers.
Why? In The Myth of Trickle-Down Innovation, Umair Haque lambasted Silicon Valley for spawning startups with incremental ideas. Or, as he skewered it: “Why is the world working on clickbait instead of going to Mars?” One of my diginomica missions is to write about startups that aim to change the enterprise – and the world beyond.
WeFarm will stick with me; building communities via SMS is one lean/mean feat. Others that come to mind: Teaching kids to code and create – YouthDigital shakes up tech education (taking tech learning directly to families). Blog serendipity led me to a lovely/interesting chat with Grace Garey, founder of Watsi in If fundraising is broken, fix it! How Watsi became the first Y Combinator non-profit.
9 – Customer use case bonanza
How CenterEdge went from Black Friday blues to cloud scale with Couchbase
Burnett and Cutter still remember Cutter’s unusual job interview. During the interview, Burnett got out a white board, and the two of them sketched out a future cloud architecture. The whole thing would run on NoSQL. They spent two hours charting how they would move the rest of the web infrastructure to Amazon. Cutter: “What we came up with on that white board – that’s what we’re implementing today.”
The heck with keynote bravado and panels from hell; I consider an event an editorial failure if I’m unable to pull a good customer story. Burnett and Cutter from CenterEdge were disarmingly open about their project, able to laugh off Black Friday fails and speak to the pitfalls of change – in their case NoSQL, and how they sold that change to the business. We have gobs of use cases around here; check our diginomica use case archive.
8 – Encryption and security set to dominate headlines in 2016
Encryption, back doors, and IoT software locks – a bad “experience” in the making
Then there’s an emerging problem in the Internet of Things space, where companies are protecting crucial aspects of their software with “software locks”. Those locks could have the unwanted side effect of creating access points for black hat hackers, potentially endangering the data – if not the well-being – of consumers.
As I wrote in Privacy, back doors, and you – get ready for the tech encryption debate of 2016. Encryption and the legality of back doors will be an ugly/important tech story in 2016.  I also explore the rise of “responsible disclosure” and why enterprises should utilize third party “white hat” hackers.
7 – The best cure for analytics and IoT hype is: field lessons
The best cure for analytics and IoT hype is field work – with Vijay Vijayasankar

On to the Internet of Things, now atop the hype cycle. Is the IoT for real? Planning for IoT security is a given, but is there a signal amidst the noise? For Vijayasankar, it comes down to identifying trends and exceptions. And you’ll need statistical savvy to do that.
Why? Wading through the IoT and predictive hype was a 2015 preoccupation. These articles often began as either videos with Den Howlett or, as is the case with Vijayasankar, podcasts on my new Busting the Omnichannel series.
Event podcasts are great for context amidst the fray, e.g. Gary Cokins in EPM, predictive, and the failure to execute. I also mocked the FUD in The IoT and connected cars FUD special. The piece that set my 2015 analytics tone was from December: How do we confront the data science skills gap?
6 – A rant is good for the enterprise soul
Friday Roast – No, Mr/Ms PR rep, I won’t be writing an article about your client
I know important influencers who haven’t blogged at all this year. For vendors collecting article scrapbooks, these folks are not on the radar. And yet these influencers are talking to buyers all the time. Maybe it’s a good idea to include them? But that wouldn’t get them any more page views!!! No social shares??? Oh nooos!!!
Why? The enterprise is ass-busting hard; we might as well laugh along the way. Den has perfected the art in his Friday Roast series. I hopped on the Friday Roast train to skewer a bad PR experience. The shocker? Plenty of positive response from PR folks trying to re-invent.
I don’t wait for Friday to rant – you can get a dose every Monday in my Enterprise hits and misses series, where I pick through the week’s carnage in search of the highs and lows. Bonus rant: No, pop-ups can’t be part of a good UX – ever.
5 – From opt-out to customer relevance: rethinking content strategy
Email marketing isn’t broken (yet), but Copyblogger found a better way 
Whether or not it was a good idea to share that much, Clark’s naked exercise has created an invaluable resource for any marketer who is determined to change in order to win, instead of measuring the wrong KPIs on the way to losing.
Why? Content has become an enterprise obsession as media subverts marketing. Attention matters – but only the right eyeballs. There is a load of bland bullshit in the content space. I’ve tried to do something different in my B2B content strategy series.
Brian Clark bared the Copyblogger story to put the paradox of email marketing in focus – why it works, but why we need to move beyond it. Other fun entries: my critique of Hubspot certification (Hubspot inbound marketing certification – waste of time or valuable pursuit?), and Hashing the CMO dilemma – is content eating the org chart? Toss in From opt-out to customer relevance – five essential B2B content tactics – a decent primer on my views.
4 – Skills gaps are the abyss that sink enterprise projects
What happened to the business process expert?
We could say that technology fads come and go, but a quality enterprise software professional is timeless. Or, we could take a grimmer view: after all these years, we still have a glut of over-technical resources and not enough well-rounded pros, whether you want to call them BPXers, or SaaSers, or simply great at what they do.
Why? I’ve been analyzing the enterprise skills gap from several angles, including the importance of independent advisors/consultants. If this is your bailiwick, you may also enjoy The pitfalls of becoming an HCM SaaS consultant (from last December). The independent theme is notched in How independent advisors can change project outcomes – with Frank Scavo.
3 – Enterprise UX comes of age
Enterprise UX do’s and don’ts – building a UX maturity model
Large enterprises are in an early phase of UX design; they recognize its importance, but typically don’t have the UX design capabilities in-house to satisfy the user requirements of modern mobile and web apps. This poses a big dilemma: how do you construct an effective UX design team? Do you engage an outside design firm (usually at a high price), pull in independent experts, or upskill internal teams?
Why? I never expected my first Enterprise UX article, Does the enterprise really need a good enterprise UI? to strike a chord. That launched my enterprise UX article series; I’ve since learned a ton from those pushing the Enterprise UX envelope.
Another 2015 pick: a day of Enterprise UX sessions in Atlanta with trainer Everett McKay (Enterprise UX essentials – the virtues and perils of simplicity). Expect more in 2016 as enterprises try to form their own UX teams (Building effective enterprise UX teams – lessons and pitfalls).
2 – The future of work is… robotic
Robotics and job futures – a new report hashes the bull/bear views
Are we back to where we started? We’re still divided on whether robotics and automation will fuel growth and create more jobs than they displace. On another level, there is a conflict between those who view machines as freeing up humans from demeaning work, and those who believe that automation fuels skills/income disparity,
Why? Like the rest of the diginomica team, I got sucked into the debate on robotics, automation and the future of work. Sometimes that meant the skills needed to keep the robots at bay, or Pulling truth from the viral absurdity of the Amazon workplace debate. I also shared the not-so-flattering experience of What I learned from taking the Facebook workplace bias course.
1 – The informed buyer causes a sales and marketing upheaval
Why enterprise buyers trust influencers – new research
Perhaps this data is not terribly surprising, but for most service providers, the implications are significant. I don’t know too many marketing teams that know how to proceed with the informed buyer, who has a BS detector par excellence.
For me, it started with Why the informed buyer is ruining the content party (July 2014). The influencer piece, drawn from a talk wtih Gartner’s Hank Barnes, sparked some interesting discussions, including this podcast interview I did with Kea Company on informed buyers and how diginomica fits into the blogger/analyst/journalist blur that buyers find alternately useful and maddening.
Impediments to winning the trust of enterprise buyers sets a tone I plan to pursue in 2016. It’s crazy to assert that enterprise buyers are now completely rational and free of bias, but I stand by my view that most sales teams are unequipped to play the advisor role, and most marketers are tone deaf to what buyers need and when, despite their exotic sentiment and so-called personalization tools. Fisticuffs!
I’ll remember 2015 for pieces where I attempted to step outside myself and grasp a new context (e.g. Bring your own data (science) – a day with Infor’s Dynamic Science Labs at MIT). Others will linger – at least for me – because a personal stake stirred the pot, as in my sadness about the loss of Grantland (The fall of ESPN’s Grantland – an enterprisey take), or my own battles to be productive amidst the noise (Tech detox? Yes, but we really need better filters).
Finally, I want to thank readers for supporting diginomica and also reading my work. You’ve encouraged me to take chances and challenged me to keep pushing. I’ll try to double down in 2016. I hope to see you at a keynote or in an airport lounge soon…
Disclosure: I did not select vendor-focused work from event coverage for this piece. But I’d like to acknowledge all the vendors, some of which are diginomica premier partners and some of which are not, for underwriting the expenses to get me to shows this year. SAP is a diginomica premier partner and the origin of my Business Process Expert (BPX) terminology used above. Infor is a diginomica premier partner. The Gary Cokins EPM piece was from the SAP Controlling Conference, which is a paid client of mine, though I was not paid for the coverage.

Read more on: Best of archivesFrictionless enterpriseFuture of work 