
In part one of this special report, Cath Everett looked at BAME diversity in the US. In this concluding part, the geographic focus shifts. 
According to figures from Colorintech, a UK-based online recruitment platform aimed specifically at ethnic minorities, BAME individuals make up less than 5% of the entire tech workforce in the country compared to 38% in the US, even though they account for 13% of the UK population and 19% of all applicants for higher education. (A similar platform, Jopwell.com, exists incidentally in the US too.)
But part of the problem of underrepresentation in both countries, Russ Shaw, founder of Tech London Advocates, a forum for private sector companies championing and supporting tech in the UK’s capital, believes, stems from current recruitment practices. He explains:
No one would say that they’re actively trying to recruit the same types of people, but the old saying about recruiting in your own likeness holds true. So employers really need to re-scope where they recruit from and ensure they start looking in more non-traditional areas than they’ve considered before.
When I get shortlists and don’t see enough viable members of minorities or women on them, these days I say ‘try again’ because, even though it may take longer, we’ll be better off in the long-term. Recruitment practices have to change or we’ll still be here in five years, asking the same questions and identifying the same issues.
Unintended discrimination
Merici Vinton, co-founder of Ada’s List, a global network for women in tech, agrees. She believes, for example, that ensuring interview panels are ethnically diverse is vital as “you’re more likely to want to work with people who look like you”. Moreover, the idea of role models is also very important as seeing others in responsible positions “makes you more hopeful about your own prospects for promotion”.
Another consideration, says Patrick Voss, managing director at business consultancy Jeito, is trying to reduce unintended discrimination by introducing practices such as removing names and date-of-births from CVs and providing unconscious bias training for all interviewers. It is also worth ensuring that all corporate communications are based on readily comprehensible, industry-standard language and that images appear inclusive.
As to how to go about retaining BAME staff once they actually join though, that is more a matter of getting the company culture right. As Voss says:
The question is how to ensure everyone feels part of the culture – so are you conscious enough about what you stand for and about your processes, stories and general environment to know what turns people on or off? It’s a complex problem and I’m not sure that the answer is simply to empower lots of diversity professionals. My personal view is that it’s about supporting individual leaders, especially senior ones who have more ability to affect change. If they understand the issues and are open-minded enough to throw the talent net as wide as possible, others will follow.
On the one hand, however, he also believes that providing people with effective mentors, whether they “inspire you from the same background or push you from a different one”, is “crucial”.
Another useful means of providing support is to create networking forums for likeminded workers. Dell, for instance, has set up a Global Diversity Council and four Employee Resource Groups (ERGs) specifically aimed at ethnic minority employees, although others exist for different minority groups too.
The BAME ERGs comprise Asians in Motion; the Black ERG; Adelante for Hispanic workers and Mosaic, which currently only exists in the UK but is multicultural in nature.
Yvonne Steward, head of Dell UK’s HR team as well as being its European HR business partner, says:
Approximately 22% of our staff worldwide are already involved in an ERG, but our Legacy of Good Plan wants to see 40% of the global workforce engaged in one by 2020. They get a great return in terms of networking, skills development and volunteering in the local community. It’s great to have the support and to have a forum in which you can share or learn.
Also valuable is using employee data to understand not only the bigger picture, but also to look for company “hot spots”. Voss explains:
If, over a number of years, you track different people aspects such as flow rates, employees leaving or staying and the company’s promotion practices, you can flag up ‘hot spots’. So is this particular division or group losing or retaining more staff than others, for example? The challenge is to get the data in a clear state so you can understand what’s going on, but it’s worth it.
My take
The issue of ethnic diversity appears to be a relatively neglected one in the tech industry in comparison to gender. But similar challenges apply, and if employers really want to get to grips with the skills shortage, and boost company performance in the process, they are simply going to have to grasp the nettle and widen their nets sooner rather than later.
Image credit - Freeimages.com/girinath gopinathRead more on: Diversity 