

Remember when Target laid down a 40% growth rate for online sales over the next few years? Unfortunately for the retailer, it’s latest numbers are considerably off target with 20% year-on-year growth for its third quarter.
That comes on the back of 30% in the second quarter and 38% in the first. The only good news seems to be that the firm expects the slide to have stabilised now and will go into the fourth quarter – the holiday season – with expectations of 20% growth.
All that’s left CEO Brian Cornell pointing to the National Retail Federation’s predictions this week of e-commerce fourth quarter growth of between 6% and 8% to defend Target’s performance:
While our 20% growth rate is not in line with our expectations, it’s still dramatically outperforming the industry.
He adds:
We’re seeing an overall slowdown in digital growth across retail, and we’re really pleased that we continue to outpace the industry, dramatically outpace the industry but our digital efforts are driving more traffic into our stores and helping us grow our overall comp. So, while there has been a slowdown broadly across the sector, we continue to outpace the industry and that’s our fundamental goal.
Cornell even blames the weather for the slowdown:
Like our stores, digital sales growth in apparel was slower during much of the quarter, correlating with the relative warm weather across much of the country. We know that our digital investments drive engagement and sales in all of our channels. And we are pleased that our third quarter sales were near the high end of our expectations. However, we believe we have an opportunity to accelerate digital transactions by enhancing the experience on target.com.
The retailer is rolling out a number of initiatives to boost digital traffic, including free shipping on all digital orders during the holiday season. But the shortfall is significant for Target as the firm regards digital as a key enabler for growth offline as well as online. Cornell explains:
I think the most important measure we are looking at is the fact that over 80% of our guests start their shopping journey online, either at home on their desktop or via the mobile device. And that digitally influenced guest is coming into our stores more often.
He adds:
Regardless of where our guest demand is ultimately fulfilled, in a store or in a guest front porch, we know the vast majority of our sales in all of our channels are digitally enabled. For example, our guests access our brands through a digital device, both in advanced hub and during their trip to one of our stores. As a result, we don’t think that digital is simply a selling channel, but a critical enabler of the shopping experience in all of our channels. This has significant strategic implications, both in terms of organizational structure and the way we reward our team.
Since I arrived last year, we have been evolving our approach to focus first on our core guests and build a total Target assortment that best serves the needs and expectations of our guest. Only after we have determined the appropriate assortment, do we plan on how to offer it to each of our selling channels.
He cites Target’s signature categories as a case in point:
For more than a year now, we’ve been investing in these categories with the expectation that they will grow most rapidly and we’ve seen this play out in all of our channels. In fact, even while our digital footprint remains relatively small, we’re approaching $1 billion of annual sales in our home category, making us one of the leading digital retailers in the states.
Priorities
For Chief Operating Officer John Mulligan, the focus right now is on making the Target customer experience more flexible:
As a result of last year’s rollout of ship-from-store capability, stores have already shipped more than 10 million items directly to guests so far this year. And the percentage of digital orders delivered in a three-day window has more than doubled compared with a year ago.
Target is now offering what it calls available-to-promise, which offers customers a more precise shipping window. Mulligan explains:
With available-to-promise, we expect nearly two-thirds of our digital orders will offer our guests a delivery window of three business days or fewer compared with our typical window of four to seven business days, prior to the rollout.
We recently expanded our ship-from-store capability to more than 300 additional stores, bringing the total to more than a quarter of the chain. This will enable about 40% of digital transactions to be shipped from our stores in the fourth quarter. In addition, two new direct-to-guest fulfillment centers became operational in the third quarter, in advance of the holiday season. With the expanded capacity these changes provide, we expect to continue making progress on shipping speed next year.
The other challenge is the ongoing integration of digital capabilities in store. Mulligan says:
Guests increasingly use Cartwheel, a digital savings app with more than 20 million authenticated users to plan their store chips in advance and then use the app to search for additional deals while shopping in store. In addition, because 10% to 15% of our digital orders are picked up in stores, we’re exploring ways to streamline the pickup process by expanding holding capacity at the service counter and implementing process improvements to reduce wait times.
My take
Target needs to get its digital act sorted quickly. The National Retail Federation predicted this week that nearly half of planned holiday season purchases will take place online.
Read more on: Analytics planning and data analysisCRM and customer experienceDigital and content marketinge-commerceRetail e-commerce and the omni-channel 