
 
As one of the UK’s oldest high street retailers, Marks & Spencer’s digital strategy was inevitably going to take some time to take hold of the company and start delivering returns. And it seems that a corner may have been turned and CEO Marc Bolland’s investments are beginning to get some positive results.
Whilst most of the financial press are reporting on M&S’s jump in general merchandising sales, which rose 0.7% on a like-for-like basis over the quarter and includes clothing sales, the best performance in nearly four years, it should also be noted that the M&S.com platform finally returned to growth after having experienced some significant teething problems in previous quarters.
Marks & Spencer has been all too aware that the growth in e-commerce and online shopping has forced the retailer’s hand and that it’s approach to the market had to change – no longer would bigger stores with a huge UK footprint be enough to win revenues. Instead it brought in Bolland in 2010 to set M&S in a new direction and made huge investments in digital platforms and warehouse technology.
The retailer’s shares soared 6.1% on the news of the results, a significantly higher rise compared to the wider market.
Marc Bolland, Chief Executive, said:

We have made strong progress over the quarter. In Food we delivered another excellent performance, with sales growth ahead of the market. We continued to deliver on General Merchandise gross margin, and are pleased that we have achieved this whilst also improving General Merchandise sales. M&S.com has returned to growth, as planned, with further improvement in customer metrics.

The results revealed that M&S.com sales returned to growth as planned (+13.8%) , with the website metrics including traffic, conversion and customer satisfaction said to be continuing to improve. This compares to a 8.1% fall in sales in July last year, which M&S.com was to blame for.
The new M&S.com is said to be the company’s new “flagship” store and is said to be the “best expression of today’s M&S”, with a “24/7 window to [its] products and style perspective”. The new platform saw M&S shifting all systems off of Amazon Web Services and bringing them in-house – but initially sales declined and customers were plagued with problems.
The same was true of the company’s new delivery center in Castle Donington, which was part of a wider £1 billion upgrade of legacy IT and distribution systems. However, earlier this year it was suggested that 18 months after the center’s opening, it was only operating at around two thirds of its intended capability.
There was only one line on the new distribution center in this week’s results, but M&S said Catle Donington “performed well during the quarter”.
My take
CEO Marc Bolland will rest easier this Easter weekend knowing that the results are finally starting to reflect the investments made in his turnaround strategy and that the digital platforms are beginning to deliver.

Read more on: Use cases 