
These days, inclusion is definitely one of the hot HR topics across all sectors, whether we are talking public, private or third.
But despite the ever-increasing war for talent in the tech industry, the diversity conversation here often appears to be rather narrowly focused on gender. All too frequently people with disabilities, different sexual orientations or members of black, Asian and minority ethnic (BAME) communities seem to fall lower down the priority list.
But in terms of ethnic diversity in particular, the problem appears to be an entrenched one. Official statistics indicate, for example, that 77% of the US population today is white, 17.6% Hispanic, 13.3% black and 5.6% Asian.
But American Community Service data shows that, while Asian youngsters may be keen to focus on techie subjects at university, the same is far from true of members of other minority groups. Among computer science and engineering (CSE) graduates with a bachelor’s degree or higher, 57% were white, 8% Hispanic, 6% black, with Asian-Americans making up a proportionately huge 26%.
But the contrast becomes even more marked when these former students start working in the real world. Asian CSE graduates are, it seems, much more likely to move into tech jobs (40%) than their black (16%) or Hispanic (12%) counterparts. Instead 10% of black CSE graduates end up in lower paying, lower status office support jobs compared with a mere 5% of whites and 3% of Asian-Americans.
Among the technical employees working at industry giants Google, Microsoft, Facebook and Twitter, meanwhile, an average of 56% are white, 37% Asian, 3% Hispanic and only 1% black – findings that have laid them open to widespread criticism over their lack of diversity.
To compound the issue though, a study conducted by Paysa, a big data-based tool that enables workers to compare their salary with market rates, found that the more low-level the tech job, the more likely it was to be occupied by a member of an ethnic minority.
Conversely, more than 70% of managerial or senior positions ranging from technical project manager to senior director of engineering were held by Caucasians – although the report’s authors were unsure if this disparity was caused by white people being given more promotions or members of ethnic minorities simply leaving the industry, neither of which are particularly positive, of course.
In payment terms, however, the research found that at every stage throughout their career, it was Asian-Americans, rather than Caucasians, who were paid comparatively higher than any other ethnic group – although evidence suggests that the majority still tend to end up clustered in professional and middle management positions rather than routinely making it to the executive suite, a phenomenon dubbed by Jane Hyun in 2005 as the “bamboo ceiling”. Nonetheless, Paysa’s report continues:
It is also worth noting though that, despite their dominance at managerial level, white people earned “the lowest average salary” of any ethnic group at every stage of their career apart from chief executive – although no explanation for this phenomenon was posited.
Diversity matters
So, in summary, it would appear that the tech industry, in the US at least, is carved up by two ethnic groups – Caucasians and Asian-Americans, the latter of whom are disadvantaged in terms of promotional opportunities, while the former is disadvantaged in terms of renumeration. Everyone else though, including people from indigenous communities, are hugely disadvantaged in every respect.
But why, beyond trying to tackle the skills gap, should employers actually care? The number one reason, says Merici Vinton, co-founder of Ada’s List, a global network for women in tech, is that:
All the data shows that diversity is a good thing. The more diverse teams that I’ve worked on always outperform those that aren’t. Talking to people with different experiences and socio-economic backgrounds changes the conversation and ensures that what you’re designing doesn’t just reflect your own personal view of the world and what your truth is.
The most cited study in this area is McKinsey & Co’s 2015 “Diversity Matters” report. It indicated that, while companies (across all sectors) in the top quartile of its gender-diversity analysis were 15% more likely to generate higher financial returns than the national industry median, the figure was more like 35% for racially and ethnically-diverse businesses.
In the case of US firms in particular, the study revealed that for every 10% increase in the racial and ethnic mix of the senior executive team, earnings before interest and taxes jumped 0.8%. Despite this situation though, it also found that 97% still have boards that singularly fail to represent the demographic composition of either their workforce or the wider population, compared with 91% in Brazil and 78% in the UK.
Nonetheless, employers in multicultural Britain are felt to be rather more uncomfortable in talking about race issues than their counterparts in the US. Here the ethnic diversity debate is more out in the open and affirmative action/positive discrimination – which is illegal in the UK – has been part of the national political dialogue since the 1990s. Russ Shaw, founder of Tech London Advocates, a forum for private sector companies championing and supporting tech in the UK’s capital, says:
My innate feeling is that ethnic minorities are woefully underrepresented in tech, not just in London but across the UK, and it’s something we desperately need to address. I worry that we’re not reaching out effectively to BAME groups and that we’re not dealing with their issues adequately.
In part two of this special report here, Cath Everett looks more closely at the UK position. 
Image credit - Freeimages.com/Pascal MeiRead more on: Diversity 