
Rob Bernshteyn, Coupa
Some good news out of spend management specialist Coupa yesterday, nicely timed on the eve of their annual customer conference this week in San Francisco. The privately-held cloud firm has scored an $80 million funding round that values the company at more than $1 billion.
Existing investors in Coupa, Battery Ventures, Crosslink Capital and El Dorado Ventures, were joined in this latest funding round by T. Rowe Price Associates, Iconiq Capital and Premji Invest. Total funding for the firm, which launched in 2007, now totals $167.5 million.
Phil Wainewright will be reporting back in depth from the Coupa Inspire conference this week, so I don’t want to tread on his toes at this stage. But I grabbed a quick chat yesterday with Coupa CEO Rob Bernshteyn to discuss what the company plans to do with its new cash.
Apart from the obvious investment that will go into further product and functional enhancement, two things jumped out at me from our brief conversation.
The first is an emphasis on international expansion. The firm already has multinational customers under its belt of course, but there’s now I detect a focus on pushing harder into Europe, something we’ve already seen identified as strategic priorities for the likes of Salesforce and NetSuite.
The other thing I really liked was an enthusiasm for tapping into the government market, again with an encouraging spotlight on Europe. For example, Bernshteyn pointed out to me that Coupa is now part of the UK government’s G-Cloud cloud computing framework. This is undoubtedly an area ripe with potential – if any sector needs spend management help, it’s the one that’s spending the taxpayers’s money!
My take
I’ve cited Coupa as ‘one to watch’ for a long time. I remain convinced that it’s a company that’s going to some serious places. This latest round of funding suggests that investors agree.
I’m going to leave the rest of the focus on Coupa this week to Phil, but I expect to see some interesting stuff coming out of Inspire over the next few days.
Disclosure – at time of writing, NetSuite and Salesforce are premier partners of diginomica, while Coupa is a diginomica partner.

Read more on: Cloud ERP financials and supply chainCloud platforms - infrastructure and architectureCRM and customer experienceDigital and content marketing 