

Pierre Nanterme
With each passing quarter, it’s increasingly clear that Accenture’s decision to double down early on digital transformation services is paying back.
In its Q2 2015 numbers yesterday was the fact that digital services are growing at a rate of 20% (in local currency) and now account for a fifth of Accenture’s total revenues.
Little wonder then that CEO Pierre Nanterme can boast that Accenture invested heavily ahead of the curve:
Digitization is all about helping our clients tap into new sources of value and new sources of revenue to create competitive advantage. We are helping clients capitalize on these trends to become the disrupters in the new digital world, not the disruptive.
He cited the example of work with a leading retailer to help them on finding new ways to attract customers:
We are bringing innovative digital technology to help them move beyond the traditional store model to a multichannel digital strategy.
Meanwhile for a global telecommunications provider, Accenture’s working on a digital strategy underpinned by analytics to significantly upgrade their customer service, while delivering cost savings of almost $100 million, according to Nanterme.
And the investment in digital capabilities is ongoing with a series of recent acquisitions, including:

Reactive Media, an Australian multi-channel customer experience tech provider.
Agilex Technologies, a privately-held company boasts the US government as one of its biggest customers.
Brazilian analytics software provider Gaspo, giving Accenture added advanced analytics capacities.

Cross-portfolio
The emphasis on digital is also feeding into the more traditional lines of business, with consulting revenues up 11% and outsourcing up 13%. Nanterme confirmed:
We are seeing demand for digital across all dimensions of the business in every industry and around the world and we’re clearly benefitting from the investment we have made in this space.
Digital is positive across the board. This is something we anticipated frankly a few years ago.
It’s covering a large value of opportunities small, medium, large covering consulting or outsourcing type of work. So digital is positive across a different dimension of our businesses, consulting, outsourcing, across all industries.
Digital apart, there are other opportunities to hand of a more traditional rationalisation nature, Nanterme added:
We are the first company to combine business process services with infrastructure and cloud services at scale. We’re working with a leading global airline on a major transformation of its procurement function, including a cloud-based supplier portal. The alliance expects to realize significant cost savings as well as increased standardization and transparency.
We are helping a global beverage company to create a global operating hub for finance and accounting, HR, procurement, supply chain and marketing operations. Our multi tower BPO services will streamline processes, minimize risk and provide new analytical insights.
And we are working with a leading European manufacturer to transform its IT infrastructure. We will migrate existing applications and data services across more than 60 operating companies into a single hybrid cloud environment. We expect to deliver improved services and flexibility, increased automation and a 30% reduction in operating costs.
There’s also the inevitable Internet of Things play, where Accenture is working with Visa to:
explore the future of mobile payments to make their traffic more convenient even inside a car. Leveraging our expertise in digital commerce we built a proof-of-concept to show our consumers [that] in a Connected Car, you can order and pay securely.
This is an area that could deliver positive returns in terms of early adopters of IoT tech, argues Bozhidar Hristov, analyst with Technology Business Research:
We expect Accenture will leverage its legacy design and implementation capabilities to drive opportunities within the segment. We believe the pace of adoption of IoT technologies will depend on the level of security vendors’ platforms offer.
While Accenture typically folds in security features within its technologies, we expect it to differentiate in the space and gain an early-entrant position; the company will invest in development of stand-alone security offerings it will utilize as a lead-in to cross-sell and upsell implementation services.
My take
I’ve said it before – Accenture took an early gamble with digital and it’s paying off in terms of new business opportunities and in breathing fresh life into traditional operations.
[mailmunch-form id=”14637”]
Read more on: Analytics planning and data analysisCRM and customer experienceDigital government and public servicese-commerceInternet of ThingsOutsourcingThe new professional and IT as a service

