
In a story that gave me an heady dose of “I told you so” satisfaction, Facebook announced that it was adding a human touch to its newsfeed algorithm. To be fair, Facebook always had a more customizable newsfeed than most realized; the problem is that it took Robert-Scoble-style swashbuckling to tweak it effectively.
As one of Scoble’s Facebook commenters wrote the last time he exhorted the virtues of custom lists:
Yeah, but it takes 8 clicks and lots of scrolling to put one person in a list.
Another commenter attempted to support Scoble, but ended up reinforcing the problem of super-Facebookers versus the rest of us:
If you go to “subscribe” (for each individual) you can control the noise. There are 3 levels for the amount of posts and 7 or 8 options for types of posts you wish to receive from that particular person.
Okay – I’ll set aside the weekend and get right on it. Snark aside, after Facebook’s new update, customizing the newsfeed is significantly easier. The change has already been rolled out to iOS users, and it’s coming to desktop and Android in the weeks to follow. The biggest change? Users will now be able to “prioritize” certain pages or users so that they always appear at the top of the feed.
But for enterprise peeps like you and me, the more important part is why Facebook did it, and what that means for machine learning, big data, or whatever you want to call the idea of personalization/prediction at scale.
If you’ve spent much time at all on Facebook, you’ve probably seen the flaws that even an “always learning” algorithm can have. I’d argue that Facebook has missed two things in particular: first, since downplaying the visibility of business pages, Facebook has underestimated the attachment/interest we have to certain businesses – even if we don’t choose to “engage” with them.
Second – and this is the bigger one – Facebook’s algo struggles to grasp the importance of certain “low activity/low interaction” friends that may be integral to our history. But: we’re not giving Facebook any clues. Consequently, we could miss vital updates. With all of Facebook’s machine learning investments, it hasn’t solved that one – and if Facebook couldn’t solve it with machines alone, others should take note.
As David Nield wrote:
The move is notable because of the way Facebook has relied on smart algorithms since the earliest days of the News Feed to work out what users are most interested in: who they interact with most, what kinds of content they skip past, the popularity of posts with mutual friends, and other factors are all taken into account… Now Facebook is handing some of that control is heading back to users – which should make anyone following Facebook’s algorithmic lead have second thoughts.
Facebook isn’t the only company grappling with the mythology of the perfect machine algo. As Alan Patrick of The Agile Elephant wrote in What is this “Tennis” thing anyway, Watson?, IBM is setting Watson loose on Wimbledon data. Noting Wimbledon’s need to maximize the tournament each year, Patrick writes:
Thus they will inevitably be pushed into the economics of ongoing automation of Tennis Tournament production. The need to both reduce operating costs and produce ever more value-add from the datafeeds is probably inevitable… So that means more and more AI for the data handling and analytics tasks, to produce more value add for Wimbledon and its customers.
Patrick goes on to muse about how much of this value-add can be fully automated. He allows for the possibility of human intervention:
Unless,unless… the unquantifiable human input can be shown to make the critical difference between an experience that will delight, versus one that is merely artificially inserted.
Patrick goes on to conclude that the smart machine will probably win over the human-touched algorithm. I disagree. I would never bet against the machines, but there’s a human context that isn’t going away – at least for certain “high value” settings.
But while it’s swell to debate whether a robot could ever be human enough to be considered a friend, I’m not sure it matters – yet. And that’s where Patrick rings true. If the automation of data into personalized services brings better revenue now, then the rest is just a dinner party hypothesis.
And as much as it chafes me to admit it, if Facebook steps away from a pure machine algo into a human-influenced one, and the user experience improves, then they win. There’s no penalty for incorporating human input into your algo – especially if you can do it at such a massive scale. Or if you can solve a vexing problem. Controversial example: the capture of Osama Bin Laden was a textbook use case of the combination of big data and human intervention. I can write about it sometime if readers want to go there.
Image credit: Very happy man in front of a group of people © Minerva Studio
 
Read more on: Analytics planning and data analysisInternet of ThingsSocial 