
When considering communication channels, we have consistently argued that LinkedIn, for all its faults, provides us with the most context rich conversational medium today.
When we pore over the statistics for the relative number of people who share our content, LinkedIn wins pretty much every time. We don’t see the same traction with Facebook although there have been some incredibly incisive conversations there. We still see plenty of Twitter action although it often tends to be of the Re-Tweet variety and often among a core group of fans with occasional outliers coming into the fray from time to time.
Statista has visualized the results from a study by Social Media Examiner – shown below – about social media marketing preferences which talks directly to this topic.

You will find more statistics at Statista
We think there are clear and obvious reasons why LinkedIn wins.

LinkedIn originally pitched itself as a professional network that could be readily managed. That may be less true today.
Users will readily click out to stories when they see an excerpt and then click back to leave comments. This is especially true when the story is sent to a moderated group that has established itself as being well managed and with a rich seam of quality discussion.
For all its faults – and there are plenty enough to make any UX designer go nuts – LinkedIn doesn’t have the same ‘river of news’ quality that Facebook prefers. This means that it is often easier to follow and track stories inside LinkedIn than it is on Facebook.
Paradoxically, Facebook’s constant UI tweaking can be frustrating and confusing for some people, whereas LinkedIn’s stable UI, while crappy, is familiar. It’s that old saw at work: it may be crap but I know how to get around it.
Research consistently shows that where marketing is tied to community, engaged users will spend more than they otherwise might. Cisco and Dell know this to be true. We know it to be true. LinkedIn has the kind of community feel that is just good enough. Facebook doesn’t have that same vibe.

Anything obvious I’ve missed. Let em know in comments – wherever they may travel 😉

Read more on: Collaboration sharing and digital productivityDigital and content marketing 