
Oracle’s proposed acquisition of Opower puts another stake in the ground for early verticalization in Oracle’s cloud strategy. As such, it is a very smart move. On to the detail.
Over the weekend, Oracle announced that it has made an agreed $532 million bid to acquire Opower, a company that provides cloud data services for the utilities industry that in turn help customers optimize power usage. This follows on the heels of another Oracle acquisition, that of Textura, at a price of $663 million. Textura provides payment processing solutions that service more than 6,000 projects per month. That acquisition will complement Oracle’s Primavera project management solution.
Along with colleagues, I have long argued that enterprise cloud solutions should not simply reflect a reworking of the past back office efforts but should also take advantage of the inherent reach and flexibility of cloud based technology to better serve vertical markets.
The comparison between how Oracle is approaching the problem through acquisition and others who are either attempting to grow their own or doing nothing other than expanding existing offerings are inevitable. In Oracle’s case, it is in the fortunate position of throwing off huge amounts of cash from its lucrative maintenance business and so can readily afford to take acquisition risks.
This acquisition sees Oracle making best use of cash as a scarce resource while positioning itself as leader in otherwise under served, large industry segments. The good news is that while Oracle pays a premium for the businesses it acquires, the valuations are not in the kind of nose bleed stratosphere of the more consumery unicorns. That in turn gives Oracle ample room for wringing solid value out of those acquisitions. This is important at a time when Oracle has struggled to meet market expectations but is comparatively cash rich.
The challenge comes in how those acquisitions are integrated into Oracle’s cloud landscape such that businesses can use those solutions in the context of a larger whole. Solve for that and Oracle becomes a compelling alternative for both back office and industry specific functions.
Anyone want to speculate where Oracle places it next big bet?
Image credit - via OracleDisclosure - Oracle is a premier partner at time of writing. Read more on: Analytics planning and data analysisSpend management 