
At the top of this year I asked the question – How can BT have spent so much on CRM, but still has no single customer view?  
As the year draws to a close, it seems that the UK’s worst broadband services provider is spending yet more on the same thing, once again promising that this latest investment will make everything better for its beleagured customers. 
The CRM upgrade news came as regulator Ofcom announced that once again BT is number one for customer complaints in its latest quarterly research, averaging a whopping 36 per-100,000 customers, a number that is almost double the industry average.
And credit where credit’s due – BT-owned companies Plusnet and EE took second and third place on the same list, so it’s a major ‘win’ for BT! Well done, BT! 
Among the complaints noted by Ofcom were: 

Faults, service, and provision issues, followed by issues around complaints handling, and issues with billing, pricing, and charges.

Lindsey Fussell, Director of Ofcom’s consumer group, said: 

We won’t stand for complacency when it comes to customer service. We expect providers to make it a top priority and work hard to better serve their customers. 


For its part, BT managed a degree of embarrassment when it stated: 

We apologise to customers we’ve let down. BT cares about the service it gives to customers and we know we need to do better. There were a couple of exceptional broadband outages during the period in question which undoubtedly influenced the broadband figures.
BT has been investing heavily in improvements, which include 90 percent of our customers’ calls being answered by advisors in the UK and Ireland by the spring of 2017 and recruiting more than 1,500 people to join our team of dedicated advisors helping customers with more complex problems.
Additionally we’re installing new software and systems to assist our advisors and allow customers to serve themselves online. Customers will see an improvement as these initiatives take effect.

BT currently runs a variety of CRM and customer service system from a number of vendors, including Siebel  and RightNow (both part of Oracle), Genesys and Cisco, as well as a Next Generation Service Desk, which the company developed itself. 
My take
See you here same time next quarter – and NOTHING will have changed. That’s no slur on any CRM tech that’s chosen. But when the cultural bedrock of your organization is one of contempt for customers, all the CRM spend in the world doesn’t fix the underlying problem. BT doesn’t care because it doesn’t have to. 
Image credit - BT/Ofcom Disclosure - At time of writing, Oracle is a premier partner of diginomica. Read more on: CRM and customer experience 