
Timing is everything – and for Yelp that timing was seriously off when its fourth quarter earnings leaked out early due to “vendor error by PR Newswire”. In what was probably a day the firm would be keen to forget, the leak meant that Wall Street discovered the firm’s CFO is stepping down as well as a fourth quarter loss which sent the stock price tanking.
Yelp reported a net loss of $22.2 million, against a profit of $32.7 million a year earlier, on revenues of $153.7 million, up 40% from $109.9 million. The company had previously indicated that it expected to top the $1 billion run rate in 2017, but that looks unlikely on present form.
CEO Jeremy Stoppelman wasn’t being drawn on that on the analyst call after the unexpected earnings release. But he did identify the firm’s core objectives for the next 12 months:
Our three priorities are to continue to build our core local advertising business, increase awareness and engagement and grow transactions. The vast majority of local business owners continue to advertise in traditional offline channels. BIA/Kelsey projects that the Yellow Pages industry will generate roughly $7 billion in 2016. Even though according to a 2015 BrightLocal study, more than 90% of consumers read online reviews when looking for a great local business. Migrating these offline marketing budgets online continues to represent a huge market opportunity for us.
Stoppelman insists that businesses are coming round to the ROI of Yelp advertising. He cites the case-in-point of:
KinderCare Education, a childcare provider with over 1,000 locations across the country, have been a Yelp advertiser for 2 years but stopped in 2013. Based on a decline in the quality of their lead shortly thereafter, so they recently resumed advertising on Yelp to tap into our purchase-oriented consumer traffic. We are pleased to see KinderCare return to Yelp and this experience underscores the importance of communicating ROI to business owners.
What is clear is that local advertising is going to remain the bedrock of the Yelp business model. Stoppelman says:
There is something like 20 million businesses in the US. It’s just broken over 100,000 local advertising accounts. So it feels like on the core business, there is still a really nice runway there. That said, we are making a lot of progress in transactions. And so I think further out years that could become an important component of business. But for the foreseeable future, we see local advertising as the core.
My take
Ooops.
Read more on: CRM and customer experiencee-commerceMobileSocial 