
In the three months since Chris Ellett joined Well as its director of transformation, he’s had plenty of time to assess the UK pharmacy chain’s progress to date on digital transformation. When asked what it has done so far, his response is pretty forthright: “Nothing.”
But he’s keen to stress that this doesn’t make Well a slacker in its sector – far from it. In general, the business of dispensing prescribed medications in the UK hasn’t changed much in decades. For the most part, it’s still about patients arriving at local chemists with a paper-based prescription from their GP. Says Ellett:
In 2017, we live our lives online and our expectations as consumers have radically changed thanks to disruptive services like Amazon, Uber and Airbnb. However, the pharmacy sector is lagging when it comes to digitization and the patient experience hasn’t dramatically changed since the Internet and mobile technology became commonplace.
At the same time, however, prescription volumes are rising: according to figures from NHS Digital, the number of prescription items dispensed by community pharmacies grew almost 45 percent in the decade between 2006/7 and 2015/16, to reach 995.3 million. Funding cuts to community pharmacists, like the ones that Well operates, add to the pressures, with many struggling to do more work on less money. New efficiencies are clearly needed.
NHS Digital has gone some way to address these issues with its Electronic Prescription Service (EPS), but it’s still early days, says Ellett. In any case, he adds, the approach that a company like Well needs to take to the entire ‘prescription journey’ is far more wide-ranging:
It needs to be a slicker, more automated, less time-consuming process – one that gives patients a better experience and that frees up pharmacists to spend more time offering them valuable frontline services and advice.
As part of its effort here, Well has announced plans to move to a ‘hub and spoke’ model of dispensing across its entire chain of 780 stores across the UK later. This will see prescriptions collected at stores but dispensed centrally from a facility in Stoke-on-Trent.
Room to grow
Ellett joins Well at a time of change for the organization, with a clear remit to drive more transformation. Formerly the Co-operative Pharmacy, the company was acquired by the Bestway Group (which also operates in sectors including cash-and-carry retail, petfoods and food services) in October 2014. It’s currently the third largest chain of pharmacies in the UK, after Boots and Lloyds, with revenues last year of £802.7 million. Its market share of national prescriptions stands at 6 percent, suggesting room to grow. Says Ellett:
I’ve got some clear goals in mind. First, we need to optimize the prescription journey – and digital has a large role to play in that. Consumers are going to be expecting that and we need to stay in step with the NHS and GP practices. So that’s clearly a priority for us and the whole industry.”
Longer term, we need to look at patient enablement – giving back choice and control to patients in terms of how they manage their health and wellbeing. And beyond that, we need to think of the broader healthcare model and our role there. In our own minds, we’re part of it, but we’re not always considered or perceived in that way. Patients often just see us as being there to dispense prescriptions, but actually, we can contribute far more than that.
Plan of attack
At the heart of Ellett’s plan of attack is Well Digital, a ‘start-up’ team within the company that will aim to bring pharmacy into the digital era, announced in late May 2017. It’s already hiring for a designer, a product manager and an engineer. Says Ellett:
My view is that there are two ways to approach digital transformation. You can start off by trying to figure out what you need to do, paint a picture of the future, all that good stuff. Or, you can dive in and get some stuff done – and we’ll be taking the latter approach.”
The reason for that is that I really believe that a digital world calls for a very different approach – faster and based on agile development, openness and transparency. So rather than just talking about what we’re going to do, I’ve said let’s just pick something we can get on with and where we can demonstrate value-add quickly. So we’ll start with an exemplar project in June.
This emphasis on action, not words, he adds, is a lesson he’s bringing to Well from his previous role at the Co-operative Group, where he worked closely with chief digital officer Mike Bracken and his team. The recruitment of those three digital specialists he adds, will help shift Well’s current reliance on consultancies and agencies towards internal delivery.
That reliance, combined with a mishmash of third-party systems and a lack of in-house development skills suggests a tough upward journey. But despite the challenges, Ellett is excited about the work ahead:
I feel like we’re big enough to rise to challenges like funding cuts, but small enough to be agile. When I think of our two closest competitors, I feel we can be more responsive, more innovative. I think we can tap into our collective intelligence to ask, ‘How can we do this better than anybody else?’ I think we can lead the way in this space.
Image credit - Images free for commercial use Read more on: Digital government and public servicesUse cases

