
One of my pet peeves about these annual “predictions” is about how many of them aren’t predictions at all. They obfuscate with words like, “start to,” or “will increasingly,” etc. A prediction should be specific. Examples of proper predictions might be: “Neil will win a Triathlon by October,” or, “Neil will drop dead trying the end of January.”
Here’s a case in point and, by the way, I’m not picking on this media outfit in particular. They just had a long list.
Forbes published an article, 120 AI Predictions for 2019 which was chock full of some great insights along with a few clunkers. However, I went through them and singled out most of the references that violated my criteria for a prediction (even if the advice was spot on.)
In no particular order, here’s the list:

“In 2019, we will start to see…” Avi Reichental, Founder and CEO, XponentialWorks”
“…we’ll begin to see “ Josh James, Founder and CEO, Domo
“…But soon you’ll start seeing”  Tien Tzuo, CEO & Founder, Zuora
” is poised to accelerate,“ Ashish Jain, Managing Director of Data Sciences, GE Ventures
“will begin to” Sean Byrnes, CEO and co-founder, Outlier (nevertheless, great observation)
“everybody is going to start learning” Aman Naimat, CTO, Demandbase
“we are going to see a shift toward utilizing AI for social good” Natan Barak, CEO and Founder, mPrest (agreed)
“will move away from “ Ronny Cohen, CEO and Co-founder, VAYAVISION
“AI is making its impact felt” Guy Zipori, CEO, Skyline AI
“will be used” Dana Chanan, CEO and Co-Founder, Sweetch
“The ability to understand human emotions and cognitive states will become part of ” Rana el Kaliouby, PhD, CEO and co-founder, Affectiva
“metadata tagging will become” Jon Toor, CMO, Cloudian
“Centralized data will be replaced by a single view of all data.” Dan Sommer, Senior Director, Qlik
” will continue to” Roman Stanek, CEO, GoodData
“I will start to become” Mikael Johnsson, Co-founder, Oxx
“Moving forward, we’re going to see artificial intelligence (AI) emerge” Kailem Anderson, Vice President of Software and Services, Ciena
“Artificial Intelligence will increasingly be used” Nathaniel Borenstein, Chief Scientist, Mimecast
“Artificial intelligence companies begin “ Alan O’Herliy, CEO, Everseen
“2019 will see more adoption” Fayez Mohamood, CEO, Bluecore
“Artificial intelligence will become more prominent” Jeff Somers, President, Insureon
“I-enabled search and analytics solutions will become more prevalent in 2019.” Kamran Khan, Managing Director of Search and Content Analytics, Accenture Applied Intelligence
“We’ll begin seeing AI integrated more deeply into the day-to-day employee experience” Gretchen Alarcon, GVP of HCM Strategy, Oracle
“2019, we are beginning to see” Aldo Carrasco, CEO, InterVenn Biosciences
“Machines will begin to understand cause and effect” Michael Wu, Ph.D., Chief AI Strategist, PROS

The article is definitely worth reading. My analysis of squishy predictions has nothing to do with the quality and thoughtfulness of the authors. By the way – anyone else notice that virtually all of the above come from vendors, which in turn means some marketing or PR wonk had their sticky paws on the project?
As colleague Stuart Lauchlan might say:

Shout out to the plucky PR firms whose clients have finally signed off on their 2019 Predictions – admire the nerve of sending them out on 15th January, but really, please don't circle back on them to see if I want to talk to the client.
— Stuart Lauchlan (@WhoStu) January 15, 2019

Image credit - Photo by Sasha • Stories on UnsplashRead more on: Analytics planning and data analysis 