
Shantanu Narayen
Adobe’s cloud gambit continues to pay off in terms of revenue growth rates of 20.4% for the firm’s second quarter, but Wall Street’s not happy with conservative projections for the coming months. 
Net income for Q2 rose to $244.1 million, up year-on-year from $147.5 million, on revenue up from $1.16 billion to $1.40 billion. But cautious growth projections for the third quarter put pressure on the Adobe stock price yesterday. 
In the Digital Media business Q2 annualized recurring revenue was $3.41 billion, a net increase of $285 million.
Creative Cloud revenue was $755 million, 37% up year-on-year, while Marketing Cloud revenue was $385 million. Document Cloud came in at $188 million. 
Q2 customer wins included Southwest Airlines, eBay, the NFL, FedEx, American Red Cross, Logitech and Singapore Workforce Development Agency. Adobe CEO Shantanu Narayen said the breadth of the Adobe digital portfolio – including Creative Cloud and Marketing Cloud – is appealing to customers:


Dealing with digital disruption is the main concern we hear about in every meeting we have with business, education and government leaders the world over. 
A key strategy for dealing with this disruption is to deliver a compelling digital experience, which is the new basis for customer satisfaction, loyalty and growth. 
This business imperative creates great opportunity for Adobe. We are the only company that helps with every stage of a digital experience from creation through monetization.
There isn’t a customer on the planet that we go visit where digital disruption is not top of mind, it’s a line item in everybody’s budget and they are all talking about how they are going to aggressively transition to digital experiences. 

He added that the firm’s shift to an enterprise subscription model is paying off: 

Three years ago, when we started this move of having enterprise customers license our software rather than buy it outright, we were just starting on this journey. It was nice, as those three-year terms are coming up, to see that there is actually a fairly nice up-sell associated with that. People are now adopting the entire Creative Cloud. They may have only had single applications there and are adopting services. 
So, we certainly will continue to focus on that trend of driving significant up-sell as people come up for retention and demonstrating the value. 

Image credit - Adobe Read more on: Digital and content marketingUX and application design 