
Going digital
Digital services now make up 13.7% of outsourcing giant Tata Consultancy Service’s (TCS) revenues, although the firm has just turned in its fifth consecutive quarter of declining growth overall.
India’s largest IT outsourcing company, TCS turned in fourth quarter revenues of Rs27,364 crore ($4.15 billion) , while net profit was flat at Rs6,083.4 crore. ($926 million)
The third quarter is typically slower for TCS – impacted by UK and US holidays – but this year the firm was also impacted by the December flooding in Chennai, one of TCS’s biggest delivery centers, employing 65,000 staff. The firm had already warned the market that the flooding would have a “material impact” on its numbers.
N Chandrasekaran, CEO and Managing Director of TCS, says the direction of travel for the firm is clear:
Digital will remain the core focus for enterprise IT in 2016 as our customers respond to competition in a global economy driven by real-time insights.
TCS sequential quarterly digital growth was 4%, perhaps at the lower end compared to some of the other global services houses. But Chandrasekaran insisted:
I think digital as a business will continue to grow very rapidly, to the extent that most of the business you do will become digital at some point in time. Currently [digital revenues] are at 13.7%. This number will keep going up. At some point in time we will need a different metric because this is not the metric by which you can continue to measure, because everything will become digital at some point in time. In a very weak quarter like Q3, I think 4% sequential growth in digital is pretty good, I would take it I would always take that.
He added:
The total size of the digital engagement is consistently increasing, but the way these engagements get done is as a large chunk of budget allocated within the company but a number of small projects. Don’t be like you’ve signed a huge large contract, which is big size. Yes, you will have visibility to the budget but the budget is done, is implemented through multiple projects.
There is clear demand for TCS’s digital portfolio, Chandrasekaran said:
TCS is also getting a lot of traction for its digital platform and all our platforms including iON Assessment, our HR platform Croma, TAP which is our accounts payable digital platform, our digital merchandising platform Optumera, our platform on Hadoop for data archival and the efficiency active archive, our Intelligent Urban Exchange which is our Smart City platform, our customer insights platform, and ignio also a traction of this with customers during the quarter.
Our deal wins have been very good. We had nine signings which are of importance and they came, three from banking and one is from insurance, manufacturing, retail, telecom, utilities and travel. From a geography-wide, we had three wins in North America, three in Europe, one in UK, and two in Latin America. And our digital engagement wins have been solid.
He dismissed suggestions that the competitive landscape is becoming more and more characterised by pricing battles:
There will always be deal where somebody is bidding irrationally, you cannot extrapolate it. There will be reasons that somebody is bidding irrationally. If it becomes an extreme level of irrationalization, then we need to know where you stop. I think in any negotiation that is true whether it is in IT services or anywhere else. If it happens, then you have to take a call as you deem appropriate for your company.
Cloudy thinking
While the emphasis is clearly on digital, TCS’s more traditional enterprise systems implementation business is still in play, said Chandrasekaran, with increasing focus on cloud roll outs:
There are a lot of deals in Salesforce and our business has been SAP and Oracle. In one quarter we see some traction in SAP, another quarter we’ve seen traction in Oracle, but our package implementation business has multiple product lines apart from SAP, Oracle and Salesforce. There are a number of other products also we are doing it.
But overall, I think in the package implementation that is based on cloud, there is going to be a lot of traction. So it will not be standalone package implementation, it will be more cloud-based. Salesforce is very cloud-based but even in other product lines, as long as they’re cloud-based, you will see a lot of traction moving forward.
The cloud implementations will gain more momentum, not only in the, let’s say, the Oracle space, but there are number of cloud implementations in many other areas like HR, like sales and many other areas, marketing cloud and so many other areas cloud platforms are emerging and that should pick up momentum going forward.
He added:
Customers will definitely look at their infrastructure and have a strategy to move to a hybrid cloud, which is both private on site, on-premise as well off-premise, as well as public cloud infrastructure. That is a big opportunity. On top of that, all the applications are to be migrated. We have invested significantly in all these partnerships and all the different types of services that we can bring to bear, both at the infrastructure layer and at application layer and also at the migrating customers to enterprise cloud platforms layer.
My take
Nothing much there to scare the horses, even if there’s nothing much standing out as being particularly impressive or ground-breaking. Attention will now turn to rival Infosys which reports its numbers tomorrow.
Read more on: Cloud platforms - infrastructure and architectureDigital transformation - frictionless enterpriseOutsourcingThe new professional and IT as a service 