
A recent analysis entitled We Are Not a Nation of Freelancers caught my attention. Picking up on a number of statistical analyses for the US market, the author argues:
In the future, new technology and businesses may herald a different world for workers. But for now, the “gig economy” and a “nation of freelancers” remains a phenomenon on the margins of the labor market.
Key data points include the assertion that full time employment is returning to normal and that the number of people reporting multiple jobs is on the decline.
Anyone who has been following tech trends will know this runs counter to the perceived wisdom that contingent labor is growing at an increased rate and that forms need too get smarter about its hiring. Add in trends like the rise of Uber, Lyft, AirBnB and many other so-called sharing economies from which earnings are derived and the picture becomes more muddled.
On the other hand, check this from Boston.com:
The number of “contingent” U.S. employees, or workers who don’t have traditionally secure jobs, is growing, according to a new report by the U.S. Government Accountability Office (GAO).
Those numbers are based up on data from the Bureau of Labor Statistics. Whats going on?
Both stories point to changes in conditions in the post-recession period but I still got a sense of confusion. In anecdotal conversations among people in my locality there are several things going on:

Those in well paid, technology led industries are certainly not concerned about a second job.
Those who are in the minimum wage trades with no real ability to augment through tips are holding down at least two jobs.
Those who are in trades where tipping is the norm are on the edge of holding down more than one job but are routinely under declaring income to the IRS by 25-40% of the tips they receive. This is a common and unsurprising practice but one I suspect has become more institutionalized since 2008.

As I have explained in the distant past, once the recession but in Europe, you could not get house maintenance work done unless it was for cash as individuals and families sought to find new ways to maintain living standards in declining economies.
Even so, the indicators remain confusing and for explanation I turned to the HR Tech Conference group on LinkedIn. Lisa Rowan, research director HR at IDC had this to say:
This actually doesn’t surprise me. We’ve been yapping about the rise in contingent labor for years but to me it always ebbs and flows due to economic conditions.
I suspect Rowan is right, which gives me a neat way to parse this to technology trends.
If your business is dependent upon unskilled or semi-skilled contingent labor, then is there much point in recruitment technology investing beyond planning? What benefit would you really get? On the other hand, if you are moving to a more fluid workforce anyway, there have to be trade offs between workforce stability and cost effectiveness. Those are business decisions that may be helped through the smart use of labor planning but, I venture, are of limited value when skills are in short demand.
In short – when it comes to thinking about technology that addresses contingent labor issues, be very clear you understand the use cases before investing and even then, think very carefully about cost benefits – they might be illusory or ephemeral.
Read more on: Future of work 