
Ever since the re-engineering effort that concluded in February, we’ve been thinking about the Next Big Thing for diginomica and its readers. We quickly figured out that we should strive towards bringing personalization to the more than 10,000 email subscribers we already have and the more than 120,000 regular monthly readers.
One approach was to provide subscribers with a choice about the content they get.
We set up a signup form that covered the 18 main topic areas Jon Reed and Phil Wainewright had prepared and that appear as landing pages inside diginomica. Here’s an example from HR but there are many others. Each of those pages is hand curated by one of the core team.
We assumed that many people would choose a single subject or maybe two subjects. We didn’t anticipate that people would sign up for five or six subject areas. Which, of course, is exactly what they did.
That presented us with a dilemma. Do we send many emails to single readers that cover all their preferences in bite sized pieces or a single humungous email? Neither made sense because we already know that people’s attention spans are such that they would likely be dis-satisfied whichever method we chose. It was also obvious that attempting to provide content this way would be cumbersome and time-consuming because there’s no good way to automate the selection of what is, in reality, random content. Even if we could do that then what would that mean for content selection?
Instead, we set out to find a solution that could learn from people’s behavior and then send emails that reflect those behaviors. In short, it would not matter what any individual signed up for, what matters is what they’re interested in at that moment in time. That led us to Boomtrain.
Over the last few weeks, we have been working with Boomtrain to create content pages that you’ll want to read and that is based upon your interest as learned from your behavior on the site.
Will it work flawlessly from the get go? No. Boomtrain uses machine learning to identify your preferences over time, building a picture of your interests in the moment so that you get what you want and not what we think might be useful.
Over time, we will learn as well because as both the list of subscribers grows and our content continues to evolve, we will discover the subject matters that mean the most to the whole readership. We can then start to tailor what we deliver accordingly.
We already know for instance that there is plenty of interest in UK and European government issues. We also know there is significant interest in the top vendors we cover. We also want to get closer to certain industry verticals rather than simply concentrate on the buzzword du jour because we know that industries have different emphases. We think machine learning techniques are the way to manage that set of content creation, development and delivery processes.
We’re now at a point where this service is almost ready to go. We expect it to start delivering content sometime in the next week. If you’re an email subscriber then please watch out for our content. And please provide feedback. We want this to work for you. If you’re not an email subscriber then consider signing up. The process takes no more than one minute.
Here is a video Jon Reed and I shot that covers this topic. FYI – Jon has done a lot of the heavy lifting around managing the project progress and deserves a lot of credit for detailing the way this solution works.

Image credit - via fotoliaRead more on: Analytics planning and data analysis 