
Oprah’s campaign
Shareholder Oprah Winfrey and one-year-in CEO Mindy Crossman are delivering on their promise to make the new Weight Watchers motto of ‘healthy is the new skinny’ a revenue driving, subscription focused business that is underpinned by best-in-class digital technology.
The company’s latest results were impressive in that they highlighted how Weight Watchers has increased its subscriber base worldwide by 1 million people from a year ago and has seen revenues climb by 17.6% in its second quarter results.
And whilst those results may not have excited Wall Street hugely, I was more interested to note that the company’s subscriber paid weeks were up 27% year-over-year in Q2 with double-digit gains in all of its major geographies. And on a global basis, average retention continues to be well over nine months in both meetings and on online, which is an increase of more than 15% versus three years ago.
This perceived ‘stickiness’ with subscribers could well be down to the fact that Weight Watchers is shifting its focus from weight loss to ‘wellness’, but it could also be indicative of its digital investments.
A digital diet
On a call with investors, CEO Mindy Crossman and CFO Nicholas Hotchkin spoke extensively about the growth in mobile app engagement, the company’s decision to ditch traditional TV advertising in favour of digital marketing, how its cloud-based architecture will allow it to enter new geographies for the first time, and how it is expanding its footprint into San Francisco to support its tech investments.
Crossman said:
By presenting WW in new ways, we’re starting to attract a broader and more diverse audience, bringing in many new members who may not have considered Weight Watchers as a program for them in the past.
Similar to what we saw in the first quarter, in the U.S., more than 40% of our member signups in Q2 were new to WW, an increase in the proportion of first-time members compared to recent years.
To reward members for referring family and friends to the program, this summer, we added an Invite a Friend feature into our mobile app. When an invited friend signs up for WW, both members receive one free month added to their membership. So far, the program results are highly encouraging. In the U.S., more than 70% of those referred by Invite a Friend have signed up for membership, with over 70% of those referred becoming first-time WW members.
Crossman added that the app is playing a central role in Weight Watcher’s strategy of becoming a ‘wellness company’. She said:
As we have said previously, our aspiration is for the Weight Watchers app to become the world’s everything app for wellness. All of our 4.5 million subscribers have full access to our highly rated WW app, providing tools, content, connection, and inspiration anytime, anywhere. And we will continue to add content and features such as Invite a Friend, to make our app even more engaging and rewarding.
Looking at the WW app usage more closely for the first six months of 2018, on average, each month, approximately 1.3 million unique members have synced a fitness device, 1.8 million unique members engage on Connect, our digital social network community; 2.6 million unique members used our convenient barcode scanner; and 280 million times members tracked food. That’s 280 million opportunities for engagement. And as we know, engagement is correlated to both success on WW and longer retention.
2018 is on track to be an important and memorable year for WW. Our business is strong, supported by a mobile-first technology platform and agile development approach, a test and learn mindset, focused on consumer insights and a brand-led culture.
New opportunities
Crossman added that to support the changes at Weight Watchers, the company has been focused on strengthening teams and putting the building blocks in place to have a “world-class, tech-enabled organisation”. She said that the business is added tech and digital product talent to “fuel innovation” and that in late October Weight Watchers will be moving into new San Francisco office space to support these endeavours.
Also, interestingly, CFO Nicholas Hotchkin said that the company is so pleased with its digital marketing channels that it has decided not to run TV advertising in its upcoming fall marketing campaign. Marketing expense in 2018 is expected to be approximately $240 million or flat year-over-year as a percent of sales.
In addition, Hotchkin added that the company’s cloud based architecture will enable it to enter new markets. He said:
For the leading global digital app and with a modern cloud-based tech architecture, we’ve certainly got international market entry opportunities that wouldn’t have been easily accessible to us until recently. And with just having a small Latin America business in Brazil but no presence in any other markets there and no presence in Asia-Pacific, I’m very excited about those international market opportunities.
And the ability to enter a new market with our digital subscription offering and while at the same time, providing some elements of human engagement, the thing that makes us really special and [we are] really having a good time working on that initiative with the team.
My take
Full steam ahead for digital wellness at Weight Watchers. The investments appear to be paying off and the executive team appears to have thought through how its business model can adapt in a modern, digital environment. If it can execute, it looks set to reap the rewards.
Image credit - Via Weigth Watchers Read more on: Digital enterprise in the real worldHealthcare transformation 