
Marketers spend advertising fortunes on Facebook and Twitter so when Marc Benioff, Salesforce CEO and one of the world’s great marketers quits Facebook it might be seen as a big deal. But is it?
Check this exchange outlined by Business Insider:

@Scobleizer Yes I’m on a FB pause. It was too overwhelming to keep up to date on TWTR and FB after Dreamforce. I needed to reduce.
— Marc Benioff (@Benioff) September 27, 2015
Benioff then expanded on why: 

“It’s not you, it’s me.” Explaining to @sherylsandberg tonight why I left Facebook. pic.twitter.com/vv8KPgiIAx
— Marc Benioff (@Benioff) September 30, 2015


Twitter and Facebook are constant topics of conversation. Which is better? Which has more usefulness? are two recurring themes. The one that bothers me most – which is the largest and most annoying echo chamber?
If you check through the Storify Holger Mueller posted on Workday Rising’s keynote, you can instantly see what I mean. There may be a lot of interest in a topic but there are precious few voices from a hall of 5,500 people and beyond. Having said that, the current number of people who have viewed it is an impressive 1,113.
Mueller and I discussed this the other week and I had hoped to get a podcast out from that conversation. Sadly, technical SNAFUs make that impossible. Nonetheless, Mueller’s central argument is that he uses Storify, which aggregates curated Tweets as a form of notebook for his further analysis on a topic. That is a very good use case but it doesn’t overcome the problem I see of  incessant Tweeting at events. Neither does it overcome the 140 character limit which has led to a degree of foreshortening of words which, in some cases, require deciphering. Neither does it help the ordinary person from understanding why certain hashtags matter. In short, Twitter inadvertently creates the conditions under which you end up in an echo chamber that only the chosen few can possibly comprehend.
Facebook on the other hand provides a much richer experience. It is possible to have nuanced conversations that are impossible on Twitter. I personally find that valuable. Here’s an example:

The big problem with Facebook is that it is rapidly becoming a walled garden where Twitter is largely public. In theory then, that means you should be able to reach a much larger audience on Twitter than you can on Facebook — if that’s your objective.
So does Benioff’s exit from Facebook matter? I think that largely depends on your use case and, it would seem, time constraints, but I see room for both. Despite its utility, my concerns about Twitter as an echo chamber remain and that is reflected in the number of people I know who don’t ‘get’ Twitter but instantly understand where Facebook can fit into their lives.
What do you think?
Read more on: Digital and content marketingSocial 