
(1) Technology is replacing tactics is replacing strategy
With the click of a button, you can reach a lot of people. Bad marketing fatigues your database and people will start opting out, or worse, stop paying attention. It’s better to have a hundred highly engaged discussions.
Why?  Marketing is at a crossroads. It needs to think of innovative ways to capture the attention of prospects and keep the attention of customers. They have no choice but to reach out and try new things. Status quo isn’t going to pay the bills. But here’s the thing: marketers are too quick to try new tactics and technology when they know they are building on shaky foundations. There is a happy medium between these two ends of the spectrum, and the most successful marketers will find it.

Four things marketers should not do in 2018 – and one they should
How innovative will marketers be in 2018?
Focus your content marketing, but don’t have tunnel vision

(2) On picking the best martech
Marketers have an incredible array of choices. But they often see it as a bad thing because they have to figure out how it all fits together and then integrate it and keep it running. There is a lot of work involved. Brinker believes it should be the industry’s collective goal to eliminate as many of these pain points as possible. He says it’s technically feasible.
Why? Marketers are obsessed with all the shiny new toys. But when is enough enough? Yes, there are new technologies that can help move the needle, but implementing something new just because it’s in vogue will only lead to problems. Strategy trumps all – without it – you just have a bunch of software.

Don’t proceed with marketing technology until you have a strategy
Goodbye spreadsheets, hello collaborative marketing network
Stop procrastinating and get moving on video marketing
Event marketing that focuses on the attendee and not the vendor

(3) The people that support your customer experiences
…companies need to reach out and find people to help them authentically communicate the value of their brand and the products and services they sell.
Why? I chose to bucket a couple of ideas under one section for a very important reason – it takes a lot of people to help a company sell its products and services. It’s not just the marketing team, and it’s not just the sales team. It’s your employees and your current customers. You have to think about what things you need to do to bring these voices into your marketing, sales and support programs in ways that positively influence others. It’s not simple and there is no right answer, but it is necessary.

If you’re serious about digital transformation, start with employee experience
How much can you really trust user-generated content?
How to find the right influencers for your brand – and weed out the fakes

(4) Content is critical – but we don’t manage it well
The right content, delivered at the right time to the right person or audience is critical to business success because it is what people are looking for. Content about your product, content about the market or industry, content about the best way to do things or the lessons learned from others. There is a lot of content you can create and share that brings value to your company.
Why? Content is the lifeblood of any marketing program. Marketers are struggling not only with developing the right content but the right amount. And then there’s managing that content and creating it in a way that it’s easily reused and discarded when it’s no longer valuable. We have to stop creating content for the sake of creating content. Strategy is critical – not only to determine what to create for who but to determine how we can create it effectively.
Is your content a business asset or a liability?
(5) Tips to improve the customer experience
Data silos and company politics exist in many companies, and the first thing that has to happen is the breakdown of those silos and a common understanding that access to all data is critical. You might need to find a way to ensure departments that data which doesn’t reflect a department in a positive light isn’t held against them. Instead, they should view it as an opportunity to improve their department and how they deal with customers.
Why? I feel like I don’t need to say a lot of improving customer experience. If you want customers and you want to keep customers, then you should be laser-focused on the experience. The best companies work across organizational boundaries to think about the complete customer lifecycle. They also think about channels, including social and offline. Operating each channel in a silo, or each department in a silo only frustrates customers.

How do we build a customer experience ecosystem?
How do we get past social silos to a better customer experience?
Customer identity management has a big impact on customer 
For best omni-channel results, don’t forget the physical

(6) The CMO role continues to evolve
So what does a CMO do? First of all, Blank said, they need to be upfront and realistic to management about what they can accomplish. CMOs need to be very aware of their market and how that affects what they do. They also need to be clear that transformation takes time and things will change over a few years, not one year. And that means they need to have a plan that addresses short-term and longer-term changes, avoiding any talk of quick fixes.
Why? The CMO continues to play a bigger role in most organizations. Or do they? The role continues to evolve; some are doing more, some less. For those taking on more responsibility, working across departments has become a necessity and winning over the heads of other departments isn’t easy. I think the biggest challenge that could potentially pull the CMO into a lesser role is their inability to wrap their head around the data. It’s all about the data.

To have or not to have a CMO
The changing role of the CMO – with Josh Epstein of Kaminario
Gigya’s Jason Rose – from accountant to data-driven marketer

(7) Getting on board account-based marketing
Many companies guess at their best target accounts or allow sales to hand-pick their favorites and then jump right into campaigns. That’s really not going to yield a long-term revenue strategy that the company desires.
Why? I kicked off 2017 with an in-depth look at account-based marketing – then it was new – ish and “the thing” for marketers to start doing. It’s the end of the year and ABM is now a staple in almost every marketer’s inventory of strategies. But experience is showing there is still much work required to do it right. Should you do ABM? If you are a B2B company, absolutely. But don’t jump into it without a good plan.

Exclusive – ITSMA, Demandbase partner to support the future of ABM
Account-based marketing – get your foundation right
Account-based marketing III – metrics, post-acquisition support and relationships
The tactics, content and technology behind account-based marketing

(8) The biggest topic of 2017
80% of marketers believe that AI will revolutionize marketing in the next five years. But right now, only 10% of them are using it. It’s more concerning to see that only 26% confidently understand how AI is used in marketing. …Naimat said that marketers are frustrated at passing leads over to sales and having them drop. They want the ability to provide insights into accounts that will tell salespeople what to do next. The demand for better insights makes sense when you think about the demands marketers face today to drive top-line revenue. Naimat said marketers are pushing for technology to give them this ability to drive ROI.
Why? There is too much data to analyze manually. But the insights it provides marketers is critical. That’s why everyone is talking about AI – whether they truly understand what it means or not (and I don’t think everyone does). The primary goal of any software that has an element of AI is to provide insights into customers that we might otherwise not be able to see through all the data. Sometimes, it even automates tasks leveraging those insights.

The value AI brings to marketing
How machine learning is shaking up e-commerce and customer engagement
Does Adgorithms have the secret sauce for artificial intelligence marketing?
Can IBM’s Watson Marketing Insight give actionable insights to marketers?

(9) Sales and Marketing play in the same sandbox
Sales enablement is interesting to talk about for a few reasons. First, Sales needs content. Second, Sales needs similar, if not the same, types of tools that Marketing uses to find and build relationships with customers. While we can see both these things are necessary, we can also see that many organizations fall short in providing one or both of these.
Why? Two completely separate groups, but Sales and Marketing share many of the same goals and the same tools. Marketing isn’t only around to support Sales, but they must play a key role in the development of the right content for Sales to ensure the messaging is on target, and they must ensure only the best leads get passed on. Could you merge these two groups? I don’t think so, but they do need to effectively work together – a big goal for 2018.

Can predictive bring sales and marketing together?
To get content right, you must enable sales

(10) Digital Transformation
Organizations need to stop thinking about digital transformation as an IT project. Digital transformation is more than simply implementing new and innovative technology; it’s about identifying how the technology impacts the business – its customers, its employees, its partners – to drive outcomes that are successful for everyone….Some might argue the CMO is there.
Why? The quote above is from March of 2017. Have organizations made head roads into their approach this year? Recent studies show there’s a lot more room for change. It’s such a huge mind-shift for many companies, and baby steps might be the only way forward. I do wonder though – at what point will it be too late?

How digital transformation is driving change in the marketing organization
Keeping pace with digital transformation? It’s a long hard road

Image credit - Freeimages.com Read more on: Content marketingCRM and customer experienceDigital and content marketingMachine intelligence and AI 