
Fresh from its $500 million funding round last week (and $4.5 billion valuation), HR and benefits automation vendor Zenefits today announces additional functionality which it claims brings it into direct competition with enterprise HR offerings.
Zenefits, billed alternately as (depending on your point of view) the fastest growing or the biggest bust in SaaS history, has grown to a customer base of 10,000 SMB companies since its launch in April 2013. To date, its main functionality has been to automate basic HR administration around onboarding, compliance, payroll, health insurance and other benefits. It offers its software free of charge and makes money from brokerage fees on the health insurance it sells.
Today’s announcement adds automated approval workflow and HR analytics, both also free of charge. The company says that both products support larger enterprises “without the need for a lengthy, costly consulting phase” as they are implemented automatically.

Zenefits for Managers delegates to managers the ability to initiate HR changes such as adding new hires, updating job titles, and making salary adjustments. The aim is to relieve the burden on HR administrators or business owners, who can still maintain full control and visibility over workforce changes through the approval structures, which the software sets up automatically.
Zenefits Business Intelligence provides analytics reports and visualizations across key HR statistics such as headcount, compensation, and turnover. The software automatically creates an initial set of custom reports and managers and administrators can sort and filter data to pinpoint specific areas across multiple departments and locations.

Having grown to $20 million revenues in 2014 from $1 million in its first nine months of operation, Zenefits is experiencing growth that its own CEO has described as “terrifying”. It is doing so by taking on insurance industry regulators in each of the 48 US states in which it currently operates. Opponents argue that giving away its software free-of-charge is effectively an inducement to buy health insurance, in contravention of the rules under which traditional brokers operate. Zenefits has so far been successful in contending that it doesn’t break the rules because companies don’t have to buy insurance to be able to use its software.
The company’s backers liken it to other fast-rising Silicon Valley startups that are challenging established, regulated industries, such as Uber and Airbnb. Critics argue that it is underestimating the complexity of benefits and HR administration and could be exposed to future liability claims that will undermine its efforts to scale to profitability.
After last week’s $500 million Series C funding, Zenefits is now the largest investment ever made by well-known Silicon Valley VC firm Andreesen Horowitz, at which former SuccessFactors CEO Lars Dalgaard is a general partner. The funding was raised at a $4.5 billion valuation, which represents a massive 45x multiple of the company’s target annual recurring revenue of $100 million by the end of this year.
Among the company’s thousand-plus employees are a number of recent star hires from the HR and enterprise software world, including controversial Yammer founder and PayPal’s first COO David Sacks, Mike Leary, former head of global recruiting at SAP and Patrick Saeger, former VP of global customer success at SuccessFactors.
My take
This is a classic value network play in which a newcomer disrupts an ossified, regulated market by linking buyers to sellers in a new way. If Zenefits really can scale out a hassle-free HR automation tool and fund it out of its cut of health insurance then it’s worth the company plowing money in now to build rapid scale into that new network.
The valuation is over-the-top but it’s in line with current market pricing. One to watch.
Disclosure: SAP is a diginomica premier partner.

Read more on: Frictionless enterpriseHCM and the digital future of workHR admin and payroll 