
Well, it looks like Neil from the Time Warner Call Center was right – The Comcast/Time Warner merger is kaput, belly-up, officially added to the list of wee wins for the American consumer. But fear not, oligopoly buffs, Charter Cable is already sniffing around the carcass.
Though Consumerist rightly claimed a consumer victory, the reality is less pleasant. The consumer benefits whenever there is valid competition. Given that there is at least a decent range of choice in mobile carriers, I’d argue that broadband access/choice is the critical digital issue for U.S. consumers.
Municipal broadband and/or Google Fiber have notched some nice success stories, but adding such services remains an uphill battle in most states. with cable companies doing their darndest to limit new consumer broadband options.
The U.S. has reached a critical point in the digital divide. High speed broadband is not negotiable for those whose professional lives are dependent on resource-hogging software and online services. Those who lack such access are falling behind, and the fantasy that mobile wireless can fill that gap – at least with today’s wifi speeds and spottiness – is just that: a fantasy.
In Massachusetts (to the west of my at-least-you’ve-got-Comcast town), this issue has been keenly felt by the “WiredWest” organization, which has learned the hard way that getting rural communities on broadband ain’t easy. Wired West’s recent open letter documents the struggle to offer real fiber broadband to communities where DSL might offer a (temporary) mediocre option, but hardly a great alternative given the limited shelf life of copper phone lines.
Frame this issue as one of consumers versus oligopolies, and today can be seen as a small win. (The “unbundling” content debate sparked by Verizion Fios is another unfolding consumer issue to watch)
But throw in the income and skills gap lack of broadband access creates, and there isn’t much time for a victory lap.

Image credit: Man with papers © Tom Wang, Fotolia.com

 
Read more on: e-commerceFuture of work 