
Attempts to deliver cross-government digital transformation are at risk and the Government Digital Service’s ambitious platform approach to delivering services needs a rethink, according to a report released this week by an influential think tank.
The Institute for Government argues that the the progress on digital transformation in Whitehall has thus far been somewhat piecemeal, and that for widespread and significant change to take hold, sustained attention needs to be given to the digital agenda – which may not happen in the wake of the EU referendum result.
Equally, the think tank believes that for true digital transformation across the whole of government, the agenda needs to be set by those at the very top of government – not just department or digital heads. Daniel Thornton,author of the report, states:
Tinkering around the edges of digital government has taken us only so far – now we need a fundamental change in the government’s approach. The starting point is recognising that digital is not just for geeks anymore – everyone in government must work to make it a success.
There are huge potential savings to be made if the Government gets this right – which makes it all the more disappointing that the PM and Chancellor have not been as explicit about their commitment to digital government as their predecessors.
Elsewhere, challenges include in-sourcing legacy IT, the need to attract digital talent in a highly competitive market and shifting the focus from fringe activities to organisation-wide change.
Moving to the next stage
The Institute for Government report outlines how Whitehall has struggled to move from its rather focused digital activities to embedded digital transformation across government. It highlights that since the year 2000, over £10 billion has been wasted on government IT, and as a result it cannot take for granted that successful change will take place.
The report notes that there has been a lot of “conflict and resistance” to change, but now the challenge is moving from the “relatively small” to the “big” – the changes that will really improve services and save money.
However, these changes will extend far beyond the remit of the CIO and digital officers, says the think tank. And making it happen will require a big increase in the capability of the leadership of departments and agencies.
Sourcing skills has been a long-standing blocker for successful delivery of digital services in government. The pain in finding the right digital skills, in a highly competitive market, working in organisations that aren’t used to needing such talent, has been well documented.
Whilst GDS and some departments have been fairly successful in attracting dedicated workers that are passionate about changing the way that government works – ultimately the hiring practices for digital talent needs to be amended (a work in progress) and more money needs to be offered to digital employees. There is a huge problem with the supply of digital skills in the UK labour market, driving wages up. The report recommends:
Government should promptly conclude its review of reward structures and career paths for
digital specialists and commit to implementing its recommendations. The head of digital, data and technology professions and the chief people officer should press ahead with developing the digital profession. The Cabinet Office (including GDS) and departments should accelerate building centres of digital expertise outside London.
The Institute for Government also believes that the head of the civil service should ensure that leaders of departments take time to learn from experienced public and private sector peers about how to lead digital transformation, and that the Major Projects Leadership Academy should prepare officials for managing transformation programmes.
Elsewhere, the think tank report also outlines the challenges in departments in-sourcing legacy IT that has been supporting citizen services for decades. The report recognises that for departments to become more agile and work in an iterative way, in-sourcing and modernising technology is often required.
These outsourced systems have lefts capability gaps in the departments and the Institute for Government report notes that the systems themselves are “slow, keep data fragmented and prevent services from being joined up”. It notes:
New IT is more flexible and can work as an ecosystem, rather than as a series of silos, creating economies of scale and joined-up services. Bringing IT in-house by ending large contracts is often necessary to make these changes.
However, as we have seen in numerous examples, bringing this IT in-house presents huge challenges – not all of them technical – and departments such as HMRC have taken years to try and figure out how to make in-sourcing possible. The report states:
At HMRC, we heard several examples of legislation that was getting in the way of providing
simple, joined-up services: different tax schemes have different definitions of a household, an address and income written into the law. Similarly, the Carer’s Allowance service at DWP was hampered by the need for a signature on paper. In its previous form, the online service had required applicants to print off a final declaration, sign it and send it in. It took a collaborative effort between policy, legal, security and digital teams – bolstered by evidence of the problems that this signature process caused for claimants – to change the policy rules and allow an online declaration.
Sometimes, these barriers are about customs rather than legislation, but it takes knowledge and understanding of the policy process to unpick this. For instance, DVLA had long assumed that its automatic number plate recognition technology had to be approved by the Home Office, when a new policy director arrived who began asking why this was. After six months of persistent questioning, it became clear that this assumption had no legislative basis, which has opened up many new possibilities for all of DVLA’s enforcement activities.
Leadership and the role of GDS
In recent months we have seen a number of changes in digital leadership in Whitehall – with GDS chief Stephen Foreshew-Cain being replaced by business change boss at DWP, Kevin Cunnington, and a number of other digital heads being removed or leaving. It was described by one ex-GDS employee as “the day of long digital knives”.
On top of this, we’ve also had the change in Prime Minister and ministers across government, who are largely now focused on the challenge of Brexit. This change in leadership and the distraction of the EU referendum result could lead to a lack of momentum in delivering digital change. The report states:
At present, that leadership is not in place. GDS is under new management, and it will take some time to solidify their approach to cross-government digital change. Government itself is under new management, with a new set of ministers (including at the Cabinet Office) busy getting to grips with their new policy agendas. Everyone – politicians and officials – is distracted by the challenge of preparing for Brexit.
We have reached a tipping point. If the leadership does not emerge to drive the changes, there is a risk that digital teams will continue to be viewed as website designers, brought in only at the very end of policy design processes. There is a risk that new governance models will not be generated, leading to the rejection or mishandling of agile project management. There is a risk that insufficient investment will be made in the capabilities needed to build new services, leading to poor quality; or to manage the newly in-house IT infrastructure, leading to failure.
So how should GDS progress its agenda going forward? The organisation has come under fire in recent months for being too large and for becoming a ‘software shop’ that is focused on building services, rather than buying readily available commercial alternatives.
The latter point being in regard to its Government-as-a-Platform strategy, which focuses on building common services that can be replicated and used across government. For example, GOV.UK replaced almost all of the central government’s disparate websites, and GOV.UK Verify will work as an identity authentication system for all of government to use.
The Institute for Government believes that GDS should back away from this strategy, and only focus on building ‘platform’ services where there are no commercial services available. It states:
Support for this programme in departments has been mixed. For example, it has been reported that HMRC – which is responsible for a large proportion of government transactions – is not planning to use Verify. This risks duplication, which will be expensive for government and bad for users. But reticence to use centrally built applications is understandable. If departments’ online services are still largely bound up with their legacy systems (as they mostly are), then integrating new, untested elements that they do not own increases risk.
In other places, departments are forging ahead with their own digital transformation at a pace that outstrips GDS. As one interviewee put it: “Departments have massive services, with millions of customers that they have to serve now. We can’t wait, we can’t afford to wait.
The alternative is for GDS to focus exclusively on ensuring that development teams adhere to open standards, so that the things they build can interact with, and make use of, applications built elsewhere in government, or by private providers. In some cases, it may be cheaper and more effective for departments to use commercially provided applications – for activities such as sending text messages – rather than a centrally built government one. Equally, they may share applications that have been built in other departments.
I’d argue that GDS’ platform strategy IS a strategy of open standards – given that the platform services generally rely on integration with private companies (for example, Verify isn’t using government services to verify someone’s identity, it is using the private companies). However, this is a contentious point in government circles.
The think tank report states GDS should:
• GDS should continue to set, support and enforce central standards for user experience and
to ensure interoperability. Given the increasing risk of cyber-attacks, setting, supporting and
enforcing security standards is a high priority for the centre of government.
• The head of function for digital, data and technology should continue to oversee the
appointment of digital leaders, sitting on appointment panels for key appointments.
• GDS should use its expertise and strategic overview of government to identify priority
work and capability gaps, and deploy teams into departments to support their work
where necessary.
• GDS should place less emphasis on developing applications for cross-government use, only
doing so where the market does not provide good options.
• Departments and agencies, supported by GDS, need to work together more closely to develop
joined-up services and identify large savings.
My take
A comprehensive and interesting report by the Institute for Government. I think it’s particularly pertinent that government fix the leadership and skills shortages in Whitehall – although this isn’t going to be easy, without plugging those gaps we aren’t going to get anywhere. The think tank report rightly states that if this initial phase continues, digital risks becoming a internal consultancy in government, responding to requests in isolation.
Image credit - .GOV on blue digital background © Denys Rudyi - Fotolia.com; Changes signpost © pablographix - Fotolia.com; Graphic of hand holding magnifying glass over people © princerko - Fotolia.comRead more on: CentralDigital government and public services

