
 
British retailer Marks and Spencer has just announced an annual rise in profits for the first time in four years, with chief executive Marc Bolland claiming that he is transforming M&S into a “stronger, more agile business”.
However, the results also highlighted that sales on the M&S.com platform were down 2% for the year, following a troubled migration off of Amazon Services, having decided to bring the website back in-house.
Customers made a number of complaints about the new £150 million platform over the course of the year, where many were forced to re-register for existing accounts and where selecting variations on an item to buy was sometimes made impossible.
Sales performance at the retailer was also impacted by operational challenges at its online distribution centre over the Christmas period, but M&S claims that it has now learned from this and made improvements to its systems and further strengthened the logistics team.
The results also highlight that despite the poor performance of M&S.com early after the transition, it has now returned to growth and it expects this to continue over the course of the next year. M&S said:

Sales were down 2.0% over the year. Following the move from the Amazon platform, this was the first full year in which we had control of our website. Whilst it proved to be technically resilient, the new site presented a bigger change for our customers than we had anticipated, which impacted sales. We worked hard to address this and made a number of updates to improve the shopping experience.
As a result of these actions, sales returned to growth in the fourth quarter and we saw gradual improvement across all key metrics: traffic grew by 15%, customer satisfaction rose by 18% and conversion rates improved. Some 7m shoppers have registered on the new site.

And despite its digital problems, M&S still managed to beat analyst expectations, where its underlying profit before tax rose 6.1% to £661.2 million. The company’s chief executive Marc Bolland said:

We continued to control costs and capital expenditure tightly, resulting in significantly improved free cash flow. We are transforming M&S into a stronger, more agile business – putting the right infrastructure, capabilities and talent in place to drive our strategic priorities.


Read more on: Use cases 