
Prime Minister David Cameron has made a speech ahead of soon-to-be-announced results of the Chancellor’s Spending Review, which aims to identify how we can create a ‘smarter state’ in Britain. It’s essentially the government’s latest austerity drive, which is being pitched by the Cabinet as “difficult decisions to rebalance the economy”.
Whatever your political leanings, it’s inevitable that further cuts are coming and further efficiencies will have to be created over the next four years.
However, thankfully, the Prime Minister finally seems to be waking up to the fact that one of the best and quickest ways to deliver savings that don’t impact on service delivery is through a better use of technology.
David Cameron’s acknowledgement of the UK’s Government Digital Service has been somewhat thin on the ground in recent years and political support for the department has been questionable.
But today, in his speech, Cameron noted:
Businesses are always looking at ways to streamline their functions so they can become more effective. I would argue it’s an imperative – a moral imperative – for government to do the same. When money is tight, it’s simply unforgivable to waste taxpayers’ money.
More than that, efficient government can actually help with our progressive goals. Opening up contracts to small businesses spreads entrepreneurship and drives innovation. Closing down government offices and releasing government land can help build more homes and spread home ownership. Indeed, across the spectrum, there are opportunities for us to make a difference not just to people’s pockets but to people’s lives. For example, I believe the creation of the Government Digital Service is one of the great unsung triumphs of the last Parliament.
A whole series of things that used to involve complicated paperwork can now be done online – from registering to vote to paying your taxes. Part of the issue is our mentality. When a business uses technology to deliver more for less, it’s regarded as a good thing. But when government does it, it’s too often just badged as cuts.
It’s as though good business is somehow bad government. This attitude has to change.”
 The question now is, of course, will David Cameron follow through on his words and continue to fund the government department?
GDS is going through a period of change following the announcement that its director Mike Bracken will be stepping down at the end of the month, which resulted in a mass exodus of senior people close to him.
Questions have been raised about how much political support there is for the department’s efforts from Number 10 and the Treasury and whether or not we could be returning to practices of the past where everything is outsourced and projects routinely fail. I’m inclined to believe that’s taking assumptions a bit far, but it wouldn’t hurt if Cameron put his/our money where his mouth is and announced his political backing for GDS.
As we know, whilst a grass-roots approach to digital can work, there’s nothing like support from the top.
Read more on: Digital government and public services

