
Wells Fargo, JP Morgan Chase, Bank of America
Here at diginomica we’ve looked a lot at the digital disruption across the banking industry, from the transformation agenda of legacy banks such as Lloyds and NatWest to the ascendency of digitally-native rivals, such as Metro and Atom. 
At the recent Bernstein 32nd Annual Strategic Decisions conference, three of the leading US banking giants opened the kimono on some of their technology-driven initiatives, beginning with a bold claim from Bank of America CEO Brian Moynihan that his institution was more than keeping up with the pace of change. He declared: 

We are 15 years in a row, top online banking platform. I don’t think that [we’re] competing there, I think that’s dominating the thing, and for this year we’re number one in digital [in] a lot of the things. 

Moynihan’s advice to all banks is to keep in mind what you’re trying to achieve with digital investment and how it sits with your existing infrastructure: 

You have to back up and think about what you’re trying to achieve there, which is as much as everybody visualizes a customer that does this or does that, the reality is customers do everything and so you have to be confident across the entire platform.
So you have to have a great branch structure and great people on the branch. You have to have a great call [center] structure and great people on the call [center] structure. You have to have a great mobile, a great online, and all of the aspects of things. So you’d say, ‘So why do you need all that?’. Well you need it because of customers. 

It’s important to bear in mind how those customers want to transact with you – and it may not be at the digitally-savvy pace you’d like or expect, he added:


If you look at payments made by Bank of America customers through last week, there’s about trillion dollars of consumer payments initiated, and believe it or not, still 25% of them are checks, so you’ve got to be confident at checks. 

But you still have to invest in the future, whether that means enabling online scanning of checks or overhauling the ATM network: 

We’ve re-tooled the mobile platform continuously, invested three times the rate we’ve invested in the past even though we’re the number one [mobile] platform. And in the online platform…it’s actually starting to grow again because of tablets.

Different thinking
Investment in technology is essential, agreed Timothy Sloan, President and Chief Operating Officer of Wells Fargo Bank:


We’ve just rolled out our new mobile application. We’ve taken that mobile experience and now we’re rolling that out online so it looks very seamless. We’ve invested and now rolled out our own Wells Fargo wallet. So it’s things like that that where you have to invest in everything to be able to be differentiated.

He added that the incumbent banking establishment needs to get used to working in a different, technology-enabled way: 

It’s going to cost a significant amount of money to be able to be relevant to our retail customers a year from now, five years from now and ten years now because they’re used to technology being very convenient to them. They want to work the way they want, not necessarily the way that we want to, so it’s going to take a lot of investment.

When it comes to that spend, Sloan argued that being one of the big names in banking provides an advantage: 

Size alone is not the recipe to success, and we’ve seen that in the industry through multiple cycles and technology has been changing forever. But I do think technology used appropriately, so that you can get the benefit of the economies of scale that we have today, is a real differential advantage to us. 
But again it’s not just about your spend it’s about where you’re allocating your spend, how you’re using it in terms risk management on a more defensive way for example  on cyber security and things like that. But also offensively in terms of how are you using it to mine your data better, to be more responsive to your customers to be able to make the investments.

Again this means meeting the needs and desires of the customer wherever and however he or she wants: 

There is a misunderstanding today number one that nobody goes into branches or stores anymore. That’s just wrong. What you see is that millennials go into our stores just as often as baby boomers, maybe not as often as for example, my mom and dad who have to go into their Wells Fargo branch thankfully once a week, just to make sure that the money is there, even though I assure them that it’s there. 
We have to be able to provide our products and services on the retail side to our customers, the way that they want to interact with us. We can’t tell them to go here or go there. So that means that we’ve got to continue to invest in our stores. It means we’ve got to continue to invest in our ATMs, we’ve got to continue to invest in online and mobile and the phone bank. And we’ve got to make that experience with the customer seem seamless regardless of how they want to interact with us. 
To be able to do that, you got to have the right infrastructure in each one of those distribution systems, but also you’ve got to be able to continue to invest in the technology to keep all of that very fresh…We’ve just rolled out our new mobile application. We’ve taken that mobile experience and now we’re rolling that out online so it looks very seamless. We’ve invested and now rolled out our own Wells Fargo wallet. So it’s things like that that where you have to invest in everything to be able to be differentiated.

Forward-looking
Technology spend is essential, affirmed Jamie Dimon, CEO at JP Morgan Chase and Co., who said his institution is spending $3 billion a year on what he called “forward-looking technology”. Conceding that JP Morgan Chase had been late to the cloud, he said that this was now changing: 

We’ve now told our people, if you can compute cheap, but it’s got to have the security and it won’t be anything which is really confidential, but if you can compute cheaper, hold storage cheaper, run software cheaper, no problem with me. And the way it’s going to be set up is that you can move it around, so you’re not locked into one provider who then can triple price and cost you $100 million to move it again.

Digital disruption is not something to be scared of, he added: 

We analyze all the Fintech companies. A lot of things they do, we can do. A lot of things they do, we don’t want to do and, of course, [they] could be competitors. And they’re also very good by the way at looking for pain points, right? Like what seems really dumb and I see banks create pain points sometimes. So, we have to do straight to a process. We’ve got to digitize a lot of trading. We have to make sure we serve people in mobile phone and we’re good at it.

Dimon seemed less certain about JP Morgan Chase’s stance on Bitcoin, at least for the present: 

It’s a technology. It may work. We’ve already tested [it] with kind of dry runs, not real, but test runs I guess. It will work for some, if it’s secure. I keep on insisting about security. Has it been broken into? How did it get broken into? Why did it get broken into?…If it works, it works. We’d be happy to use it. But, again, it’s one of the long line of technology that’s made things cheaper for us.

My take
Dimon had a good quip that he aired: 

They say the millennials don’t like banks. I say, ‘Yeah, until that first paycheck!’.

It’s a nicely cynical, but pragmatic view of the banking landscape, one predicated on the ongoing need and appetite for offline bank branches co-existing with technology investment with new digital business models of customer engagement and transactional activity. 
All three speakers represent what the pureplay newcomers call the ‘legacy’ institutions, but all three outlined a common-sense co-existence philosophy. 
The trick now of course is to put this into practice on an ongoing basis. That’s a check that’s harder to cash. 
Image credit - Bank of America, JP Morgan Chase, Wells Fargo Read more on: Digital enterprise in the real worldFinancial services and fintechUX and application design 