
As the summer season draws to a close and we begin to prepare for another busy few months of digital government activity, I thought it might be useful to take a look at the key stories that have emerged over the year so far.
A look at the trends and areas of focus that will form and underpin the future analysis that you will find on diginomica’s digital government coverage.
‘Digital’ in government has come a long way over the past few years – even if the successes of the Government Digital Service (GDS) aren’t consistent, the change in conversation it has driven has had an immeasurable impact on the design of services.
Pre-GDS, IT systems in government will built in a cumbersome way, with a lack of focus on the user need and with a complete disregard for tax-payer’s money – with the end result being that they often failed. And although GDS has had its own problems (which we will discuss below), it has put the citizen back at the centre of digital design.
Here are my key areas of focus for digital government for the remainder of the year.
All eyes on Kevin Cunnington
It’s been a disruptive year for GDS with regards to its leadership. Following the departure of Mike Bracken and co last year, the organisation settled into a new groove with Stephen Foreshew-Cain in charge and with a significantly boosted budget from the Treasury.
GDS adopted a more collaborative approach to digital change, wanting to be more co-operative with its Whitehall counterparts, and it continued with its strategy for a platform government.
However, this was short-lived. Just last month the powers that be decided that Foreshew-Cain wasn’t the man for the job and brought in the DWP’s director general for business transformation, Kevin Cunnington, to replace him.
GDS now needs to find its feet again under the leadership of Cunnington and he will have plenty of questions that he needs to address going forward, once he has settled in. Here are the key stories relating to this topic:
J’accuse John Manzoni Part 2 – A Digital Purge
Questions that new GDS leader Kevin Cunnington needs to answer
New GDS chief Kevin Cunnington says the organisation “is here to stay”
Skills and leadership
Related to the topic above, there are also a number of challenges facing Whitehall in relation to digital skills and leadership. In addition to the changes of the top job at GDS, there were also a number of other digital departures from within GDS, as well as key players in other departments (including heavyweights, such as HMRC).
Who is going to fill these roles and what is the strategy going forward for attracting and retaining digital leadership? The projects in hand aren’t easy and they require people that can deliver change.
Equally, we have heard that the government needs to recruit thousands of technically minded civil servants to drive the digital and commercial change required. Where are they coming from? GDS has spoken in the past about reassessing how it hires and works with the private sector, but we haven’t had much insight into what this exactly means. We expect to hear plenty more on this over the course of the year.
Here are the key stories relating to this topic:
HMRC digital lead quits at critical juncture in breaking free of the old outsourcing ways
Government needs to recruit “probably thousands” of technical civil servants
Brexit means…what exactly?
The result of the EU referendum came as a shock to many in Whitehall, with many expecting that the British public would be risk averse and stick with the status quo (myself included). However, with new Prime Minister Theresa May consistently stating that “Brexit means Brexit”, civil servants and Whitehall need to prepare for the outcome.
Although the implications aren’t immediately obvious for digital and technology in government, there are likely to be a few. For example, we have heard from the government watchdog chief that because of the resources that are likely to be used up in the focus on the exit from the EU, this could mean that some major projects could be cancelled. The public sector is already stretched in terms of finances, so if more money is being put to Brexit, other things will need to be cut.
Equally, we have heard analysts suggest that the uncertainty that Brexit brings could mean that risk-taking with digital transformation could be deemed a bit ‘too risky’ now. This could mean reverting back to the status quo and Whitehall going back to its comfort zone of lengthy contracts and large suppliers. Only time will tell.
Here are our key stories on this topic:
Brexit – Government watchdog chief says major projects could be cancelled
Brexit – Bad news for digital government and SMEs, good news for large SIs?
G-Cloud and the Digital Marketplace
It’s been somewhat of a challenging year for the G-Cloud and the Digital Marketplace. Whilst business continues to grow and the online store has now reached the £1 billion a year in annual sales mark, we continue to hear complaints and there seems to still be some dissatisfaction.
Whilst an element of this is likely to just be that the honeymoon period is over, and the G-Cloud is just a mature business that now experiences a few disgruntled customers – there are always areas for improvement. For instant, the Digital Marketplace itself is still working on its search functionality, and there continues to be key features that were promised years ago that are still not there.
However, a lot of the problems are likely to still lie with the buyers and suppliers that are unwilling to change their ways. Old habits dying hard.
It will be interesting to see how this key part of GDS’s strategy continues to develop and how it fits with it’s over-arching platform strategy. Here are the key stories on this topic from the year so far:
The G-Cloud’s procurement problem – old habits dying hard
Early G-Cloud advocate says the “dream is dying”, warns of gov “propaganda”
Over half of G-Cloud SaaS vendors are “disqualifying themselves by inept submissions”
The data conundrum
Time and time again we have said that data needs to be considered as a key focus for driving successful digital change in any organisation – but particularly government. As the institutions of government have developed over the years, particularly in silos, citizen data has become messy and fragmented.
GDS needs to fix this in order to really deliver services that are end-to-end. They are aware that citizens don’t want to provide the same information to HMRC that they provide to DWP, that they provide to the Home Office. They are also aware, however, that citizens don’t trust government to use their data in a proper way (just take a look at the failed NHS care.data programme).
As a result, this is a thorny topic that requires a huge shift in thinking and approach. GDS’s answer to this is to create data registers that are canonical sources of truth that underpin its platforms. These can then be used, with citizen approval and identity assurance, to connect digital services across government. Will they be a success and will the plans go ahead? Will government be able to create data-as-a-service? Those are questions that need answering as we enter the second half of this year.
UK government’s data chief wants ‘data-as-a-service’ in Whitehall
What do we know about the government’s data sharing plans?
Open data in government remains “frustratingly siloed”, warns ODI
Institutional change
Finally, the topic of institutional change is one that GDS has typically shied away from, but is one that needs to be pushed more over the coming months. If it is to succeed with its plans for Government-as-a-Platform, it needs to have an honest conversation with Whitehall and citizens about what that means for what government looks like in the future.
The best way to think about this is: if you were designing government now, would you design it like the current government we have? Absolutely not.
The reality is that government could be a lot leaner, a lot more agile and a lot more efficient if it was built and structured in a different way. Not only this, but the we way currently creating policy and legislation, as well as citizen services, isn’t as effective as it could be if we were thinking about the opportunities that digital presents. Take a read of these for deeper insighcts into what this could mean:
GDS Director on impact of digital – ‘Parts of Whitehall will no longer exist by 2030’
GDS Director says suppliers will be a component of Government-as-a-Platform
Image credit - .GOV on blue digital background © Denys Rudyi - Fotolia.com; UK flag Brexit stormclouds from EU balloons below © meatbull - Fotolia.comRead more on: Digital government and public services

