
Pierre Nanterme
Accenture went above and beyond what Wall Street hoped for yesterday, turning in a 24% leap in earnings – and it’s all down to disruptive digital transformation, according to CEO Pierre Nanterme. 
The firm turned in net income of $1.33 billion, up from $690.7 million year-on-year, on revenue of $7.95 billion, up 6%. Digitally-related revenue growth rate was north of 25%. 
Nanterme talks in terms of Accenture’s business model now pivoting on three fronts: 

For the last couple of years, we said that you had two massive growth drivers in the marketplace at the high level. One is the digitalization of the industries – which is huge, massive coverage everywhere – coming together with what we’re calling the rationalization of the operations, and the rationalization of the portion. 
This is what’s driving good growth in the rest of the business and non-digital specific business in application outsourcing, in application services, in business process outsourcing and that kind of services. These last six months or six, seven months, we’ve seen a third engine kicking in which I will call consolidation, what you’re calling M&A. So, we are digitalization, rationalization and we are adding consolidations. 

He adds: 

All industries are investing in digitizing their operations, because all the leaders and all these industries are subject to disruption, and to massive disruption. It’s not about being better, it’s not about getting more productivity, it’s about not being disrupted and not being disrupted with not disappearing in the marketplace. 
Where the money is coming from is for rationalization of the operations. I mean calls for engineering, IT efficiency, it’s all of this, and it’s across the board in many organizations. It’s coming from IT, but as well it’s coming from all the business lines, looking at rationalization.

Nanterme cites a number of examples of how digital transformation programmes are fueling growth: 

Working with Boston Scientific, we have jointly developed a cloud-based digital health solution for hospitals, built on the Accenture Insights Platform, the new installation is designed to leverage our analytics capabilities to significantly improve patient care and reduce treatment cost.
Accenture Interactive continues to gain traction in the marketplace and has recently been named the digital agency partner for Celebrity Cruises where we are helping redesign the digital customer experience and for L’Oréal in Brazil, where we are responsible for search engine optimization and digital marketing analytics.
In Accenture Mobility, we are using the Accenture connected platform to drive digital transformation for Metro de Madrid, one of the largest transportation systems in the world. We expect to increase operating efficiency, improve the passenger experience, and enable new Internet of Things based services.

New ERP
The more traditional ERP implementation and services business is moving into a new phase, adds Nanterme, and ability to compete in this new landscape is a major differentiator: 

The main difference between the winners and the losers is coming from the ones who are able to rotate to the high growth areas and to rotate at speed. When you look at ERP, as all our strategy was to start building capabilities to rotate our ERP to new ERPs. At the time, we were, as an illustration, building capabilities, strong capabilities with HANA, which is going to be the next generation of ERP with SAP. Given the investments we made ahead of this HANA S/4 wave, today we are already the number one in implementing S/4 and HANA in the world. We see clearly and you see improving with the results of SAP, a pick up on this new ERP development.
And if you move beyond the strict definition of ERP to the broader definition of application packages, then it’s even more spectacular in terms of Accenture positioning. We are enjoying good growth in all the application packages and especially with the new packages. I am very pleased with the growth that I am showing with Salesforce. I am very pleased with the growth we have with Workday, with Microsoft Dynamics and some other application package services. So, we benefit from having rotating our ERP to the next generation of ERP and having taken a leadership position in this new application package. So, all in all this business is growing.

My take
As I’ve said before, many times, the early investment in digital savvy just keeps paying off for Accenture. 
Read more on: Cloud platforms - infrastructure and architectureDigital transformation - frictionless enterprise 