
Tapuwa Mtutu
Here is a shocking statistic for you – if people in the UK from black, minority and ethnic (BME) backgrounds were given the same opportunities to participate and progress in the workplace as their white counterparts, it would add a huge £24 billion to the national economy each year.
In other words, the fact that members of BME communities are being held back due to the colour of their skin leads to an effective 1.3% annual reduction in the country’s gross domestic product, according to a newly-published review entitled ‘Race in the Workplace’ by Baroness McGregor-Smith, the first (if now former) Asian female chief executive of a FTSE 250 company in the shape of Mitie.
Moving the situation over the pond to the US, meanwhile, companies appearing in the top quartile of McKinsey & Co’s 2015 racial and ethnic diversity rankings showed themselves 35% more likely to generate higher financial returns than the national industry median. The management consultancy’s study, “Diversity Matters”, also revealed that for every 10% increase in the racial and ethnic mix of the senior executive team, earnings before interest and taxes jumped 0.8%.
But according to Mark Martin, a tech consultant and educator who also goes under the name Urban Teacher, while talk about the “diversity issue is being thrown around like confetti” at the moment, the tech industry, like most others still has a long way to go to get to grips with it. For example, he says:
East London was a very diverse area in the past, with lots of different cultures. But since tech companies moved in, the people have moved out so if you’re advocating for diversity, you could ask yourself why? Prices have gone up, but there’s also a problem with visibility. There’s a lack of visibility of people of colour and ethnic minorities – there just aren’t enough role models.
As a result, he and eight other black technology professionals have got together to form UK Black Tech, which was launched in mid-February at Bloomberg’s offices in London. The aim of the company is to provide paid-for consultancy, training and networking services to encourage cultural diversity within employer organisations as well as offer networking opportunities among BME tech professionals, entrepreneurs and investors across the UK.
A tough sector
To illustrate the value of such an approach, one professional who entered the tech industry via her own professional network is Tapuwa Mtutu, talent acquisition specialist for the UK and Ireland at Dell EMC. She had never particularly considered a job in the tech space before joining the data storage vendor four and a half years ago. Instead she “fell into” it after peers introduced her to the opportunity to develop a graduate programme for the firm’s Europe, Middle East and Africa business. Mtutu says:
The technology sector is certainly the toughest I’ve experienced when it comes to diversity. I think it has a lot to do with the way in which ethnic cultures have traditionally been brought up. For example, people would traditionally have been encouraged to join the medical or law profession. Technology would never normally feature in career choices in the past.
In order to gain a better understanding of the reality on the ground, therefore, a further objective of UK Black Tech is to undertake a nation-wide survey to collate data about BME businesses and talent in the country for the first time. Another goal is to create a platform for people to share their stories and, importantly, have them heard.
But Martin is clear that for potential employers to make inclusion a matter of conscience is not the right approach – instead it is about creating win-win situations for everyone. He explains:
Diversity shouldn’t be seen as a moral issue, but an issue of performance and growth. More diversity means more ideas from people that don’t look or act like you, but it’s not just about having a few tokens in the building. It’s about taking the right people on for their skills and what they can do. If you think about football, they don’t sign someone up because he’s black or white. They sign him for his skills on the pitch, but I don’t think that’s there yet for tech.
Martin cites a Trades Union Congress report from April 2016 entitled ‘Black, qualified and unemployed’, which provides a range of alarming statistics that apply just as much to the tech sector as to any other:

BME graduates with a first degree are twice as likely to be unemployed as white graduates.
BME workers with either ‘A’ levels or HNC/HND-level vocational qualifications are almost three times more likely to be unemployed than their white counterparts.
The employment gap between BME and white workers who have completed an apprenticeship is 23%.
Black workers with degrees earn nearly 25% less than their white peers.

But as Martin points out:
When I go to events, people on the platforms say they’re looking for skills and they want diversity. But there are lots of young graduates from ethnic minority backgrounds wanting to enter the tech industry and they can’t get a job. So it leads me to question ‘am I missing something?’ Is it the recruitment pipeline that’s broken, which means people aren’t hiring different faces?
In this context, there is something to be said for introducing so-called ‘blind CVs’, which remove job applicants’ names, age, gender and the like to try and reduce unconscious bias, a factor that can also be dealt with via training. Another approach is to involve members of BME communities in the interview process, not least to ensure a more level playing field.
Participation not inclusion
But Rioch Edwards-Brown, founder of So You Wanna Be In Tech, a sister organisation to soyouwannabeintv.com, a consultancy and networking organisation that aims to tackle the lack of diversity and social mobility in the TV industry, does not believe such activity is enough:
It’s not about tackling issues like race or gender through silos or quotas as they alienate the very people the tech industry is trying to recruit. No one likes to be referred to as if they’re part of the problem – they want to think they’re being approached as talented individuals and, in reality, socio-economic background and the barriers it presents are a much more significant issue. So tackling ‘ethnic diversity issues’ is not the answer, but real community engagement is.
As a result, Edwards-Brown advocates working with dedicated community partner organisations, including her own, Urban Teacher, Code First: Girls [http://www.codefirstgirls.org.uk] and TeenTech [http://www.teentech.com]. She also recommends providing “realistic, easy-to-access” investment in and sponsorship of these partner organisations and community hubs as well as the talent pipelines they offer in order to ensure they are sustainable.
In other words, Edwards-Brown believes that traditional recruitment approaches will simply not cut it. Not only are “diverse communities weary of the inability of industry initiatives to engage them on their terms”, she says, but:
The whole process of how Generation Y and Z engage is completely different and doesn’t fit into a linear HR model.
Social media is vital here and “can’t be just a bolt-on”. But equally important is ensuring that inclusion is high on the chief executive’s agenda as the rest of the company will inevitably follow their lead. Edwards-Brown explains:
CEO-level management has to be on board – you have to take a top down and bottom up approach because if you don’t, you’ll just end up with a continuation of what you have now.
This situation also extends to how best to retain BME staff once they have been recruited. On the one hand, transparency over how workers are promoted and paid is important so that individuals do not feel they are being discriminated against. On the other, it is important to help people feel as if there is room to participate actively. Martin explains:
The word ‘inclusion’ should really be ‘participation’ as people can be included but still feel as if they’re on the periphery. A lot of tech professionals leave companies because they don’t feel supported or that their voice is heard. So you can appoint a diversity lead and show people how to engage, but if the environment is hipster with lots of booze and pizza, it’s not really going to work if you’re Muslim. You can make quite simple tweaks to make it easier for people to socialise, but you have to think about it. The status quo has gone on for a little while now and so it needs to be challenged.
My take
The key message here is that, to ensure your organisation is truly inclusive, it is crucial to reach the communities you are trying to connect with based on where they actually are rather than where you expect them to be based on past experience. But it is also vital to listen and ask yourself what your target audience can teach you, in the same way that you can teach it.
diginomica supports

Image credit - SparkLondon.orgRead more on: DiversityHCM and the digital future of work 