
Interesting to see that, with around nine months to go, two high-profile tech CEOs have offered up condemnation and endorsement of candidates in the race to become US President.
First up was former Republican candidate for Governor in California, Meg Whitman, now CEO of HP Enterprise, who laid into Donald Trump, declaring him to be “unfit” to be President. She added that she sees Trump’s plan to impose a 35% tax on imports a a threat to the US economy.
Whitman also criticised New Jersey Governor Chris Christie – who withdrew his candidacy from the 2016 Presidential campaign – for endorsing Trump, saying:
Chris Christie’s endorsement of Donald Trump is an astonishing display of political opportunism.
Trump would take America on a dangerous journey. Christie knows all that and indicated as much many times publicly.
Whitman had previously endorsed Christie, choosing to do so rather than support one of her predecessors as HP CEO, Carly Fiorina. Fiorina pulled out the Republican candidacy race after failing to gain enough support.
Meanwhile, in less aggressive mode, Salesforce CEO Marc Benioff has endorsed Hillary Clinton’s run for the Presidency, arguing that this is based on her policies on education. Speaking on CNN, Benioff said:
By 5 years old your destiny in this country is set and that’s where I am disappointed that I haven’t heard more of that narrative, and I feel the one person who has delivered that discussion over and over again, including her Too Small To Fail initiative, is Hillary Clinton, and that’s why I am backing her.
Benioff has been party-agnostic in the past, donating to both Republican and Democrat campaigns and initiatives. Between 20013 and 2005, he served as co-chair of the President’s Information Technology Advisory Committee under George W. Bush, while prior to the 2012 Presidential election, Barack Obama visited the Salesforce headquarters, while Benioff and his wife Lyn hosted a fundraising dinner for the incumbent President.
Clinton herself appeared at Salesforce’s Dreamforce conference in 2014, where she was interviewed about philanthropy and education by Klaus Schwab of the World Economic Forum, prior to announcing her run for President.
My take
Nine months to go and we’re going to hear a lot more of this sort of thing as polling day arrives.
It’s a delicate tightrope to walk, one that risks upsetting as many people (aka customers) as it pleases. Such is democracy though.
As an aside, one of my favourite anecdotes about Oracle CEO Larry Ellison was when I asked him in an interview, from many, many years ago now, about his politics and how he voted. He looked at me and dead-panned:
I don’t believe in democracy.
Those were the days…
Disclosure - At time of writing, Oracle and Salesforce are premier partners of diginomica. Read more on: Digital government and public services

