
Deal announces the veto
Georgia’s Governor Nathan Deal has backed off from the state’s attempt to legalize anti-LGBTI discrimination following a massive backlash from US businesses. 
Deal bowed to pressure from critics, including tech giants such as Apple, Google, Dell and Salesforce, and vetoed the so-called ‘religious freedom’ bill HB 757, saying: 

 I do not think we have to discriminate against anyone to protect the faith-based community in Georgia of which my family and I are a part of for all of our lives. Our actions on HB 757 are not just about protecting the faith-based community or providing a business-friendly climate for job growth in Georgia. This is about the character of our State and the character of its people. Georgia is a welcoming state filled with warm, friendly and loving people. 

Republican State Senator Josh McKoon, who pushed HB 757 through,  said he was “disappointed”, adding that he had thought Deal was someone “the faith community could rely on”.
While Deal insisted that the threatened boycotts of Georgia by businesses as diverse as Marvel, Disney, American Airlines and Coca Cola had no bearing on his decision, it’s difficult to give that credence. 
The most immediate consequence is that Salesforce’s Connections digital marketing conference will now go ahead in Atlanta in early May. Salesforce CEO Marc Benioff, who rallied the tech industry response to HB 757, had threatened to pull the event if Deal didn’t veto the bill.

My take
Good work – and the only sensible decision Deal could take. 
For the record, last week I wondered if this would become a US Presidential Election issue and noted that Hillary Clinton and Bernie Sanders had both voiced their dispproval of HB 757. Following the veto, Republican candidate Ted Cruz stated: 

I thought that was very disappointing to see Governor Deal of Georgia side with leftist activists and side against religious liberty.

Now, about North Carolina…
Disclosure - At time of writing, Salesforce is a premier partner of diginomica. Read more on: Cloud platforms - infrastructure and architectureCRM and customer experienceDiversity 