
It’s time for another gut-check of digital media disruptions – the enterprisey review. Here’s the rules: I pick the impactful stories from my media disruptions channel, give them a hard look from the enterprise side, and, where appropriate, recommend a course of action. Note: this series is NOT geared for the media industry, but for enterprises looking to win opt-in audiences.


For many legacy news organizations in Europe, digital disruption comes with new ideas but few answers
by: Shan Wang
key excerpt: “News organizations are busy overhauling their websites to be mobile-first. But monetizing mobile of course remains an open question. ‘People are using mobile more and more, but we are not yet getting the revenue out of it that we would like to get.'”
enterprise relevance: high, from a mobile consumption standpoint. Enterprises can learn from pure media companies taking it on the chin. The problem, as this latest study indicates: only 10 to 20 percent of news organizations’ revenues come from digital, and the trend towards mobile dmakes monetization tougher. Video monetization and syndication have been financially disappointing.
best course of action:

Don’t require your content to be revenue-producing. Define other metrics that measure the value of content, such as obtaining opt-in data or geographic traffic data.
Learn from the news organizations’ mobile push. Experiment with mobile apps, but don’t limit only to dedicated mobile apps. Also look at getting your content/brand visible on other mobile apps, from Snapchat to Flipboard. B2B companies should pay special attention to traction on LinkedIn.
Look hard at video, but in the context of focused content and customer narratives – not viral sensations.


Facebook apologizes for feeding inflated video-view numbers to advertisers
by: Sam Machkovech
key excerpt: “On Friday, Facebook took to its official blog to confirm and respond to a Wall Street Journal report. In the blog post, the company acknowledged that one of Facebook’s most crucial metrics for measuring video-view performance had been wildly inflated.”
enterprise relevance: Medium – instructive lessons here on the pros/cons of video, and trusting third party stats. Facebook is still dealing with advertiser backlash over stats that drastically overstated the average duration time of video views, to the tune of 60 to 80 percent.
best course of action:

Always cross-check third party analytics stats against other benchmarks. (Facebook itself offers third party video verification options from Moat and Nielson). At diginomica, we are always cross-checking our stats from our reporting service against another. That helps us spot trends and identify anomalies in a particular data service.
If you’re pursuing video marketing, come up with meaningful stats to measure your definition of a success. Average duration of view may be less important than number of video shares, or amount of viewers that pursue a call to action. Repurposing video content into audio and text, and tying such content into broader campaigns also provides protection against over-investing in one media channel.


Twitter live streaming numbers for NFL considered “underwhelming”
by: Ken Fang
key excerpt: “For the first two games, Twitter has averaged 285,000 average-minute viewers (243,000 for Jets-Bills and 327,000 for Texans-Patriots). Twitter was hoping for 500,000 viewers, but it did not guarantee advertisers those numbers. Advertising Age quotes one ad executive as being disappointed’.”
enterprise relevance: Low to medium – live streaming video is having an impact, even it Twitter is struggling to meet the needs of its paymasters. Though online streaming disappoints advertisers, given the numbers aren’t “TV good,” it doesn’t render streaming irrelevant. Twitter’s live streaming numbers are actually decent. One disappointed advertiser said, “The problem is people aren’t watching full games.” That’s shocking to think an advertiser thought someone thumbing through Twitter would sit through an entire game.
best course of action:

Experiment with live streaming capabilities on Twitter, Facebook, YouTube and your own web site, but make sure the promotion ahead of time is intense enough to draw a crowd.
Plan to repurpose live streaming content into shorter video features and highlight reels.
Don’t expect an immersive audience for live viewing. Instead, plan for shorter, interactive segments. But – make sure live events run long enough to pull in viewer questions and feedback, otherwise the live moment is lost.


Press releases: how to go beyond waste, fraud, and abuse
by: Josh Bernoff
key excerpt: “Penn, who is VP of Marketing at Shift, a PR firm, shares a few press release facts that he figured out:

PR people create 1,000 press releases a day. They’ve created 236,356 of them this year.
The median number of clicks on one of those releases is zero.
The median number of social media shares is two.
The median number of inbound links is one.”

enterprise relevance: Medium – unless your team spends inordinate time crafting press releases, in which case, priority = high. For enterprises, press releases do serve some basic functions. The mistake is assuming they have marketing traction or that the average person cares. It’s also a mistake to blast press releases at media types.
best course of action:

Minimize the time and effort spent on press releases. For major companies, a “news” section with press releases is useful, especially in events season, but there’s a limit to the value of a press release that is quickly reached.
Refocus efforts on blogging important corporate news in a more informal way, that emphasizes behind the scenes reasons for the decision and what it will mean for customers.
In general, shift marketing focus from incremental product news to customer narratives and proven field results with customers and partners.


Bonus content – a few more for the road.

What business writers can learn from journalists — and what they can’t – some useful tips for your content producers. Though the pointers on not being like a journalist are more compelling: “Don’t be balanced, have a point of view. Journalists are supposed to fairly present both sides (although some now question that principle). Smart businesspeople, though, develop a clear point of view based on their experience. Explain that point of view and back it up.”
Facebook has repeatedly trended fake news since firing its human editors – Some juicy/embarrassing lessons on the perils of removing humans from the algorithmic equation. Keep in mind Facebook removed the human element to avoid bias complaints, but ended up with an equally difficult problem.
Gawker’s Nick Denton: The Problem With Media (And How I’d Fix It) – Yes, it may seem strange to take notes from a bankrupted editor. But I’ve never believe in stigmatizing failure. Denton’s not my fave but he knows his stuff, including thoughts on media brand dilution (people consume articles, not web sites) and the upside to user-generated content.
The marketer’s quagmire – how do you attribute value to content? – Given my emphasis avoiding content monetization obsessions, you may want to check out my recent piece on how companies grapple with attributing content value.


These pieces were picked from my curated scoop.it channel, enterprise media disruptions. You can also view the entire digital media disruptions series.

Image credit - Image credit: Exciting Movie © lassedesignen – Fotolia.com.Read more on: Content marketingDigital and content marketingMobileUser experienceUX and application design 