
Tiger prowling digital
Digital disruption among large enterprise client organisations is a mainstream reality – and that’s a great opportunity according to N.V. ‘Tiger’ Tyagarajan, CEO of Indian offshore BPO provider Genpact.
The opportunities arising from clients re-inventing their businesses along digital models helped the firm to push revenue up 9% to $609.5 million for Q215. Global BPO revenue was $391.0 million, up 18% year over year, while total IT services revenue was $128.3 million, down 6% year over year.
This, reckons Genpact, illustrates the growing awareness of the need to re-invent business processes around digital disruption. Tyagarajan explains:
Established companies continue to operate in a volatile, uncertain and lower growth world with increasing regulatory oversight forcing them to completely transform their businesses by making them more nimble with cost structures that are lower and much more variable. At the same time, there are a set of newer companies that are disrupting established business models and are on an incredible growth journey. It is clearly a two-speed world.
Second, companies are adopting new digital technologies in order to leapfrog and disrupt established business models. These all-new business models often deliver superior customer experience at a fraction of the cost and with dramatic cycle time improvements as compared to legacy models.
Third, as companies adopt these new business models, they are ratcheting up investments in digital technologies, while, at the same time, slashing spend on deployment, maintenance and running legacy IT infrastructure platforms and applications. Fourth, these new business models require companies to create new organizational structures, as well as new information and process flows requiring a complete re-imagining of process to transform the way their businesses operate.
And finally, these new process flows use digital technologies leveraging both data from within the enterprise, as well as external data to build real-time insights. These insights bring more intelligence into these processes in the form of self-learning, advanced predictive analytics and self-monitoring, driving huge value for clients.
He adds:
Those are making clients revisit their business models. When that happens, they take a complete look at their business model and they then come to the table saying, I want to completely re-architect the way I run my business and that means I’m going to talk about a big transformation and I want someone who can be my partner on that journey, or I want more than one person to be the partner on my journey. So, that’s one big driver.
The second is coming out of the global financial crisis, after everyone had hunkered down and had ‘shrunk themselves through their core’, whatever that meant for them, then it was a question of now how do I drive the efficiency and effectiveness in what I’ve already shrunk to? After I’ve already cut off my waist? That meant now coming out and saying now I need a partner to go take me to the next level.
The third is disruption. The fact that there are new disruptive forces in our clients’ industries, the fact that there are companies that can be born tomorrow that can actually take significant market share in one quarter using new digital technologies in their verticals means that these businesses are driven to taking action much faster than they used to. And that means they need to take faster, deeper, bigger, broader action and that means bigger deals.
The need to reinvent
So what’s needed, he argues, is domain expertise across technologies, across industry sectors and specifically within organisations themselves. This leads him to claim:
It is clearly our time. As companies embark on these transformation journeys, mid and back office structures will be redesigned, re-imagined and digitized. This is where we shine the most and where we are bringing real innovation.
Historically, our Lean Six Sigma teams have been one of our core strengths. We are now taking this many steps further with our hundreds of black belts and master black belts going through digital immersion to create a certified group of new digital black belts and digital master black belts in order to make our value proposition even more relevant to our client journeys.
Tyagarajan says that clients are seeing the need for this process reinvention and that this is crucial:
Our big learning on digital technologies is that trying to implement them without leaning out the process and without understanding the domain and how you string these together will lead to failure. There’s a number of clients who’ve tried these out who actually see that value, which is where we are getting a lot of traction.
He adds:
You cannot automate and intervene with digital tools unless you actually lean them out first. We are discovering that with the range of banking clients we are working with, global banking clients. We’re discovering that with the range of CPG clients we’re working with, with life sciences clients we’re working with, insurance clients we’re working with, and capital market clients we’re working with.
That is the way we are bringing that to the table and that is different from some of our competitors, because each of them bring digital to the table in their way that’s relevant for them and that’s their strength.
Genpact
Genpact has identified 12 specific areas of digital expertise, including areas such as dynamic workflows, mobility, advanced cognitive, and artificial intelligence tools. These are now being embedded into client-facing propositions.
Tyagarajan cites the example of Duke Energy Renewables as a case in point, where Genpact is helping to design new approaches to capturing, cleaning and analysing real-time data generated from turbines in several of their wind farms to perform predictive modeling. This is used to schedule preventive maintenance of equipment to ensure higher uptime as well as reduce maintenance expense and replacement part cost.
As for the declining revenue related to ‘traditional’ IT services, this isn’t a point of major concern, insists Tyagarajan:
Never ever will we not do IT as part of our core offerings. I think it always will be part of our core offerings.
Our IT business, I would characterize in three or four buckets. Bucket one is the old original GE IT business, which is a lot of the original IT business that we came out of GE with. That’s undergoing change driven by some of the divestment activities that GE is undergoing, some of the rationalization activities, they are undergoing and, as a result, some of the project work that we are doing for them that shrunk in the second quarter, and we expect that to continue as we go through the balance of the year.
The second part of the IT business is what I would call “legacy IT services” for a number of our global clients. And by definition, a number of our global clients are transferring spend from those legacy areas to new digital areas. As that happens, some of the work that we are doing shrinks.
He concludes:
We continue to believe that the characterization of our business – or any of our businesses – as BPO versus ITO is probably the wrong characterization. We would like to characterize businesses as solutions in specific areas that bring together a number of competencies for the big problems that our clients are facing.
My take
Another traditional outsourcing and BPO firm in the process of its own digital re-invention – and doing OK so far.
Read more on: Digital and content marketingFuture of workInternet of ThingsOutsourcingThe new professional and IT as a service 