
10 – Mercy Ships
Welcome on board: Mercy Ships finds faster way for HR to onboard volunteers
For some of the people we try so hard to encourage to volunteer with us, what we were asking them to do, in terms of applying, took a lot of their time and energy. Just as they thought they were close to getting done, we’d hit them over the head with yet another request for information or paperwork.
Why? Around 75% of the world’s population lives within 100 miles of a port city. So what better way to bring safe, affordable healthcare to its poorest communities than by sea? That’s the thinking behind Mercy Ships, which runs civilian hospital ships staffed by 1,200 volunteers annually – doctors, dentists, nurses, teachers, cooks, engineers, maritime crew and others.
A custom-built web recruitment app, built in-house by the charity in just seven months using OutSystems’ cloud-based rapid application development (RAD) platform, has cut the time it takes for volunteers to complete an application from days down to hours and, in some cases, they’re done in as quickly as 30 minutes.
9 – Cats Protection League
Cat Protection’s purr-fect solution for cloud communication
These are passionate people: nobody gives up their time and energy volunteering for an organisation like ours unless they’re really committed to the cause. What we get from them are some firm opinions and strong judgements on how we work as an organisation. Sometimes, that’s tough to hear – but it’s vital, so that we’re providing them with the tools and information they need to support the welfare of the cats in our care.
Why? Every year, some 46,000 cats and kittens find new homes, thanks to Cats Protection, the UK’s largest feline welfare charity. But Cats Protection couldn’t handle the work it faces without its nationwide network of around 10,000 volunteers who, alongside 500 employees, give up their time to foster cats, raise funds and work in the charity’s retail stores and adoption centres.
When Tony Gamble, the charity’s head of IT, asked volunteers what they needed from the charity, they didn’t hold back. A major grumble was the way the charity shared information with them via an elderly and frequently inaccessible extranet. Microsoft stepped up, offering Cats Protection unlimited free licences for Office 365, providing the means for the charity to deliver a modern new extranet to volunteers in early 2015.
8 – Cancer Research UK
Cancer Research arms UK mobile workforce for smarter working 
It’s less of a question of IT telling people what they can have and more a case of them telling us what they want on their devices and we deliver it to them. That’s actually pretty liberating for an IT department – but it takes some radical thinking to go in that direction.
Why? Forty years ago, only one in four cancer patients survived the disease. Today, that figure is two in four. And in the next 20 years, Cancer Research UK aims to improve survival rates to three out of every four patients. In order to meet that goal, the charity needs to work harder and smarter, says head of IT Mick Briggs. With that in mind, the charity’s been working with Citrix on ambitious IT infrastructure makeover, so that staff and fundraisers can access applications and data securely, from a wide variety of locations and devices.
7 – Cystic Fibrosis Trust
Digital Transformation for the Cystic Fibrosis Trust
IT spend is about reducing other operational expenses and it’s about minimising non-charitable activity expenditure, sure, but it’s also about new ways of working that have a really positive impact on the lives of people with CF.
Why? Cystic Fibrosis (CF) doesn’t get the attention it should. In the UK alone, it affects 10,000 people. Some 2.5 million people (around one in 25 of the population) carry the faulty gene that causes this inherited, life-shortening condition – and every week, five babies are born with CF and two people die from it. The Cystic Fibrosis Trust is the UK charity for people with CF, their families and their supporters.
diginomica was delighted to speak to CF Trust CIO Phil Shoesmith, appointed in April 2015, about his plans for digital transformation at the charity and the three-year IT strategy that he believes will get it there. A particular point of interest is how he’s supporting remote and home-working and introducing cloud services: a number of employees and volunteers working for the CF Trust have CF themselves and, due to the risk of passing difficult-to-shift lung infections between each other, they can’t work together in the same office.
6 – Project Open Hand
Project Open Hand extends warm welcome to Volunteers for Salesforce
There are people who give you money and people who give you time. Data about them gives us headlights that we’ve put on our organisation to see the road ahead. If you can’t see what’s ahead, you’re going to hit a lot of potholes. You’re going to make a lot more mistakes.
Why? Dreamforce claims to be the world’s biggest technology conference for non-profit organisations and charities – and one of the most interesting sessions I attended at this year’s show was presented by San Francisco-based charity Project Open Hand, which delivers 2,500 meals every day to elderly and critically ill people throughout the city and in neighbouring Alameda County.
Project Open Hand needs around 125 volunteers every day of the year to carry out its work – and more for special events and occasions – and is using Volunteers for Salesforce to sign them up and schedule their shifts.
5 – City Year, Sierra Club, PATH
Non-profit CIOs talk data security at Dreamforce
We work with kids, we work in schools and we need to collect data on them in order to measure our impact. So I feel we need to set the bar very, very high here. I won’t settle for minimal compliance – that’s what I mean by ‘sacred trust’.
Why? Another story from Dreamforce here, following a panel discussion in which CIOs from three US-based charities (City Year, the Sierra Club and PATH) described their concerns over data security and they ways they address it.
This a hot topic on both sides of the Atlantic and elsewhere: major charities have experienced significant data breaches in the last year or so, including Goodwill in the US and the British Pregnancy Advisory Service (BPAS) in the UK. Charities increasingly hold donors’ credit card details on their systems, and often handle highly personal information about the people who use their services, but they frequently have less budget to spend on IT security than private-sector organisations. That makes them great targets for hackers.
4 – RSPB
Data analytics takes flight at UK’s RSPB
If you’ve got reasonable evidence from data that a conservation issue exists and a tried and tested solution to it, then it’s much less likely that resources get wasted on implementing an intervention that won’t address it effectively.
Why? If you tend to associate the work of the Royal Society for the Protection of Birds (RSPB) with bird boxes hung hopefully in suburban gardens, day trips to nature reserves and cheery robins on Christmas cards, then think again. This UK-based conservation charity also packs some serious scientific clout.
Its 60-plus post-doctoral scientists and other researchers use a range of analytic tools from SAS Institute in their work – and the insights they gain form the basis of scientific papers submitted to academic journals for peer review; internal reports; applications for grant funding; and submissions to government representatives in the RSPB’s work of advocating for policy change.
3. North East Child Poverty Commission
UK child-poverty hotspots highlighted for action through data virtualisation
So what we’ve got now is a very user-friendly way to map changes in [child poverty levels], year on year, so you can look at how it changes at a very fine level indeed – right down to […] a group of streets.
Why? Based in Durham, UK, the North East Child Poverty Commission aims to provide reliable, accessible and up-to-date information about the causes and consequences of child poverty in a region where one in four kids already live below the poverty line.
It’s using data visualisation technology from Tableau Software to share its findings openly with local policymakers, educators, charities, journalists and members of the public, in the form of explorable data maps, published on its website.
2. University of Heidelberg
German academics tackle cervical cancer in Africa with SAP HANA
We hope we can get more funding because, right now, we have enough for about two years, but after that, we’re not sure. What we do know is that we would like to be rolling out this kind of screening on a broader basis to other countries too, such as Tanzania.
Why? In the developed world, regular screening, early detection and rapid treatment have led to positive long-term outcomes for women diagnosed with cervical cancer. In the developing world, the disease is still a killer. In fact, almost nine out of ten (87%) of cervical cancer deaths occur in less developed regions. And since the disease is particularly prevalent in women in their thirties, many victims leave dependent children behind.
At Heidelberg University, Dr Magnus von Knebel-Doeberitz and his team have worked with SAP and its HANA Cloud Platform to create a mobile app in support of their Emerging Technologies in Cervical Cancer Screening (ETiCCS) project. This helps to coordinate the testing for cervical cancer of 800 women in Kenya, conducted by local physicians and health workers.
1. Action for Children
Action for Children deploys non-technical staff on coding duties
Constructing applications in Mendix is really fast, giving working prototypes that you can demonstrate to users in just days. While in our experience, traditional code-based approaches can fail to meet user expectations, Mendix facilitates step-by-step, the creation of user-friendly, fit-for-purpose applications that our staff are keen to use.
Why? For many charities, a lack of in-house software development skills (and a lack of money to bring in outside expertise) presents a serious hurdle to digital transformation – but Action for Children, a UK-based charity, isn’t letting these challenges stand in its way.
It’s using the Mendix rapid application development (RAD) platform, so that a team of three non-technical staff can build a wide variety of apps – to help internal employees run intensive family support programmes, for example, and help families book beds for sick children at Action for Children-run respite centres.
 
Disclosure – at time of writing, Salesforce and SAP are premier partners of diginomica.
Read more on: Best of archivesCRM and customer experienceDigital and content marketingSocialThird sector and non-profitsUse cases

