
A ‘first the good news, then the bad news’ pronouncement from the UK’s Confederation of British Industry (CBI) on the subject of Brexit.
The good news – two out of five firms will recruit more staff in 2017, with tech & IT firms set to report growth of 52%.
The bad news – half of UK employers reckon that the UK’s attractiveness as a place to invest and hire will diminish over the next five years.
Skills shortages were said to be the biggest threat to competitiveness, with over half of those polled concerned about future access to skilled migrant workers, something that’s been a well-documented concern for the tech sector.
Those are among the main findings of the CBI/Pertemps Network Group Employment Trends Survey.
Josh Hardie, the CBI’s deputy director general, says the key thing now is for the government to focus on getting an industrial strategy in place:
Getting our industrial strategy right and understanding what the UK’s future relationship with the EU will be will help ensure that this worry does not negatively impact the future performance of the labour market.
The government should build on the positive moves it has already made to dispel uncertainty by drawing up plans for a smooth transition, giving firms both the time to adapt to new regulations and the confidence to invest beyond 2019.
He adds:
Businesses need the confidence they can employ the right people at the right time. They will continue to invest heavily in skills and training, working with the Government to grow the skills base needed for a thriving economy. But having an immigration system that provides access to both skills and labour, whilst addressing the public’s concerns is essential.
As we enter a new phase of UK-EU relations, it is imperative that employers are supported effectively so our labour market continues to perform. There is a clear opportunity for the Government to work in partnership with business to position the UK as an attractive global hub and strong economy.
Image credit - UK flag Brexit stormclouds from EU balloons below © meatbull - Fotolia.comRead more on: HCM and the digital future of work 