
The July 4 weekend is underway in the U.S., and in the weeks that follow, many of us in the enterprise software world on both sides of the pond will exchange tasks on demand for toes in the sand.
Over the years, I’ve been surprised by how many view the holidays as a time for a bit of casual career enrichment, a semi-goofing/learning state that can lead to new ideas.
But you can’t enrich without a few consumption options. Without further ado, here’s some recommends.
1. Load up the Kindle (or your e-book reader or choice). Here’s a couple of Kindle searches lined up:
Enterprise software on Kindle
Leadership books on Kindle
Aside from some pulpy fiction, I’m currently reading Epic Content Marketing, Shift: A User’s Guide to the New Economy, Be So Good They Can’t Ignore You, and Ray Wang’s Disrupting Digital Business: Create an Authentic Experience in the Peer-to-Peer Economy.
Others beach bibles I recommend include: Lean UX, Success Built to Last, The Challenger Sale, and the best creativity porn ever written, Hugh MacLeod’s Ignore Everybody: and 39 Other Keys to Creativity.
2. Stream up the YouTube – YouTube isn’t just for watching World Cup replays until FIFA grumpily removes them. Enterprise software buffs could do worse than browse through the hundreds of interviews my diginomica colleague (and sometimes video partner in crime) Den Howlett has posted. There’s some fresh content that includes the latest on IT spending trends and women in tech. A couple other options:
Browse through my #ensw multi-media picks collection – As I consume curate content I put all the interesting multi-media content on one stream. There’s a lot to browse there from many producers you may not have stumbled on yet.  Bonus: also check my “Cool data science and analytics talks” YouTube playlist.
3. Peruse business documentaries on Netflix (or elsewhere) – Here’s some updated Netflix documentary lists:
12 documentaries on Netflix that will make you smarter about business
The 25 best documentaries streaming on Netflix right now
16 must-see business documentaries (alas, no online links included)
I recently watched The Rise and Rise of Bitcoin on NetFlix, which is a good intro to the significant developments of the blockchain. Freakonomics is up next. Veering off the enterprise, I was a fan of Netflix’s original Bloodline series, though it has its problems. It’s not a “fun for the whole family” vibe -b but then neither are these documentaries.
4. Discover a new blog – A new blog is always a swell discovery. Over the holidays, it’s nice to read blogs that are informal in style, as in:
And Vijay Says – Where you might get a debate on why spreadsheets will never die, or you might get a pros/cons of why SAP shouldn’t open source HANA, or you might get thoughts on international Yoga day.
Kellblog – Are Your Managers Good Enough? How about a vintage rant on United Airlines? Or Interpreting Customer Satisfaction Surveys in an Age of Bias? Nice mix here.
Confused of Calcutta – Music, cricket, and meanderings that always seem to work their way back into the fresh thinking about the enterprise.
Many of my fellow Enterprise Irregulars who blog share their posts with that site – it’s a good place to scroll through a range of relevant and/or eclectic views of the enterprise quickly.
5. Tinker with a new app – It’s always good to squander a couple hours playing with new apps – who knows, we might find something that actually increases our productivity when we go back to the cube. A good place to start is Mark Suster’s Products I Love to Use, which has a useful comment thread where readers share their faves.
Audible, which gets an honorable mention, is way better than I expected for audio books on the go. I’d add Newsblur, my trusty newsreader with an awesome mobile app, and Chrome bookmarks for cross-device sync. I’m gonna check out a few on Suster’s list including MediaREDEF.
If you’re burned out on all things #ensw, you may want to give a listen to my fave podcast on television, Firewall and Iceberg. The guys have a natural banter and a good combo of context for shows I watch and pros/cons of those I don’t, but might want to put to the test, e.g. True Detective season 2. See you on the other side…
Read more on: Future of work 