
It’s been a while since we had a decent marketing cloud acquisition, so thanks be to Oracle for its decision to snap up Maxymiser Ltd., a maker of cloud-based software for mobile marketing.
Founded in 2006, Maxymiser’s tech enables marketers to test, target and personalize what a customer sees on a Web page or mobile application. The firm boasts that it optimizes over 20 billion customer experiences every month for brand names such as Allianz, HSBC, Lufthansa and Tommy Hilfiger.
Oracle says the technology will be added to its Oracle Marketing Cloud. Thomas Kurian, president of product development at Oracle, said in a statement:
Companies are increasingly seeking innovative ways to differentiate their brands while increasing both ROI and loyalty based on optimized customer experiences.
Together with Maxymiser, Oracle Marketing Cloud enables enterprises to stop guessing and start delivering what customers want across all digital channels and devices.
Mark Simpson, founder of Maxymiser, explains the appeal of the acquisition as:
The biggest challenge today is providing the optimal customer experience. It really is hard to decide what to show who. A lot of marketers have been doing this through guessing what to put in front of their customers.
We take enterprise data and augment customer profiles with real-time data. On top of that we’re layering algorithms that enable us to test, to discover segments and to target content and predictively personalise the right experience for the right individual.
As a case in point, he cites Alaska Airlines which wanted to boost the number of car rental reservations made at the same time as booking flights.
It needed to test various forms of attachment, from banner images, rental partner logos, messing for reservations and low price guarantees and so on. In total, the airline needed to test combinations of over 400 promotional experiences, using different colors, timings, pricing and designs.
The end result was a 12% increase in car rental bookings and zero impact on the sales of airline tickets.
My take
A nice little tuck-in acquisition.
Disclosure – at time of writing, Oracle is a premier partner of diginomica.
Read more on: Cloud platforms - infrastructure and architectureCRM and customer experienceDigital and content marketing 