
As I said earlier, earnings season is always fun. The latest contender for providing the greatest amusement is VM Ware which posted solid numbers. From the earnings call, [transcript] Pat Gelsinger CEO said:
Our first quarter was a solid start to 2015. Q1 revenue grew 13% year-over-year in constant currency, and we exceeded our total revenue and non-GAAP operating margin guidance.
Sanjay Poonen – EVP/GM, EUC VMWare
So far so good. Along with reminders of product launches, it was the mobile division that catches the eye with 50% year over year license bookings at constant currency. Mobile is a hot topic across multiple dimensions. With that in mind, we’d reached out to Sanjay Poonen, EVP/GM, VMware End-User Computing (EUC) whom we know from his days at SAP.
In an email, he said:
Our End-User Computing (EUC) business is kicking butt!  It has dramatically turned around  – we’ve gone from laggard to leader, through sustained innovation which has put us in the undisputed #1 position, and by building the world’s most talented EUC dream team in the industry here at VMware.
It has also been a year since we acquired AirWatch, to drive VMware into leadership of Business Mobility. AirWatch is going smashingly well.  Net-net, we’re taking lots of market-share from Citrix, MobileIron, Good and others.
Classic marketing but heh, it’s always nice when you’ve good news to crow about. He goes on:
After Q1, I tweeted out our publicly made statements about growth and market-share gains relative to the competition on Twitter, see here and chart below this e-mail.  It kicked up a bit of a firestorm on Twitter you can see on the tweet thread, but all good, we welcome the debate!
What’s all the fuss about? Again, there’s some marketing involved here. The graphic which stirred a few up:

 
Cláudio Rodirzuez, CEO WTSLabs was particular incensed at the way VMWare presented the picture:
@spoonen @VMware @citrix @mobileiron and the tone of the posts, a my dick is bigger than yours, always from VMware is getting old.
— Cláudio Rodrigues (@crod) April 25, 2015

Ouch – that’s gotta hurt but then Poonen came back with an offer to go through what the company is doing which Rodriguez accepted. As Poonen points out, mobile is a hot topic. Right now it seems that VMWare is benefiting from that trend but we need to know more. The company is coming from a relatively low base albeit aided by the AirWatch acquisition – it remains to be seen how momentums builds. In the meantime there’s no doubting Poonen’s confidence in EUC.
One to watch with more updates to follow.
Disclosure: SAP is a premier partner at time of writing.

Read more on: Mobile 