
One of the great advantages about being a site owner is that I get to talk about things that matter outside of my site remit on occasion. This is one of those occasions.
Médecins Sans Frontières is a relief organization I learned about many years ago in the context of an organization that was trying to beat down its organizational costs and operate in as transparent a manner as possible with its main sponsors. The idea was to get as much money going to relief as possible. It was a great example at the time and I remember being impressed with their singularity of vision and determination in execution. Sadly, I don’t have access to that story today and in one sense it doesn’t matter.
What matters is that a few days ago, a hospital in Afghanistan where MSF was providing relief operations was bombed by US military forces. MSF staff sustained terrible losses —
On Saturday 3 October 2015 the MSF Trauma centre in Kunduz was hit several times during sustained bombing by coalition forces, and was very badly damaged.
Twelve staff members and at least 10 patients, including three children, were killed; 37 people were injured including 19 staff members.
I can’t imagine what that’s like, let alone comprehend the damage and pain that brings to families and friends of those who lost their lives in the pursuit of voluntary relief. It doesn’t compute and it shouldn’t on the scale of human expression.
The reason I am writing this is because on a Monday night in San Diego, there has been almost no obvious coverage of this shocking event in any of the popular media I see. Maybe I am not seeing the right media, The material I can find suggests it was collateral damage but then I also hear the MSF had signaled its location to US forces well in advance of any attack.
I am not a political person, neither does diginomica offer politically motivated thoughts. But I find it tragic that an organization I know was doing everything it can to bring relief in one of the toughest places on earth, and which carefully uses technology in a good way to maximize available relief dollars, should find itself in this position.
Somethings are just not right. I needed to say that.
Read more on: Healthcare transformation 