
Shantanu Narayam
Adobe’s gamble on moving to a subscription-only business model appears to be paying off.
For its latest quarter to end of February, the firm turned in a profit of $84.9 million, up from $47 million, year-on-year on revenue up 11% to $1.11 billion. Subscription revenue rose 68% to $713.4 million, while product revenue fell 38% to $290.8 million.
Adobe added 517,000 Creative Cloud subscribers during the quarter, up 28% year-on-year. CEO Shantanu Narayen idenitifies a shift towards mobile as a significant trend on view:
In digital media, Creative Cloud continues to be the preeminent destination for creatives around the world, enabling them to work seamlessly across desktop and mobile devices.
While the desktop applications continue to be the foundation of Creative Cloud, 50% of Creatives are using mobile devices in their creative process.
Over 30 million mobile apps have been downloaded, including capture apps like Adobe Brush and Shape, as well as desktop companion apps for Photoshop CC and Illustrator CC. Over 5 million new free subscribers were acquired through our Creative Cloud mobile apps since October.
The company successfully closed its acquisition of Fotolia in January. Next step – integration into the wider porfolio. Narayen says:
Work is underway to integrate Fotolia into Creative Cloud, providing current and future Creative Cloud members with the ability to access and purchase over 35 million images and videos within the Creative Cloud experience.
We will also continue to operate Fotolia as a standalone stock service, accessible to anyone. With seamless integration, we believe we can increase Creative Cloud ARPU over time, as well as grow Adobe’s share of the stock content market.
Earlier this week, Adobe announced Adobe Document Cloud, which Narayan pitches as the next big thing, building on the firm’s historic experience:
Adobe invented PDF and it is the de facto standard in the documents category. We see a sizable opportunity ahead of us in the documents space to monetize the millions of existing Acrobat customers and hundreds of millions of Reader and PDF users.
We plan to make Document Cloud available to our customers as both a perpetual and subscription offering within the next 30 days. It will also be available to our Creative Cloud subscribers as part of the full Creative Cloud offering.
He adds:
The fundamental issue is that the need to manage documents and document workflows is actually increasing rather than decreasing. And we have this incredible franchise when we think about both the reader, distribution that we have across virtually every device, the fact that we’ve distributed over a billion of them. And the fact that PDF has been accepted as the de facto standard for documents.
So when you put that together and you consider the massive shift that’s happening from paper to digital, we just think we have a really unique opportunity to convert paper documents to this high-quality PDF that you can edit, you can auto populate, you can fill forms, you can send for signatures and more.
As for the digital marketing push, revenue for Adobe Marketing Cloud in Q1 was $311 million, representing 17% year-over-year revenue growth. Most recently, the firm introduced Adobe Primetime, a multi-screen TV platform, and Audience Manager, a data management platform as well as new capabilities in Adobe Campaign and Adobe Analytics.
Narayan concludes:
We have built two fast-growing cloud businesses and are well on our way to building a third. All three share a common goal of enabling our customers to make, manage, measure and monetize virtually every type of content.
We are driving the future of digital media and marketing in a way that no other company can, and we are excited about our roadmap for the year.
My take
They took a gamble. They got complaints. But it’s hard to argue it’s not working out.
RELATED STORIES

Adobe CEO: je ne regrette rien!
Adobe passes the 2.3 million subscribers mark for Creative Cloud
Adobe Document Cloud champions paperless office
Adobe set to pass major cloud milestone as Creative Suite licensing ends
Adobe’s subs succeed, but Marketing Cloud needs marketing


Read more on: Cloud platforms - infrastructure and architectureMobile 