
It’s the people stupid! 2015 was a year when I got to both catch up with old sparring partners while meeting a clutch of new executives who are genuinely interesting and changing our technology world. Sprinkled among, I saw a mixture of the good, bad, indifferent and bizarre. That’s what makes this industry so fascinating and in that spirit I offer you a selection of pieces many of which hold clues for 2016. Grab a brew, skim read or soak it up but do enjoy.
10. Rimini Street ordered to pay Oracle $50 million – what does it mean?
The case for third party maintenance is settled and Rimini Street has proven conclusively through its reported earnings that it can serve customers well and grow at a good clip. In that sense, customers are on the winning side. But in the end, it will be stakeholders who decide the next move.
More important, having established the principle that third party maintenance is a legitimate business, customer must now look to the wording of their contracts to ensure that original software vendors do not include words and phrases that make an exit to a third party prohibitively expensive.
Why? I have been following the Oracle v Rimini Street case since Rimini Street was founded. The fact that the court found in favor of Oracle was no surprise given the way the case came to trial and the extent to which Rimini Street was handcuffed in terms of what it could argue. The ‘no fault’ verdict was a massive win, as was the legitimizing of the third party maintenance model. It’s now game on as Oracle attempts to pivot towards a subscription model while Rimini Street picks off the many customers who are in steady state.
9. An informal conversation with Luka Mucic, CFO SAP
Overall, I was impressed with the extent to which Mucic answered questions without obvious fluff or swerving to PR trained talking points. That was made more poignant by the fact we met without a set agenda. That was evident from our diversion into the financially heady territory of transfer pricing and currency movements impacting the business model. On those two points, I came away convinced that while financial analysts might wish for a bullish outlook, Mucic has ensured the company communicates a conservative, cautious model that takes as many factors into account as possible but without being too downbeat.
Why? SAP has plenty of challenges but the office of the CFO is not one of them. Wicked smart, amusing (who can say that about a CFO?) but clearly in control of a behemoth that on occasion gets in its own way ensures that whatever gyrations may be going on elsewhere, Mucic keeps the investor community focused on the business model and how that translates to the balance sheet. A formidable person who never fails to challenge. In short, my kind of CFO and especially for a company that will continue to transition in 2016.
8. digibyte: Workday Q4 2015 beats on revenue estimates, guides past predicted $1bn revenue for 2016
Workday shades revenue estimates in its Q4 2015 report and guides past my 2012-13 prediction that it would reach revenue of $1bn in the 2016 timeframe.
Why? This one is self indulgent so see it for what it is. As someone who rarely makes firm predictions. there’s a lot of satisfaction in seeing a prediction come true and especially when that prediction was made years before its passing. It is even more satisfying to see a prediction come true earlier than anticipated. Workday of course is one of my favorite vendors. They put on the best analyst days and have one of the most transparent executive teams I’ve ever met. Is it a surprise they frighten the incumbents?
7. Mark Hurd, co-CEO Oracle: welcome to Nobody Cares
This is what CEO’s care about. Most of the time you’re thinking about survival. You have zero friends and investors? Well, nobody cares about you. They only want your performance. Make me money and if you don’t do it fast we’ll get the next person in line to do it. It’s about execution. It’s in the head of everyone who’s in the corner office. Its the reality.
Why? Mark Hurd may be one of the most hard charging co-CEOs in Silicon Valley and is always driven by the numbers but his contextualizing of the pressure under which today’s CEOs operate was refreshingly honest, adding the right degree of urgency to decision making in software selection. In analyst meetings, Hurd is happy to step off the messaging piste when the occasion demands. We like that in a CEO and expect more of the same in 2016.
6. Amazon splits out AWS numbers, market goes crazy making wrong assumptions
Yesterday Amazon finally split out its Amazon Web Services (AWS) operating numbers. They reveal an operating division that’s profitable – sort of – if you ignore the fact that Amazon, in common with many other technology companies is in the atrociously bad habit of ignoring a large chunk of employee costs under the moniker ‘stock based compensation’ and other creative accounting measures.
Why? Technology companies are rewriting the accounting rules for themselves and it isn’t all good. The way most try mask real costs in a manner wholly dependent upon a rising market is egregious and cynical. But. I have to give Amazon credit for getting us all focusing on its amazing infrastructure business. Look for Amazon to become one of the elephants in the enterprise room during 2016.
5. Ad-blocking as a moral right?
Rather than capitulate to a perceived eventuality, should we not ask the fundamental question: why do ad-blockers exist and what can we do better so that they are not needed? Better still, if we must have advertising, how about making it genuinely creative and attractive?
Why? You can tell when an industry is in trouble when someone hoists the ethical flag on a topic that has no bearing to the economics and so it was. Ad blocking was a rolling topic throughout 2015 and won’t go away in 2016. In the meantime, those of us who care about CONTENT, remain pissed off at the way ad-driven sites assault us with popups, popovers, page splashes and goodness knows what as they seek to grab another nano second of our impoverished attention spans.
4. Exclusive – ADP v Zenefits – a follow up and assessment
I find it hard to believe that Zenefits actions on such a small sample of ADP total customer count could produce this level of activity such as to warrant a shutdown. I know Brian sees this differently but I would need to see compelling log file evidence to be satisfied that ADPs concerns were legitimate.
Why? The Silicon Valley spat of the year got us in front of both Zenefits and ADP. Unusual, with both sides seeking to make PR points. It turns out the judge took one look at ADPs case and booted it from the courthouse, telling ADP the headmaster’s equivalent of ‘grow up and behave yourself.’ Zenefits remains a lightning rod for anything that goes vaguely wrong so expect more ‘revelations’ in 2016. But see them for what (most of them) are. The media fed rantings of companies that are desperately seeking ways to plug disruptive holes in their own business models.
3. Exclusive: progress in the transformation at Infosys from the inside
I came away from the two days having learned a great deal. All of those I met, many for the first time, spoke with candor and an enthusiasm that is both unusual and encouraging.
At any conference, I can readily find my share of people willing to tell me how tough things are, how broken this and that are or how badly the company sucks. People I met were willing to share their issues but with a mind to work through solutions. That is a different experience.
Why? I was genuinely privileged to go ‘behind the curtain’ of a sales kick off that took place in my own back yard of San Diego. I like the vision CEO Vishal Sikka brings to this company and the very human way in which he articulates the importance of education. As 2015 ends, Infosys faces fresh challenges and 2016 could be difficult – at least from the POV of keeping the financial markets happy. It won’t divert Sikka from his long term purpose. He has no time for that.
2. Oracle OpenWorld 2015 – the verdict
We can mark down Oracle OpenWorld 2015 as a hit. Many questions were answered and new initiatives look exciting.
Why? I’m looking down this list of 10 and see Oracle highlighted in three but for different reasons. Hmm…Well, it turns out that Oracle did a very good job of ensuring that some of us gnarly, grumpy old farts got the kinds of answer we wanted to long standing questions. And, there is no denying that Larry Ellison, now in a new role as CTO, did a stand up job of communicating a plethora of moving parts in a coherent and, entertaining manner. 2016 is the year when Oracle has to start bringing this together in a meaningful way. It will not be easy.
1. Lew Cirne, CEO New Relic, on sleepless nights, culture, customers and technology
New Relic is one of many competitors in the APM space but it is carving out a place of its own as it replaces legacy solutions while appealing to those businesses transforming through technology or which are going straight to cloud. I found Cirne’s answers to be an agreeable mix of enthusiasm, caution and reality.
I was particularly impressed by his direct reference to the kind of customer to which New Relic appeals rather than listing all the functional achievements that differentiate the company. That suggests a maturity of thinking around positioning that is unusual.
Why? My conversation with Lew Cirne was one of the most engaging I’ve had in many years when meeting for the first time. I have to cast my mind back to the first time Vishal Sikka grabbed me to talk about his (then) new baby HANA to get the same sense of purpose and passion. Cirne sets a differentiating tone that resonates across the business and not just with the geeks. That’s genius in an industry that often suffers from an inability to get beyond its technology talking points. 2016 promises to be very interesting for this fast moving company.
 
Disclosure  – at time of writing, Infosys, Oracle, Rimini Street, SAP and Workday are premier partners of diginomica. Infosys is a personal consulting client.
Read more on: Best of archivesDevOps NoSQL and the open source stackFrictionless enterpriseFuture of work 