
Last week, following US President Donald Trump’s decision to pull America out of the Paris Accord on climate change, I said that tech industry leaders had some tough decisions to make as a result of this, particularly in relation to how they engage with the current administration.
Yesterday, some of the biggest tech names made a stand by signing up to the We Are Still In movement, led by
Tech signatories include Amazon, Apple, CA Technologies, Facebook, Google, Hewlett Packard Enterprise, Intel, Microsoft,  Salesforce, Twitter and Yahoo! Notable absences (to date) include IBM, Oracle and SAP.
For those who have signed up, they joined mayors, governors and academics to declare that they will continue to support action intended to meet the requirements of the Paris Accord. In total, the signatories represent 120 Million Americans and $6.2 trillion of value to the US economy.
The declaration reads:
In December 2015 in Paris, world leaders signed the first global commitment to fight climate change. The landmark agreement succeeded where past attempts failed because it allowed each country to set its own emission reduction targets and adopt its own strategies for reaching them. In addition, nations – inspired by the actions of local and regional governments, along with businesses – came to recognize that fighting climate change brings significant economic and public health benefits.
The Trump administration’s announcement undermines a key pillar in the fight against climate change and damages the world’s ability to avoid the most dangerous and costly effects of climate change. Importantly, it is also out of step with what is happening in the United States.
In the U.S., it is local and state governments, along with businesses, that are primarily responsible for the dramatic decrease in greenhouse gas emissions in recent years. Actions by each group will multiply and accelerate in the years ahead, no matter what policies Washington may adopt.
In the absence of leadership from Washington, states, cities, colleges and universities, businesses and investors, representing a sizeable percentage of the U.S. economy will pursue ambitious climate goals, working together to take forceful action and to ensure that the U.S. remains a global leader in reducing emissions.
It is imperative that the world know that in the U.S., the actors that will provide the leadership necessary to meet our Paris commitment are found in city halls, state capitals, colleges and universities, investors and businesses. Together, we will remain actively engaged with the international community as part of the global effort to hold warming to well below 2°C and to accelerate the transition to a clean energy economy that will benefit our security, prosperity, and health.
My take
A powerful message, a worthwhile stand.
Image credit - YouTubeDisclosure - At time of writing, Oracle, Salesforce and SAP are premier partners of diginomica. Read more on: Digital government and public services

