
Onwards
The gap between success and failure just keeps getting wider at The GAP – and even some digital successes aren’t making much difference to the bigger picture. 
The retail chain just reported a 33% drop in profits over the quarter ended 30 January (which takes in the holiday season), down from $319 million to $214 million on revenue down 7% to $4.39 billion. 
CEO Art Peck argues that investment in digital transformation of the customer experience is an ever increasingly priority:


Historically in this business, the moment of truth was when a customer crossed the leased line into a store. Today, as a company, we are increasingly seeing the moment of truth is when a customer, through their phone, comes into our digital store and we either win or lose their affection, their engagement and ultimately their sales if we win or lose at that moment of truth.

That means having to keep up with the customer’s use of technologies, he explains: 

This year, the bulk of our traffic will be mobile traffic to our digital space. That represents an opportunity because a great majority of that traffic is incremental, but it also means that we offer the customer an emotional, immersive, holistic, engaging brand experience along with what we have historically done extremely well, which is a very efficient e-commerce transactional experience.

In turn, this is going to mean investment in the corporate technology strategy. Here, Peck points to a check-list of action items: 

We’re modernizing our Points of Sale. We’ve built a number of omni-channel capabilities. We’ve virtualized our inventory so that we have access to all of our inventory across all of our demand. 
The thing that I am really excited about is the accelerating pace of mobile and the mobile experience that we have. Historically, we’ve operated our websites in two separate platforms. We’re in the process of bringing those together on a fully responsively designed website. 
And most importantly, we’re going through a cultural change inside the company of really thinking digital first and mobile first.

Learning
Here there are learnings to be taken on board, says Peck, citing the example of the Athleta brand, bought by GAP in 2008 to expand its online presence. Athleta sells yoga, running, skiing, snowboarding and surfing gear online and by catalog. The progress there has been perhaps counter-intuitive, he says: 

We are learning every day what the right mix of online catalog and stores is in the Athleta business. It’s the opposite of what has happened in mainstream retail, where people have gone online from a stores business. In Athleta we’ve gone into stores from an online and catalog business.
Our initial expectation as we started to open stores was that it would probably be cannibalizing of our online business. As we’ve learned and seen how the store channel and the direct channel interact with each other, we are really pleased to see that the direct business continues to grow even as we open stores, and that as [the customer] discovers it in a store, she goes to direct.

In other areas, it’s a case of proceed in exploratory mode. For example, the junction of outlet and online is cited by Peck. Outlet mall shopping is an area into which GAP has entered slowly: 

Frankly the reason we’ve gone there is that’s where the customer is, and we’ve got to go where the customer is right now. The whole outlet business has continued to morph over the last decade. It used to be a business that was highly physically isolated relative to the specialty business, and obviously there’s been a collision going on where outlets get closer to speciality, and the suburbs have spread out to where the outlet malls were built.
The online channel is another extension of that at the end of the day. That’s where our customer is, and we felt a need to have a presence there. It’s early days right now. We are in our early days of having this channel. It’s very difficult to identify anything that is cannibalizing anything frankly, versus the fact that it is complementary to the existing outlet channel. But we are watching it very carefully, and we are trying to understand how it interacts number one, with our outlet stores, because that’s critical, but then number two, with the speciality business as well.

My take
Digital transformation is clearly crucial, but GAP’s problems lie deeper. Digital tech can’t cure issues such as the one Peck cites around Banana Republic: 

We just had huge quality misses. Literally places where whether it was fits or the quality of the fabrication, it made the product very difficult to wear…blazers in Banana Republic women’s assortment where it was extremely difficult for the average woman to actually get her arm into the armhole.

You can’t fix that level of FAIL with spending on a fancy mobile commerce site. 
Read more on: Retail e-commerce and the omni-channel 