
The Crown Commercial Service, which represents the commercial interests of the UK government, has announced that it has signed a new deal with Oracle that should allow it to cut down on spend and licensing costs with the software provider.
The Memorandum of Understanding builds on a similar agreement back in 2012, which set out to save Whitehall £75 million by consolidating its buying power, making all purchasing central, as opposed to disaggregated across government.
The latest deal extends the scope to include additional public sector bodies, such as the NHS, as well as more products and services.
Sally Collier, Chief Executive of CCS said:
The enhanced will deliver savings across government and allow easier and more effective procurement of Oracle products and services. It lays the foundation of a more collaborative relationship between government and Oracle.
Oracle’s Senior Vice President and UK Country Leader Dermot O’Kelly added:
 We are delighted to demonstrate our commitment to the agenda of the new government in saving money and delivering leading-edge information technology to help transform public services. We look forward to continued productive and mutually beneficial relationships with our public sector customers.
The news follows reports from the Register that the Cabinet Office had contacted central agencies and asked them to look for ways to “get rid of Oracle”, with estimates that the public sector spends in excess of £200 million a year with the software vendor.
The sceptics amongst us may question whether the timing of the story may have helped CCS’s cause when negotiating its latest deal with Oracle. However, its also fair to note that the latest agreement is building on an existing understanding that Oracle signed up to in 2012 – so a precedent had been set.
Either way, good news in terms of savings and an indication that Whitehall isn’t quite yet rolling over and going back to its old ways.
Disclosure – Oracle is a diginomica premier partner at time of writing. 
Read more on: Digital government and public services

