
Digital transformation in the retail sector is a recurring topic on diginomica. In this special report, four brand names provide an update on their progress – or otherwise…
Kohl’s
At Kohl’s, digital channels are currently growing at just over 19% year-on-year, with mobile making up 70% of total digital traffic and nearly half of digital sales. Offline stores fulfil around 30% of digital sales, with dedicated e-commerce centers delivering the remainder.
CEO Michelle Gass points to Buy Online, Pick-up In Store as an accelerating trend that both lowers overall shipping costs while also driving incremental up and cross-selling. For the coming year, she flags up a number of key initiatives:
First, we will be launching Buy Online, Ship to Store, otherwise known as BOSS, this summer. This will significantly broaden the assortment available to our customers to pick up in store and add to our existing buy online pick up in store platform which has seen very robust growth in the past few years. This is another great way that we see we can bring traffic into our stores.
Second, we will begin the multi-year build-out of our sixth e-commerce fulfillment center. It will be highly automated similar to our fifth center that came online in 2017, which is 3x as productive as our first generation center. Third, we’re making further investments in our analytics driven inventory deployment model to enhance both speed to customer and cost efficiencies across a fulfillment network.
Kohl’s is also upping its play to attract a younger demographic, with Gass pointing to how teens utilize “digital data and insights to inform not only our omni-channel business strategies, but also our in-store merchandising. This has led to some new partnerships and alliances:
We are partnering with POPSUGAR, a leading digital media company to launch POPSUGAR at Kohl’s this September. This new innovative apparel brand will be targeted toward millennial women and will tap into POPSUGAR audience of more than a 100 million readers and 31 million social followers to both inform the assortment and drive unique joint marketing approach.
Gass also taps improved personalisation as a key objective:
We’re investing a lot as it relates to technology and data and certainly the teams. We have a lot of activity there. A lot of testing going on and we do think it’s going to be a big contributor. As we sit here today we have our own internal benchmarks and metrics we will see it unfold. We’re not in a position to a fully quantify because we’re still in the testing and incubating, but we’re all pretty confident this is going to provide an uptick in sales and traffic as we look forward
Urban Outfitters
At Urban Outfitters, digital is outperforming offline stores, reporting “double digit” growth levels to make up 40% of total revenue. As part of this, average order values are up as are session durations and conversion rates.
The firm has developed its own proprietary tech to support this level of digital growth, says CEO Richard Hayne, and work continues to enhance capabilities further:
The digital and brand teams working together continue to research and test new ways to enhance the digital experience. For example, this month, both the Urban and Anthro brands launched their new online marketplace. This exciting new feature enables a curated assortment of third party sellers to list and sell merchandise on our brand websites. After a thorough test period, each brand plans to expand its marketplace to include complimentary brands, products and services with a goal of expanding the online assortment offered to the customer and increasing site traffic.
Other recent site enhancements include the addition of two alternative payment methods – Apple Pay and Afterpay. The latter has recently entered the U.S. market from Australia with URBN as their American launch partner. Afterpay allows customers to purchase and receive products and then pay for them over time with no interest charges or credit checks. If U.S. customers behave similarly to those in Australia, this service could raise our conversion rates and boost average order values
Urban Outfitters has also made a move to allow third parties to list their merchandise on its own site. Chief Digital Officer David Hayne admits this isn’t a new idea in the wider internet market, but sees it as a big deal for Urban Outfitters:
I think it’s going to be a relatively big win for both our merchant teams as well as our customers. For the merchant that should provide them a fair amount of flexibility in crafting their assortment as well as how they react to the market. And then just for customers, we expect that to be something that will be able to get wider breadth and assortment and hopefully choose to shop with us and choose to come back to us because of that.
As CDO, Hayne has his own to-do list to address:
We are focused pretty heavily from an infrastructure standpoint making our sites faster, making them generally more shoppable, focused pretty specific ways around specialization and making the site something that reacts to the customers and what we know about them. We’ve just recently launched a new iOS apps which are something that have just gone live for the Urban and Anthro brands and we’ll be launching for Free People in the next month or so. These are completely built from the ground up and totally new experiences that have a much more fluid navigation and much better customer experience. So that’s a positive development task well.
Ralph Lauren
The situation isn’t as healthy at Ralph Lauren where e-commerce revenues were down 18% in the U.S. Europe’s still doing OK, but there’s a tech platform upgrad coming in that region which is likely to negatively impact there in the short term. In total, global digital sales are around $1 billion, including direct and indirect business.
CEO Patrice Louvet admits there’s work to be done, but is confident that this is a temporary blip:
In fiscal 2019 and beyond, we expect our digital growth to accelerate as the major pullback in our directly operated North America e-commerce business is largely complete. We’re improving our site’s functionality and increasing marketing to return to revenue growth in this important channel.
In fiscal 2018, we drove market share gains in this channel at our key retailers and in our key categories. We are collaborating closely with our key partners on targeted product and marketing initiatives on both department store websites and pure play customers. As an example, our collaboration with ASOS in Europe with the different ways to wear the polo shirt campaign was highly effective, as we tailored the message specifically for the consumer on that platform.
The shift to a more consumer-focused marketing approach is deliberate, Louvet says:
We recently completed a major global consumer research study that provided important insights…These learnings will enable us to be much more precise about how we engage specific consumer groups in order to make our marketing investments more effective and efficient.
There have already been several major marketing pushes to drive consumer engagements for the brand, starting with Winter Olympics sponsorship:
We generated 6 billion media impressions from extensive social media presence with key American athletes and outfitting the U.S. Olympic Team with the high-tech heated jacket. Our February fashion show was a successful media event with 3.2 million global live views. We built anticipation and amplification on social with 3.3 billion global media impressions.
The Snow Beach limited edition in January successfully leveraged social media through a robust campaign on Instagram and key influencers such as Chance the Rapper and Zayn.We also continued to build our influencer and celebrity coverage, spanning various parts of culture from artists to movie stars to athletes. Awards season dressing included Shailene Woodley at the Golden Globes, Emma Watson and Eiza Gonzales at the Academy Awards, Jay-Z at the Grammy Awards Pre-Party and Mandy Moore and Yara Shahidi at the Screen Actors Guild Awards.
GAP
GAP has had its problems in recent years with its Old Navy low-end brand keeping the ship afloat while the high-end Banana Republic has struggled. Online and mobile channels across the group now account for $3 billion, a figure that CEO Art Peck insists will continue to grow, with additional investment in tech to support this:
We’re enhancing our productivity across the enterprise, and we’ll beginning to unlock the value of our customer data assets across brand and across channel. We’re also investing in store technology. We’re adding new mobile devices that can improve our in-stock and service levels, and speed up the check out process. We’re also lighting up, in Old Navy, Buy Online and Pick-up In Store (BOPIS), which we believe has the opportunity to continue to unlock how the customer shops seamlessly across both of our channels. We believe these levers can improve conversion, and we’re investing in digital experience and fulfillment initiatives beyond this that enable us to engage with our customers in a more meaningful way.
We’re continuing to invest in bringing the relevant technology and putting it into the hands of our sales associates in our store. We’ve talked BOPIS, which is in Old Navy now, which we’re going to continue to roll across the fleet. We have a really exciting on-shelf in-stock app that we’ve now deployed on iOS devices in our stores that is an exception based re-stock app, tied to a re-design of our stock rooms. We’re seeing so far in the very early days a significant improvement in on-floor service levels and the reduction in payroll. So we get an efficiency benefit as well in terms of the re-plan hours that we spend keeping our stores in stock.
Is GAP doing all it can in terms of making the right investments? Peck is commendably frank:
No, there’s probably 2x what we’re spending if I met all of the demand across the organization. But we do feel that spending at a responsible level, that we have set the right priorities this year and as we go forward in terms of where we’re applying that investment. We’re focused on balance growth, continuing to support accelerating growth in active and value, supporting and investing in our progress in digital and accelerating the growth of our digital business, and how that connects to customer experience, rationalizing non-performing real estate and driving productivity
Image credit - Kohl’s/Urban/Ralph Lauren/GAPRead more on: Digital enterprise in the real worldRetail e-commerce and the omni-channelUse cases 