
Eisenberg and Krihely, from Girls Who Code piece
Since Phil Wainewright first announced the formal addition of a diversity section to our HCM and Future of Work cornerstone topic, I count 91 stories in the diversity category. Now, that’s stretching because Phil back-tagged prior posts, as far back as Derek du Preez’s scorching Silicon Valley: it’s hard out here for a bitch on July 3, 2014.
Since Phil’s formal intro on March 26, 2016, I count (informally) 55 new posts in the diversity category (keep in mind our posts can fit into multiple categories. and not all of those 55 are focused on that issue). So how are we doing? That’s for our readers to judge, but I’ll offer a few comments. First, however, I’d like to highlight some of my favorite pieces from our coverage.

British Gas turns up the heat on its Women in Technology network
by: Jessica Twentyman
quotage: “At the September event, there’ll be advice on how women already working at British Gas can ask for training, promotions and involvement in technology projects. They’ll get to understand better how the company can support them with childcare vouchers, help during school holidays and support to pursue further and post-graduate educational opportunities.”
why I picked it: Diversity at work is in the doing, not the happy talk. Who better to lead us off than our resident use case maven Jessica Twentyman, with a story of how women in tech are supported at British Gas, including a fruitful collaboration with the CIO.
also see: Stuart’s It’s good to be a girl, says Vera Bradley’s “true social movement” as retail marketing gets digital, a retail use case that some might see as cynical but I don’t care, I liked the “celebration of femininity” values expressed – a brand could do worse.

A gender diversity update with Cindy Jutras
by: Den Howlett
quotage: “It was also refreshing to hear Cindy make the often but obvious point that women have to work in what is essentially a man’s world. In her world view, it is up to women to demonstrate their abilities rather than plead for equal treatment. That approach is always tough but in taking that position, Cindy is ensuring that women take on board the responsibilities they can.”
why I picked it: Just because you’re a dude doesn’t mean your event coverage has to be dudelike. Find the guts to ask questions and learn. That’s what Den has done for two straight years at the Plex user event, interviewing analyst Cindy Jutras on enterprise gender diversity. Many of you know Jutras but it’s a real opportunity to hear her share what she’s learned and overcome in her career.

The politics of diversity in tech, 2016 – the black perspective
by: Gail Moody-Byrd
quotage: “The pervasive approach to solving the diversity problem in tech is to address the “pipeline problem” by exposing high school and college students to STEM. This approach, which does feed the pipeline with young people in entry-level roles, masks a large problem at the top of the tech pyramid – that mid-to-senior level Black executives are underrepresented in leadership roles in tech.  This is the place that unconscious biases, largely stated in ambiguous “behavior” terms, limit the upward mobility of Blacks in tech organizations.”
why I picked it: Too often, we reduce “diversity” to a gender discussion when in fact diversity is multi-faceted. Racism proves harder to talk about but is just as urgent. In one of the finest pieces diginomica has ever published, guest contributor Moody-Byrd makes a powerful case for racism in tech AND the benefits of overcoming. The end of the piece is a nod to the discrimination her father endured, and why silence is unacceptable.
also see: Derek’s recent assessment – Airbnb finally makes changes to platform to tackle racism problem – is it enough?

Africa’s women digital entrepreneurs are driving innovation
by: Cath Everett
quotage: “A prime example of this is the case of Onwaba Mrhwetyana, a single mother from a township who has developed an application called Creche Connect, which is billed as “TripAdvisor for crèches”. Mrhwetyana was a member of Project CodeX, a full-time apprenticeship scheme for budding software developers in South Africa, and last year ended up winning a hackathon offering the prize of R10,000 ($680) in seed funding to develop ideas for tackling early childhood development issues.”
why I picked it: Contributor Cath Everett has done a terrific job of addressing diversity issues in her coverage, this being one example. A big theme of our semi-regular coverage of African innovation is how, as Everett puts it, “Despite, or maybe because of, having inadequate fixed line infrastructure, the continent has leapfrogged its counterparts in the developing world in this arena.” Necessity, imagination and courage are hard to deny.
also see: Phil’s How the cloud helps Camfed empower girls in rural Africa. And this was one of my fave interviews of the year: Internet pioneer Nii Quaynor thinks the blockchain can change life in Ghana.

Competency over Pedigree – Plugging the tech skills gap by giving disadvantaged young adults a chance
by: Derek
quotage: “Gerald Chertavian is training up young people between the ages of 18 and 24, giving them the skills they need to start work in a corporate technology role in just twelve months. This is providing some of the largest companies out there (including Google, Facebook, LinkedIn, JP Morgan and American Express) with a pipeline of talent, all the while saving the lives of a section of society that is too often ignored, just by giving them an opportunity.”
why I picked it: I’m personally fed up with excuses for employers claiming lack of available talent. But: we do need organizations like Year Up to partner with hiring managers, and make sure these talented young people are ready to seize that opportunity. Derek’s powerful two part series, culminating in Jonathan Ruiz tells us how Year Up “saved his life” and got him off the streets of Boston, shows one way forward.
also see: How FIRST inspires students to find their place in our robotic future, by me

Bonus content – We also cover diversity in our vendor coverage. Many of our partners are doing important work in this area, so this is not an exclusive list, but these recent stories stood out:
The autistic worker – practical advice to recruit unique tech talent (SAP) – Cath
Diversity quotas in tech – good or bad? Expert panel divides (Salesforce) – Madeline
Salesforce gets a new CEO as the battle for equality steps up a notch (Salesforce) – Stuart, who has done stellar coverage of the tech industry’s fight against LGBT discrimination.

Final thoughts
When Phil wrote the intro to our diversity section, he asked why a tech media company has a focus on diversity.  He wrote:
Diversity isn’t merely a tech industry fad. It’s a crucial attribute for every enterprise in an increasingly interconnected digital world. Conformity is bad for competitive survival. When technology is rapidly breaking down the barriers that used to prevent people interacting with each other, diversity broadens your talent pool, boosts innovation and equips you to engage with the broadest market.
I like that answer because it moves beyond doing-the-right-thing, which always matters, to doing-the-better-thing. Diversity as a competitive advantage is real. Looking ahead, diginomica should do an even better job of making that case. Phil also raises a timely/ominous warning about AI and unconscious bias:
We’re also finding diversity is a recurring ethical issue when considering the increasingly important topic of machine learning and artificial intelligence. As Microsoft’s Tay chatbot has just reminded us, machines have no innate moral compass and they’re prone to unwittingly reflect the unspoken prejudices of their creators’ culture.
We have editorial work to do there; Brian Sommer already issued biting takes on the algorithmic dangers HR faces, e.g. “You’re not our kind of people” – why analytics and HR fail many good people.
Despite the competitive upside of diverse workforces, diversity in tech is hardly where it needs to be. In some cases it is shameful. That means diginomica can do better; we can do a lot better. We have a much more diverse contributing team than when we launched three and a half years ago, but, speaking for myself, we know our own imperfections.
For example, I found myself the subject of Twitter ire a few times this last year for appearing on all-male panels at events and webinars. I realized I need to make a change in my own policy on accepting appearances; putting all blame on the organizer is a copout.
I’m glad we have a dedicated diversity category; that holds us accountable. We can check how much coverage we have actually done, and so can you. Frankly, we can do better at events. Sometimes events are a blur; it’s easy to lose time in a ridiculous schedule to chase down an under-reported story. For example, without MongoDB’s help in advance of their event, I would not have been able to get a Girls Who Code feature out. But at other events, I didn’t get the job done.
So if you’re a vendor planning an event, make sure to loop our team into your diverse workforce stories, or, for that matter, clue us in to challenges you are facing. We won’t be dreamy, but we’ll do our utmost to be fair. And if you’re a reader who has a story angle we should be pursuing, do let us know.
Image credit - Photo of Meagan Eisenberg and Francesca Krihely of MongoDB by Jon Reed.Disclosure - SAP, Plex and Salesforce are diginomica premier partners. MongoDB paid the bulk of my expenses to attend MongoDB World.Read more on: Digital enterprise in the real worldDiversityFuture of workHCM and the digital future of workUse cases 