
Hancock’s Half Hour or so
Following the UK General Election on 7th May, there was much speculation about who would step into the shoes of Francis Maude as Minister for the Cabinet Office and as such the political face of the digital transformation of government.
Maude was, as we’ve noted, always going to be a hard act to follow and the appointment of his replacement would come on the eve of longstanding legacy IT and services contracts beginning to wind down.
Who is in the hot seat to manage the planned transition to new, short form contracts to replace those is vitally important to the continued progress on reforming public sector IT practices.
That person is Matt Hancock MP, who today provided the first insight into what we might expect from him when he addressed the Institute of Government think tank with a short speech and then some Q&A. .
He began with a comparison between the position the UK administration finds itself in today with how things were 160 years ago when the Civil Service Commission was set up:
A technological revolution was changing the way the world worked.
And the government of the day had to confront another familiar problem. How to adapt time-honoured structures to a world being transformed: by intense global competition, by technology and by ever-rising expectations about what government could achieve?
GDS praise
While much of his speech focused on the vexed question of civil service reform, Hancock did reference the work of the Government Digital Service (GDS) and argued that the best practices demonstrated there could be applied outside of the technology field:
Famously, GDS is leading the world in making real the benefits to citizens offered by digital: the biggest revolution of our times.
We need to deliver better services designed around the needs of users not the dictates of the machine.
Sometimes support is about giving people permission to try. Instead of trying to craft the perfect policy behind closed doors, often policymakers trying to solve a problem should just get stuck in, see what works and learn from mistakes, rather than working out all the nuances and minutiae before getting sign off from the Permanent Secretary.
This agile approach to service delivery gave us the award-winning GOV.UK, which has received 1.5 billion visits and reduced running costs by over half.
Next comes Verify, a digital platform allowing citizens to prove who they are so they can access all online government services – everything from applying for a driving licence to claiming a tax refund – without having to constantly type in your details. It’s a world first and it’s happening here in Britain.
Small teams of developers building a product quickly and cheaply, then iterating to improve it not through long consultations and private advice but by seeing how it survives contact with reality. It will more and more be the way of the future – for all policy-making and service delivery.
Addressing the IoG
There is clearly a lot of work to be done, not least in the area of getting technical skills back in house in the civil service. Hancock admitted:
To use the best tech, delivering the best public services, will require tech savvy skills in the civil service.
Curiously perhaps, he distanced himself from the idea of bringing in more expertise from the private sector:
I’m not someone who believes that the solution is to bring in more people from the private sector. Running the country is difficult.
That last comment will go down well with ‘Sir Humphrey’ and his colleagues at any rate. But Hancock is open to the idea of greater involvement of Non Executive Directors (NED), arguing:
NEDs operate essentially by ensuring depts have that sense-check. They bring different skills to the table. In some cases some cases NEDs get involved in policy but only at the invitation of the Minister. A good example is digital. If there’s a project that needs to be looked at, I’d expect a NED to open up thinking and broaden minds.
Hancock summed up:
There’s much more to do. Take the impact of digital for instance. Five years later, it has established itself.
Digital is the biggest revolution. GDS is there as a catalyst with some of the best experts in the world.
He added:
Freedom to fail is really important but it’s best done small. That’s why agile, iterative approach to policy making is attractive.
My take
The references to digital and to GDS’s work are very welcome given that this speech was not being delivered to a specifically tech-centric audience. That said, there’s a lot more meat needs putting on the policy bones before I’m entirely comfortable that the progress of the past five years is still on track.
As those big legacy contracts wind down, the pressure to extend them and buy more time, especially from non-tech savvy, panicky civil servants, will grow stronger. But going back to a big services house that’s coming to the end of a ten year contract and asking it to extend for another 9 months or a year,  is likely to be met with a short response or a large bill I’d imagine.
The execution to the new model of service delivery needs to be done with ruthless efficiency and unfettered by the legacy chains of conservatism with a small c. As we see more of Hancock in action, that’s what I’ll be looking for.
[mailmunch-form id=”14637″]
Read more on: Data privacyDigital government and public servicesG-Cloud and the Digital MarketplaceRegulation

