

HR as a global function has not really invested in technology fully since the turn of the century.

Market changes and customer expectations are now forcing HR to make up for those wilderness years and invest in technology, analytics and digital transformation, according to Harry Osle, global HR advisory practice leader and principal at The Hackett Group. 
A June Hackett Group report finds that six of the top 10 planned HR initiatives for 2016 involve technology or data, as HR recognizes that it has no choice but to embrace new technology. 
It also identifies some serious gaps in HR’s ability to address business requirements. These include a lack of ability to analyze and forecast data or indeed to provide basis analysis and reporting and insights to business decision makers. 
Top planned HR transformation activities in 2016
There is also a shortfall in HR’s ability to predict the skills and recruit people for the business as well as its ability to recruit business-savvy HR staff.  Finally, the core areas of the talent management, including learning and development, succession planning and performance management all have room for improvement.
Investment in digital transformation to meet these goals is critical, but to complicate matters, stagnant or falling budgets and staffing levels means HR needs to make these changes by channelling existing funds and resources.
According to Osle, for many in HR, the last big spend on HR technology happened around the time of Y2K and the dot.com boom. Funds evaporated once the dot.com bubble “pinged”. But now, with “backs against the wall”, HR must invest in technology.
What to spend on?
A couple of years ago the emphasis was much more on managing talent, but priority has swung towards technology, first because of this need to replace out-of-date technology and second because of  the rise of cloud software. Osle says:

The combination of that fact that we haven’t invested for a lot of years and we’re out of compliance and out of maintenance is number one. Number two is the fact that cloud solutions are more prevalent, easier to obtain, easier to implement.

Improving the quality of data and analytics is the key to better agility for firms, but many firms have been hampered, “because their technology infrastructure wasn’t robust enough”, notes Osle:

Data and analytics work well only if you have the right technology platform. So you have to be able to take a look at your technology platform to see if allows you to have the ability to capture and to store the right data.

After all, adds Osle:

What good is data analytics if you can’t get the right data?

Overall, Osle believes that HR “is average or below average” in terms of its analytics use. Another spanner in the works, says Osle, is that delivering the right data at the right time will only work if HR has staff with the business acumen to effectively communicate the importance of that data:Where world-class companies do a better job is aligning the skills set and competencies of that [HR] business partner with the right acumen for the business so that they can take that data and make it relevant:

The combination of having great data but some person who doesn’t know how to deliver the message is not good.  And the reverse is not good. The combination is what organizations are looking for.

The problem for HR is finding people the right data and analytical nous, says Osle:

Smart or world-class organizations are bringing in those skill-sets from outside. I think they’re bringing in them in from finance, I think they’re bringing them in from the technology organization… because you don’t necessarily need to know HR as a function – you don’t need to be an HR Subject Matter Expert to be able to analyze data very well. 

So, there’s a busy agenda ahead for HR over the next 12 months, but then, that’s always the case for HR, says Osle:

In the past, the focus was on operational excellence, then there was more focus on talent management and now a combination of talent management and technology. Once we get the technology piece right, it will be something else.

My take
The worrying takeaway from this report The CHRO Agenda: Continue to close Gaps in Critical Capabilities Through Transformation is that there’s a mismatch between what the business wants HR to provide and what HR can actually do. (The research is based on results gathered from executives at nearly 180 large US and other organizations.)
But the upside is that HR is on the case.  HR knows it has to change, otherwise it simply will not be able to deliver what the business requires.  But these are not small changes, they take time.

Image credit - Hackett Group Read more on: Digital skills and trainingHCM and the digital future of work 