
Finbarr Joy
It seems almost every enterprise is looking to achieve digital transformation at the moment, but not all are destined to succeed. I picked up some insights into the pitfalls and success patterns in conversation last week with Finbarr Joy, who spent two years leading the rapid transformation at bookmaker William Hill and is now joining global telecoms brand Lebara Mobile as group CTO.
Joy believes there’s a tendency for organizations to believe that going digital is simply a matter of copying the same IT architectures that the consumer Internet giants are using. He likens this to the ‘cargo cult’ phenomenon in which South Pacific communities who saw aircraft delivering supplies to troops during the Second World War began to build replica airstrips in an attempt to attract deliveries of cargo out of the sky. Simply copying the infrastructure won’t deliver digital transformation, he warns:
A lot of those consumer Internet leaders started from a different place. Accept them as benchmarks, but evolve your own models for how it works in your own organisation. You can get an architectural view of some patterns of how it works but I’m wary of putting in the same infrastructure as you have at consumer Internet leaders.
Another variation on going through the motions without effecting real transformation is to just hire in a team of digital developers. That won’t succeed, says Joy, unless the rest of the business is ready to change the way it works.
It’s not just about getting a roomful of ‘rockstar’ developers. It really is more about the different endeavor of changing the operating model of businesses.
It has to be something that touches all parts of the operation, not just an IT thing. It’s a company-wide thing that needs to take place.
Responsive, agile business
Joy says enterprises must use digital technology as an enabler for a more responsive, agile way of operating the entire business, in which IT and business teams work together to deliver a more customer-focused outcome.
The operating model becomes more about customer focus, placing that at the heart of the entire business cycle. The team that you might have called IT needs to be very results-driven, likewise the surrounding business needs to be more technology oriented.
Let’s create structures that mean it’s increasingly easier for those practitioners to work together. With a good product team, typically it can be quite difficult to tell who’s from which practice because it’s obvious they’re all focused on the outcome for the customer.
For this to work, it’s crucial to break down the barriers separating different functions and create the conditions for IT and business people to work more closely with each other, he explains.
Establishing the structures that mean that business practitioners and IT practitioners are working directly together is key for me. You’ve got to get rid of all the mediation and really work hard on that convergence.
A good technology person should be absolutely able to interact with a good business person. A good product proposition person in the digital age should be attuned to technology possibilities.
This means business people must become familiar with the disciplines that IT has evolved to speed up the development and delivery cycle, he adds.
Those things we tend to call agile, devops, it’s recognising they are actually business cycle endeavors, not just IT issues.
It’s an overall convergence story for me. From a technology and IT perspective, I view it as a trend for the IT department to converge with the business.
Finding the skills
While this kind of change requires the backing of executive leaders, Joy says enterprises frequently make the mistake of assuming it can be driven top-down.
You often see executive ambition outstripping what the organization can do. It needs to be paired with ground level activities that are validating what’s going on. An executive leader needs to see that it’s underpinned by what the team is doing.
Fortunately, most organizations already have the necessary skills in their workforce, he believes — the key is to identify those individuals and let them get on with it.
It’s finding those practitioners and giving them the autonomy to drive it forward.
I can guarantee there are already people in your organization that have these skills and are dying to put them into practice.
There has to be investment in new analytics capabilities so that the enterprise is able to test and monitor the success of new digital initiatives, he advises. Rapid feedback is needed not only to finetune the proposition but also to demonstrate an early return on investment.
If we are committing to remodeling how we take the proposition forward, then you are straight into that cycle of having to prove and validate that what you are doing makes sense from the customer perspective.
That brings in the new capabilities we have now to bring in much better analytics to establish that. Unless you take those steps you probably are not being digital.
Joy is especially critical of those who see digital transformation as something that should be kept apart from existing core IT systems.
Unless you’re willing to reduce the scope of your mission, you will find you have to make some changes to what you call your legacy. That’s where your customer data is.
It’s unlikely an organization can do something innovative and leave its data and applications untouched. That’s saying you’re only going to do cosmetic things, which I don’t think is tenable if you’re wanting to provide innovative services.
My take
I had wanted to catch up with Joy having read my colleague Derek Du Preez’s piece last November about his experiences at William Hill. So I arranged a phone call to follow up on his keynote earlier last week at Nimbus Ninety’s Ignite Summit on digital transformation.
There are plenty of viewpoints about digital transformation, but the only ones that really matter are the ones rooted in real-world experience. At diginomica, we make a point of listening to digital enterprise practitioners and presenting their stories. The same themes that Joy highlights continually recur: it’s not just a technology change, it ripples throughout the organization, and the business has to embrace those changes in collaboration with IT.
Read more on: DevOps NoSQL and the open source stackDigital transformation - frictionless enterpriseUse cases 