

Will Lewis
No cats on skateboards videos or ten reasons why Donald Trump’s hair might be real.
As mission statements go, you can’t really argue with that one as articulated by Will Lewis, Chief Executive of Dow Jones.
Part of the News Corp empire since 2007, the 133 year old company counts among its properties, Barron’s. Market watch and the Wall Street Journal.
Lewis says that his goal is to target what he calls:
the sweet spot between B2C and B2B publishing and what we call B2P or business to professional.
To these people, he adds:
We’re not a nice-to-have. We’re a must-have and we intend to stay that way by investing in our journalism.
With over a century of content creation behind it, Lewis argues that Dow Jones has the expertise to take its offline expertise into the online age:
When it comes to content, our mission is clear. We deliver valuable news and information from the first flash to the last word. We believe the way you get your news from has never been more important.
New digital publishers and technology platforms are learning a hard lesson creating great content. Journalism that exudes authority and inspires trust is incredibly difficult and it doesn’t come for free.
In a tough market, a market in which many of our competitors are reeling, we’re growing. For example, we have reached 819,000 digital-only subscribers for the Wall Street Journal.
There has been a shift in the balance of the company’s revenue sources, says Lewis, with more than half of current revenues coming from businesses other than advertising including subscription revenues. He says:
A large growth area is digital, which already accounts for nearly half of our revenue. While we believe passionately in the power of print, we know that digital is not just our future, it’s also our present. So we create, plan and deliver products and services accordingly.
That’s meant an increased focus on digital delivery platforms. Lewis explains:
In the past calendar year, we executed a full digital refresh, redesigning our portfolio with a keen eye on making our products more mobile friendly.
As of the past several months, the share of our audience coming from mobile devices is now 52%, a ten percentage point increase over prior year, based on our internal numbers. This is a largely new audience on top of our existing desktop digital customers.
Mobile, mobile, mobile, is the mantra at Dow Jones. The What’s News App for on the go readers and the WSJ City App targeted at London professionals are great examples of Dow Jones’ innovation at its best. The speed with which we’ve gotten to market is as impressive as the quality of the content and their brilliant design values.
There are still areas for improvement of course, he adds:
We’re primarily in the iOS house and we need to fix that. Android is a big potential area for us as well, particularly outside of the US. Most of our US customers are iOS users, but [there is] a great area for opportunity outside the US which is for android.
What we’ve said as an objective inside the company is I have absolute confidence we’re the best in the world at newspapers; we need to become the best in the world at mobile and that involves entire company embracing this and we are on the road to doing that.
Data dynamics
As well as journalism, there’s a great opportunity to be exploited in the data industry. He adds:
Our value isn’t limited to traditional written word content. We collect, curate and analyze data on people, companies and financial markets in the responsible manner you would expect from an ethically driven company like Dow Jones. We believe our increasing power to combine this data with our great stories will help us create amazing new products.
Critical to this is the development of an API platform to access new data sources, adds Lewis:
The goal is simple – gather all our data and stories in one place, sliced and diced according to customer preference and then monetize without excessive manual labor costs. That is why we’re hungry for more high quality data, data harnessed to our new API platform, our brilliant brand and our superb sales force will surprise, delight and satisfy our corporate clients.
The data industry is going through a tremendous exciting phase, not least because there is obviously the API revolution and the fact that when our platform is finished, we’ll be able to enable our own customers to build their own products using our data.
As the advertising model shifts and evolves to accommodate new digital opportunities, new challenges and areas of focus emerge. For example, the recent controversy around ad blocking is something that all digital publishers need to take a view on. Here, Lewis is taking the high ground:
I don’t want to be overly provocative, but I can’t help thinking that this has been brought about in large part by some of our competitors being overly greedy in the ads that they run that create a substandard customer experience for their uses.
We haven’t done that. We haven’t inflicted a poor customer experience in our web properties for our customers. So we also think that probably less that 10% of our users have installed ad blocking.
So I’m slightly probably, slightly more sanguine about it than most, but obviously I know it is an issue.
He concludes:
I certainly wouldn’t want to be entirely reliant as quite of our competitors are on just digital advertising right now, because there obviously are some changes going on that could be quite difficult for them.
For us we’re able to then often highlight for those that are particularly struggling with ad blocking, the power of print because it’s pretty difficult to block a print ad!
My take
Much here that resonates!
 
Will Lewis was speaking at the UBS 43rd Annual Global Media and Communications Conference.
Read more on: Analytics planning and data analysisCRM and customer experienceSocial 