
It’s a turbulent time for cosmetics retail institution Avon. The firm, famed for its army of female sales reps – the Avon Lady – ringing the doorbell, has fallen on flat times and not kept up to speed with the rise of the omni-channel retail environment. Just this week, the firm announced that it’s pulling out of the Australian and New Zealand markets, the latest indicator of some tough decisions that need to be made – and made fast.
The person making those decisions is Jan Zijderveld, announced as Avon’s new CEO after a 30 year career at Unilever. His appointment is long overdue after his predecessor in the hot seat, Sheri McCoy, left the firm midway through last year. He’s clearly conscious of the challenge ahead in turning Avon into a fit-for-purpose business in a world where it’s easier to click online than to welcome a sales rep into your home.
There are major assets on which to build, he argues:
Very few companies have the brand recognition, extensive global reach, whole market positions in beauty and direct selling that Avon has. In a world where trust in companies is becoming a scarce commodity, representatives relationship with the consumers has never been more relevant. At its core, Avon is an organization with a clear and compelling purpose that has endured 130 years of history. Operating in an attractive beauty and personal care categories across the globe and skewed towards developing and growing markets.
But that 130 year old business model is part of the problem. While once the Avon Lady was a retail innovation, those days are long gone. Zijderveld defends the channel to market, but concedes it’s in need of a makeover:
Through our direct selling representatives, we empower millions of micro entrepreneurs globally. The opportunity to modernize and enable them to be more competitive and serve their consumers better is a powerful proposition, and this is at the heart of Avon’s value proposition. However, the performance has not what it should have been.
I came here because I can make a difference. Avon is operating a dramatically changing consumer and competitive environment and business as usual is not an option…We’re taking a fresh look at everything, with a sense of urgency that you would expect. There are no quick fixes.
That said, it’s clear that major digital investment is going be a priority moving forward, with Zijderveld stating:
There’s a lot to be done to modernize this business, whether to modernize the route to market and sales rep experience, whether to modernize the brand and become more relevant, whether to modernize the IT systems and the whole digital agenda, whether to modernize the culture. There will, for no doubt, be areas where we’ll need to invest more, the digital agenda, but I think we need to get the themes right, we need to sequence it right and start on the path.
Having no intermediaries between the brand and the consumer and the rep for me is one of the big potentials of this business. The trick is to modernize that and to add data and digital capability to that. And we need to, obviously, do that and transform the business into a direct, digitally-powered and databased insightful company with relevant brands skewed towards the relevant and growing segments.
A foundation
There has been some work done already, adds Executive Vice President Jamie Wilson, including progress on rolling out digital analytics tools to improve representative segmentation, targeting engagement and earnings potential. This has begun to pay dividends, he argues:
From the Brazil rollout, we learned that the new front end has many benefits, including a reduction in impersonations where one representative places orders for multiple representatives for convenience, fewer abandoned orders, improved representative self-learning, and faster order submissions.
Expect more work on the analytics front in 2018 is the message here:
We’re improving representative-focused data and analytics. We will work to align our rewards to better motivate each representative, target our offers, and provide better measures of satisfaction. We defined our framework for representative segmentation in 2017 and look to execute on gathering and leveraging the data in 2018.
Analytics tech will also be instrumental in embedding what Wilson calls “our service first mindset”. He explains:
We need to deliver a step change in service performance from demand forecasting through delivery. For example, we are testing campaign planning automation, which uses analytics to drive improvements and demand forecast. We understand this will take time, but it is a crucial improvement. We have defined what good service means within Avon with the goal of developing a clear framework and KPIs. We have set a goal of improving our service measure by at least 10% as we exit 2018.
Wilson also talks up using digital mechanisms to ensure the Avon Lady is in close contact with corporate:
We have plans to roll out My Avon business, a new front-end representative-facing system that will improve connection between representatives and Avon. We plan to start with Poland later in 2018 and move on to other Central European markets. We’re also set out to increase our investment to drive our mobile capability last quarter. During 2018, we intend to enable mobile connection to our systems for the majority of our representatives.
My take
Overall 2018 is clearly going to be a critical year for Avon. One hundred and thirty years of history doesn’t guarantee a future, no matter how strong your brand is. There is a recognition of the need to modernize, as exemplified by Wilson’s comments that:
I can tell you, the world is changing, obviously. There’s modern retail, there’s e-commerce, there’s direct selling, competitors that are changing, evolving. It is all about business staying relevant as a business for our reps. That’s the whole modernization. The whole world is changing and Avon needs to modernize and do that.
That’s the plan. But is it too late? Avon needs some serious digital disruption of its own business model and fast. There’s no room for lipstick on a pig here, even if it is Avon top range lipstick.
Image credit - PinterestRead more on: Analytics planning and data analysisCRM and customer experienceProductivityRetail e-commerce and the omni-channel 