
I haven’t written about interesting SAP jobs related to the cloud in a while so I returned to SAP’s career site and did some digging. As usual, I found a number of interesting job offers that shed light on various aspects of SAP’s cloud strategy and what is planned in the future. As the annual SAPPHIRE Now conference gets underway this week, a quick look at such offers reveals if the rhetoric heard in the keynotes is really reflected in hiring trends.
Note: Yes, I know some projects at SAP are being covered without new external hires (I don’t have access to SAP’s internal job site which would be even more interesting) but fresh external hires are often required for projects exploiting cutting-edge technology where internal resources may be unavailable in the particular region where such projects are being staffed. 
Let’s take a look at the jobs:
Development Architect – Master Data Management S/4HANA Job
The Master Data Management team is responsible for driving SAP’s Master Data Management offerings. In the context of S/4HANA, a consistent and holistic view on master data is the foundation for all our end-to-end processes. By continuing and expanding our success story, we enable our customers’ key master data processes ensuring data quality and compliance across the enterprise.
Analysis
“Master data” has many different meanings in IT (MDM, etc.) and the job description is so generic that it is very difficult to figure out what it really entails. For me, the fact that there are five different offers for developers in two different regions (Bangalore and Palo Alto) working on this project  is of interest.
Yet, despite S4/HANA’s importance at the upcoming Sapphire conference, I was surprised that I didn’t find more job offers concerning this new offer. Besides the team associated with Master Data, I only found one another team being created for efforts associated with S/4 HANA for Industries and a few other offers (a total of 31). Perhaps, most of the offers for related projects are being filled internally.
It also looks like SAP is using SCRUM for its S4/HANA development activities which should assist in its aggressive release schedule for its public cloud version of the offering.
dah note: SAP has a series of agile initiatives ongoing in Palo Alto which I understand are being replicated elsewhere. 
Custom Development Cloud Service offers (EMEA Cloud Integration & Innovation Architect, Successfactors Architect – Cloud Custom Development, Support Specialist)
EMEA Cloud Integration Architect:
It is focused on Cloud solutions integration, development and innovation involving the various Cloud and On-Premise solutions by SAP and work closely with various LoBs/Local MU’s/Sales/Pre-Sales Units in EMEA to support these units concerning Integration and Innovation topics on Public Cloud Solutions like Ariba, SuccessFactors, Fieldglass, Concur, C4C, etc.
Currently, we are working on a conscious and strategic move to expand the consulting capability breadth of EMEA Cloud & Data Innovation Services competency to support the „Cloud Integration Architect Services‟ requirements of EMEA region.
SuccessFactors Architect:
The Custom Development – Cloud Service Center offers remote development service delivery to global SAP Cloud Solution customer. Our solutions allow SAP customers to adapt existing SAP Cloud solutions to meet their business needs. We also offer the creation of completely new custom cloud applications. With a proven remote delivery model, global coverage, and an experienced delivery team, we help customers increase the value of their Cloud solution while lowering their Total Cost of Ownership (TCO). Our service portfolio starts with simple modifications and goes all the way to completely new customer business scenarios and standalone cloud applications.
Analysis
There was a recent announcement concerning the decision of SAP to provide cloud-related development activities on a subscription basis.
This new offering includes services for custom development of new cloud applications based on the platform SAP HANA Cloud and Services or SAP HANA Enterprise Cloud for the expansion of existing SAP cloud solutions. The services are offered on a subscription basis. The customer only pays a monthly fee, with all the costs of development, implementation, maintenance and future updates are covered
[Translated via Google – original in German]
I found the announcement important and expected a response from the ecosystem (other partners, etc.) but have yet to see any blowback from this corner. The jobs I picked above are just a very small selection of similar offers that are present of SAP’s career site and which suggest that SAP is building up its custom development team on a global basis (the jobs mentioned above are located in the States, England, Brazil, etc) to meet the cloud-related business requirements of its customers. Combine these numbers with the ability to provide such services on a subscription basis and SAP is well set up to support its customers as they increase their activities in the Cloud.
Developer / Senior Developer for HANA Cloud Platform Job
As part of SAP’s strategic product – SAP HANA Cloud Platform, we will enable components like Hadoop, Redis, Mongo DB, Postgres, RabbitMQ, Kafka and several other components for the SAP HANA Cloud Platform and dedicated customer scenarios. Together with Cloud Foundry @ HANA Cloud Platform, this offering is planned to be the technology foundation for industry cloud scenarios with SAP.
As an integral member of SAP HANA Cloud Platform Group in Bangalore, you will be contributing to integrate components like Postgres, RabbitMQ, Kafka etc as a service into Cloud Foundry @ HANA Cloud Platform offering.
Analysis
It is good to see that the Cloud Foundry integration in the HANA Cloud Platform is proceeding rapidly and the hiring for the associated team (there are 5 openings in Bangalore for the same project) is receiving the appropriate attention.  Although the focus on the Cloud Foundry is significant, the list of involved components (Hadoop, Redis, Mongo DB, Postgres, RabbitMQ, Kafka) is of equal importance. At a recent Hadoop conference in Brussel, Irfan Khan, CTO for SAP Global Customer Operations, presented a keynote where he emphasized SAP’s intense interest in promoting Hadoop in the enterprise.
During this presentation, he associated Hadoop with the HANA Cloud Platform (HCP) – now we know the context of this statement. Kafka is already in use in HCP – as evidenced in the migration of SCN to HCP where Kafka plays an important role.  Mongo DB is also already present in HCP – it is an important part of the Document service. Thus, the existence of many of these components on HCP isn’t the important aspect in the job offer rather the promise that platform developers will have the ability to use them directly via the integration with Cloud Foundry.
Intern – Digital Catalogue Leader Job
The focus of this position is to lead the effort to publish Independent Software Vendor (ISV) Applications that are built on HANA Cloud platform to SAP’s Digital Catalogue. Currently known as the HANA Marketplace, this catalogue is being rebuilt by an agency to address the needs of HANA Cloud Platform. The role of the Digital Catalogue Leader will be to be the primary focal point with the Agency and with ISVs to manage the process of publishing content. There will also be business development opportunities to target select ISVs with the HANA Cloud Platform value proposition to help bring them into the SAP ecosystem.
Analysis
Well, it looks like we are going to see the emergence of yet another SAP store – the new one should be called “Digital Catalogue” which is a rather curious name but could be connected with the “digital” activities of Jonathan Becher (Chief Digital Officer). Some interesting aspects are that an “agency” (my assumption is an external one) is being used and that the target is focused on HCP. An emphasis on bringing more ISVs into the HCP ecosystem is critical especially since the platform will play such an important role in S4HANA extensions.
Developer Job
Building and driving content – Business APIs – from SAP Applications, Customer and Partner applications for SAP’s API Portal to enable extensions of SAP applications in SAP HANA Cloud Platform
Analysis
This job offer reveals that SAP is working on a dedicated API portal for its own and external applications.  It also demonstrates that SAP understands the importance of APIs on the creation of extensions for SAP applications (notice that the term is generic – I assume it refers to OnPremise as well as Cloud applications).
Senior UI Developer – Emerging Technologies / IoT Job
You will be working on cutting edge Internet of Things and 3D Visualization solutions for Discrete Industries built on top of our flagship cloud platform – SAP HANA.
You will have an opportunity to learn 3D, computer-aided design, connected manufacturing and robotics working with industry leaders on customer focused innovation projects.
…..
OUR TECHNOLOGY STACK

WebGL, SAP HANA Cloud, CAD, CAM, CNC Machines, Big Data Analytics

Analysis
This job provides some indication of interesting developments regarding 3D Visualization (remember the acquisition of Right Hemisphere in 2011) and the Internet of Things (IoT) – of special interest is the mention of Discrete Industries (remember the Industry Cloud). This is the first time that I’ve seen CAD and CAM associated with the SAP HANA Cloud. Could this be somehow connected with a next generation Manufacturing Integration and Intelligence (SAP MII) solution?
Dragon Slayer (Engineer for Distributed Systems) HANA Velocity Group Job
We are an exceptional team of aces distributed around the globe to work with. We have the mission to design and develop a massively scalable, multi-tenant aware and extremely fast data management engine.  Our goal is to expand from a research prototype to a productive version of the engine. In this process we will make use of and contribute back to the Hadoop eco system and explore far-reaching integration possibilities into HDFS, Spark and other components.
Analysis
I know this job doesn’t have a direct connection with SAP’s Cloud activities but the job title was just too wicked to ignore.  What was interesting is the very tight association with Hadoop and the team’s goal: “Our goal is to expand from a research prototype to a productive version of the engine”. Velocity is the code name for a new lightweight, in-memory, embedded data engine that is associated with the Lumira Server. The association of Hadoop with this engine is intriguing (although the association with Spark for HANA is not new) but I think it is equally important to emphasize the team’s desire to contribute to the Hadoop ecosystem.
Extensions-related jobs (VP, Platform as a Services (Cross-LOB) and Business Development Expert )
VP:
This Leader will be responsible for business development within the PaaS portfolio with a focus on Cross-LOB Extensions, S4-HANA Extensions, as well as have responsibility for the LOB Extension team, including HR Extensions, Procurement Extensions, CEC Extensions, and Concur Extensions.
Dev Expert:
This leader will be responsible for business development within the PaaS portfolio with a focus on HANA Cloud Platform for HR Extensions.

Defining and rolling out a 5 year revenue plan for their solution areas of responsibility, including defining target markets and business development plans.
Be an expert in HR solutions such as SuccessFactors, Workday, Peoplesoft, ADP, and SAP HR
Deliver the optimal pricing and packaging model to take a solution to market
Work directly with customers to educate them on the strategy as well as act like a trusted advisor.
Roll-in feedback from customers into the product management teams
Work with software implementation partners, OEM partners, independent software vendors, and reseller partners to maximize revenue through leveraging the ecosystem

Analysis
It’s interesting to note the association between the PaaS (in this case, HCP) and three different types of extensions i.e. Cross-LOB, S4HANA and LOB Extensions. I’d never heard of Cross-LOB extensions before. This distinction gives us an idea of the organizational structure associated with such development activities.
The second position provides details about the business/sales-related responsibilities associated with LOB (in this case, HR) extensions. My assumption is that each extension type (or indeed, particular extension manifestation (HR, Travel), etc.) will have its own business development expert. Partners with domain expertise and interest in extensions should try and liaison with the individual responsible for their area of interest.
I will be digging into SAP’s cloud strategy during SAPPHIRE Now and will report back on what I find.
Image credit: Personal development career, © Jakub Jirsák, Fotolia
Disclosure: SAP is a premier partner and covered most of the author’s T&E for attending SAPPHIRE Now 2015

Read more on: Cloud ERP financials and supply chainCloud platforms - infrastructure and architectureFuture of work 