
Magic Kingdom
Last month Disney announced it would pay $1 billion for a one third stake in technology and streaming business BAMTech and launch a new web-based ESPN service later this year. As we noted at the time, it’s another sign that even the most powerful and long-standing of global brands can’t resist the tide of digital transformation. 
It was a theme picked up by CEO Bob Iger this week at the Goldman Sachs Communacopia conference, where he articulated Disney’s strategy as being to: 

put most of our capital in the direction of high-quality branded content, to use technology to distribute more broadly, to get closer to the customer to make the product better and then to grow globally in a more profound way than we had been.

That technology focus is a long-standing commitment, said Iger, arguing that Disney had seen the future coming:


We were big believers in using technology to reach more people and to reach people where they are today and clearly we’ve seen dramatic increases in digital mobile media. We actually were fairly prescient about that citing what could be a real trend or growth in that area back in 2005 when we agreed to put ABC TV shows on that quaint little device called a Video iPod. So we believed for a long time that mobile digital media was going to become a fairly big deal and in fact it has.

That belief has led ultimately to last month’s deal with BAMtech, which gives Disney a proprietary streaming platform already used by other entertainment companies, including HBO Now and the National Hockey League, and an option to acquire a majority stake in the business at a later date. It’s a billion dollar play, but one that Iger sees as critical:

What BAMTech represented to us, particularly for ESPN, was an enabler of sorts and a very high quality one. We’re extremely impressed with how robust, how great their platform was and the business they had already created. It was a great way for us to move ESPN and probably other Disney assets onto digital mobile platforms in a more effective way. We believed in the growth of that platform and by investing and having a good seat at the table, it gives us the ability to learn a lot more about what worked, what doesn’t work, how the consumer is essentially using the platform, pricing issues, you name it. We thought that was really valuable. 

It’s with Disney’s ESPN that the first impact will be seen, Iger explained:

For ESPN, if you’re going to look it just from that business perspective, sport is clearly something that a lot of people are really passionate about, particularly young men. They use mobile devices fairly frequently. ESPN’s goal has always been to super-serve their fans. One way to do that is to be present in more places, on more platforms. So they viewed this as a great complement to the services that they already provide. 

There’s also a rich seam of digital content here as well as when ESPN licenses sports from various leagues and schools, it typically buys both traditional media rights and digital media rights. This is valuable for Disney, said Iger: 

ESPN has a treasure trove of digital rights for 99% of the sports that it covers that it is not fully exploiting on new platforms and it fully intents ultimately to do that. So there is a monetization factor here. This will give us the ability with BAMTech to create complementary product to ESPN and to mine the goldmine of those rights that ESPN has I think more effectively.

The first steps in that will be taken next year, he added: 

With BAMtech, we’ll launch a branded ESPN service that will include a lot of the rights that we boought that we’re not exploiting on the primary services. So let’s look at it as an add-on product, not a product that is a substitute product for ESPN, the mother ship. We’ve got this huge collection of rights that we can use to create additional sports service. 

Getting personal
One aspect of this service is likely to be greater personalisation, so that subscribers won’t sign up for a sports bundle, but can select specific sports, seasons, matches, dates etc. Iger said: 

This is what Sky does in the UK for instance with a lot of its Premier League rights. We think that that could be really interesting for fans that may not want to buy another bundle of sports, but maybe want very specific sports that they’re willing to step up and pay for, again provided that gives them mobility and the ability to watch wherever they are.

Iger is confident that there won’t be an ‘Uber-isation’ moment to come, arguing that there’s little room for new entrant for sports given the reach of the licences ESPN has in place, although he did concede that there are firms who can do interesting new things, such as Twitter and its NFL coverage: 

I thought Twitter actually did a very good job last week, interestingly enough that platform was powered by BAMTech last week and will be, which I think says a lot about that platform because it was very stable. I checked it out as did a lot of people and I thought it was quite a good experience, they did a good job. 
But you have to think about monetization capabilities of these new entrants. You can think about monetization capabilities even in the current entrants, nobody can monetize sports better than ESPN for a variety of reasons. First of all the great combination of advertising and subscription fees, which is obviously very large, ESPN’s ability to monetize across multiple platforms and serve advertisers in multiple ways as well. That’s stunning actually, when you think about what they’ve done, they are far ahead of anybody else digitally in terms of sports television. 
So, while these new entrants are clearly interested in gaining rights to support their own grown or their own strategic growth priorities, if you think about them in terms of direct competitors to the current incumbent sports rights owners – and that’s not just ESPN, but NBC and CBS and Fox and Turner to name a few – the new entrants, at least in the foreseeable future, would have a really hard time monetizing anything close to the level of the traditional players.
That doesn’t mean they don’t have the money to do so in some cases. They have the capital, but they would dig deep into their pockets and be doing something that would be a loss leader and then some if they were to do it. I don’t mean in any way to suggest complacency. There’s always been competition for sports rights, you could argue that that’s not going away because of the value of life and the purity of that audience from a demographic perspective. But I think that it will be awhile before any of them can monetize close enough to what we monetize and therefore it’s going to be hard for them to compete on an equal playing field, no pun intended, level of playing field.

Iger also argued that technology is breaking down the traditional relationships between content creators, distributors and consumers and that this has brand implications: 

Think about music, for instance. When you go to iTunes and you look for a song, you’re not buying that song necessarily from the record company that publishes the song or even the album necessarily, you’re doing it because you want the song and it’s findable across really creators or distributors, or the distributors, in this case is Apple. 
The same thing is true for Netflix, but with Google and search terms. You get those results from anywhere for the most part and you can enable a brand to travel with the product, which we try very hard to do, it’s a conversation we’ve actually had with Netflix, because it’s important that our brand including the ABC brand,  but of course the Disney brand and the Marvel brand and the Star Wars Lucas brand, we want those to travel as well because that’s quite important and quite important to the consumer. But in terms of usability and findability, technology is breaking walls done clearly between the originator of the content and the distributor.

All of this is indicative of a period of change and transformation, but Iger was keen to emphasise that Disney is not building new strategic directions for reactive reasons. Of the BAMtech/ESPN move, for instance, he insisted:

We’re not doing this though because we think that the current business model is in any way crumbling, we’re doing it because we think we have more opportunity to reach more sports fans. We’re also doing it because we can’t predict right now where the business goes over time or when it goes someplace over time, but we certainly feel we need to be fully prepared for dramatic shifts should they occur and that this is one step in that direction.

My take
Disney is playing a game that is both defensive and proactive, putting down stakes in new digital platforms that may indeed hold off the ‘Uber-isation’ factor.
Image credit - Freeimages.com Read more on: Digital and content marketingDigital enterprise in the real worldRetail e-commerce and the omni-channel 