
In an entertainment world where Netflix has become the tail-that-wags-the-dog, even the mightiest of movie moguls are rethinking their approach to their industry. This can be seen at 20th Century Fox, where CEO James Murdoch talks of the importance of:
executing a core realignment of the company around the future of video.
It means taking a long hard look at the way that firms such as 20th Century Fox do business and facing up to the harsh reality of a digital disruptor that’s come in to rewrite that model. Murdoch admits that the threat is real, but nascent. That means that the ‘traditional’ players still have time to get their acts together. He explains:
The underlying revolution – ubiquitous high-speed connectivity, a continued proliferation of end user connected displays, and the potential for unfettered access to creative assets in the cloud for customers – globally presents an opportunity for accelerated growth for new and existing video platforms. We believe this is only just the beginning and the combination of strengths required to operate a high-volume content business and a vast international video platform business is precisely the combination of strengths that we’re developing.
In short, if content is indeed king, then using it to build a platform that is an expression of those underlying trends presents one of the most promising opportunities for our company in decades. And so far, we’ve made great strides to this end.
Murdoch points to various initiatives around the world that indicate that 20th Century Fox is indeed taking this revolution seriously, such as the Hotstar platform in India, launched two years ago. Between December 2015 and 2016, that saw its subscriber base essentially triple from 16.5 million monthly active users to over 50 million. In terms of engagement, minutes of viewing in the December quarter grew year-on-year from 3.9 billion minutes of watch time to 17 billion minutes.
Meanwhile in Europe, the Sky brand has been delivering online services to over 13 million customers, streaming almost 20 billion minutes in the last quarter of 2016. Plans are also in place to roll out a significant upgrade to streaming apps tech that Murdoch hopes will boost customer numbers and engagement levels there.
Playing nicely
As well its own tech, 20th Century Fox has been aggressively pursuing licensing deals with other new media firms, such as DirecTV Now, Sling, Hulu’s soon-to-launch streaming MVPD (Multichannel Video Programming Distributor) and Google’s upcoming service. Murdoch says:
We expect this explosion of competition to benefit customers, to spur innovation, and grow the overall marketplace for video in the US where top-line subscriber trends have been previously not so great. That should reverse over the coming years.
The work with Hulu is such that Murdoch expects it to address some of the issues around content streaming apps, particularly in the area of concurrent streams:
We’ve seen really, really good progress in terms of our ability to stream concurrent streams of live sports, of the high-volume entertainment programming, for example, at the Hotstar platform, as well as what our affiliate Sky kind of routinely does with Sky Go and NOW TV. Hulu is working very hard on making sure that that experience for customers is as good as it possibly can be.
You never rule out teething problems and I think it’s worthwhile mentioning that some of these problems in streaming, particularly concurrent live events when everyone’s logging in at the same second, it’s non-trivial. That said, we have a high degree of confidence in the Hulu platform, in the team there, their ability to deliver really a ton of minutes of streaming across their subscriber base currently. It’s not an easy technical challenge, but it’s one that is surmountable and the team at Hulu is very, very focused on it. And I think the experience is going to be pretty good.
At the end of the day, 20th Century Fox wants to turn a profit and that means delivering a quality service that encourages customer stickiness and creates an advertising target audience that can be monetized. The upgraded US app will be critical here:
One thing that’s really interesting is that as we revamp, we’ll start rolling out on a per-platform basis, tvOS and then Android and so on as you kind of roll through the kind of estate out there. The authenticated apps really have a potential to reach an enormous audience. Ninety million or so MVPD households out there, under our agreements, have access to these apps.
What we need to do is ease and simplify the authentication pathways. We need single logins across multiple brands. We need to really make it easy and a great experience for customers. We think we can generate some real audience there.
Once that audience is there, there’s room to innovate around advertising models, he adds:
That’s around dynamic ad insertion, it’s pricing a customer’s time in a different way, it’s about engagement units and other things, really lowering the ad loads and getting a higher yield. We’re already seeing non-linear advertising growth at a very, very good clip in the US and internationally, and that’s because, from a data perspective and then a monetization perspective flowing from that, with innovative new ad products and different loads, you’re going to have a much better experience.
So, we’re going to approach it, first of all, by making sure the app platform is stable. It’s not easy dealing with the number of systems, the number of MVPDs, all the different authentication kind of issues that are out there. But, first of all, we want to make it stable, we want to make it a great experience. We’re very focused on having a very, very big – large volume of content available on those apps. And we’re going to kind of iterate in terms of how the advertising monetization works. It’s already going pretty well with the existing apps and we think we’re going to able to enhance that experience and enhance our capabilities over the next number of months and through the rest of the year. It will be a big focus for us.
What will also be of interest in the months to come is which of the providers in the increasingly-competitive MVPD market survives. Which horse to back is a challenge for all content providers, but for an established major player like 20th Century Fox, that’s also an opportunity, reckons Murdoch:
I think it’s crowded in terms of the number of sort of names that are out there, but I think it’s very, very nascent. We’ve seen Sling, obviously, first out the gate. I guess Sony views Sling to actually be very recent and we expect the team at Hulu to be ready for a launch pretty soon. AWe think there is a lot to play for. We think it’s a big opportunity.
We think that that proliferation of downstream competition is really, really healthy for content creators and for brands like ours that are robust, that are differentiated, that can really deliver content that works for customers. So, we think that proliferation is going to be a positive thing for our business and we do believe that it can reverse some of these overall declines in subscriber trends in the total MVPD universe and have that go forward.
My take
It’s not just on the tech side that sets Netflix against 20th Century Fox. The former has been accused by the latter of poaching staff, with 20th Century Fox executives quoted as referring to Netflix as :”public enemy number one”. This is a turbulent market that’s on the cusp of enormous digital disruption. 20th Century Fox is shoring up its defences, as are other ‘traditional brands’, such as Disney, as we’ll see in the second in this short series of Disrupted Media analyses.
Image credit - 20th Century Fox Read more on: Digital and content marketingDigital enterprise in the real world 