
An interview I carried out last week with William Hill CTO Finbarr Joy and a piece written by my colleague Phil Wainewright have got me thinking about whether the UK government has got itself a bimodal IT problem.
Whilst I’ve typically been an advocate of the Government Digital Service (GDS), and I stand by my comments that it’s been a necessary function to kick start the digital agenda in Whitehall, I’m beginning to wonder if too much emphasis has been put on the centre and not enough work has been done to transform skills and operations within departments.
That’s not to say that nothing has been done to embed digital skills – GDS has helped to employ many senior leaders across Whitehall – but I think that this could be more of a challenge than many (including myself) had recently anticipated.
First of all, let’s take a look at the comments made by William Hill CTO Finbarr Joy. He is transforming William Hill into an iterative, agile development house, where he says the traditional idea of procurement and IT are no longer really valid. However, he is adamant that what is required is to bring the ‘legacy’ operations along with the new digital folk on the transformation journey. Joy said:
There’s an awful lot of literature out there about IT alignment, IT alignment with the business. For me it’s increasingly about convergence. What you used to call the IT department practically doesn’t exist. Those product teams are made up of people that you formerly called IT people, who you formerly called commercial product people, but they happen to be in the same team. We are increasingly seeing that that distinction is just going away quite frankly. The whole notion of an IT department that sits and waits for a request from the business is completely gone.
I’ve done an awful lot of hiring, we have built new facilities – the Shoreditch facility is a new one. But we are bringing everybody along with us. That whole movement around two-phase IT, we are not subscribing to that. You bring everybody along with you, you make sure the whole team is on that journey.
The legacy guys have the domain knowledge, you need them to be on the same path. They’re actually the breakthrough into some of the fast stuff you’ll do, because they know the business so well. We have to bring the whole operation with us.
Equally, on the topic of bimodal IT – an idea that has been touted by the likes of Gartner – my colleague Phil Wainewright explained why it can seem appealing, whilst highlighting its drawbacks. He said:
Enterprises want to hear that they can adopt these disruptive new technologies without too much disruption. They know that they have a huge hill to climb if they are to completely overhaul those entrenched legacy systems and bring them up-to-date (or replace them entirely) for the digital age. Often, the longstanding vendors who support those legacy systems (and who, let’s face it, are the primary source of Gartner’s revenues) also want to encourage the least disruptive path.
Bimodal IT conveys a reassuring message that updating those systems can be be postponed and isolated. It encourages procrastination and condones a drawbridge-up mentality instead of fostering the collaboration and convergence that is the true secret of success in digital transformation.
A bimodal Whitehall
 The purpose of GDS has been to disrupt Whitehall from the centre. Whilst that hasn’t meant retaining control at the centre, it has meant that most of the knowledge is held there. The organisation’s previous director Mike Bracken, however, did write a post about hiring in senior digital skills – titled ‘Hire the head and the body will follow’. He said at the time:
Forming GDS went some way to addressing that problem. But real change needs to be deeply embedded.
Yes, GDS is a centre of digital talent at the heart of government, but we’ve also taken the lead in bringing pivotal digital and technology professionals into the rest of government.
He then went on to list a number hires that had been made, including the likes of Sarah Wilkinson, Norman Driskell, Darrell Midgley and Paul Shetler. So there has been a recognition from the centre, GDS, that more needs to be done outside of its four walls to make digital change operational.
This has been picked up on by the head of the civil service, John Manzoni, who has spoken out about decentralising the skill-base. I’ve criticised Manzoni in the past, as I believe his version of decentralisation is different to mine, but more on that later. He has said there is a “dawning recognition” that:
“…the modus operandi of the last five years won’t get us where we want to be.
And whilst I don’t agree that GDS should be slimmed down (which it actually appears now it won’t be), if we take a look at the recent rural payments IT project debacle, which was meant to be a digital examplar for GDS, it is apparent that there is a digital vs. legacy battle ahead of us.
To cut a long story short, the project has failed spectacularly and a large amount of blame has been placed on the conflicts between senior people at GDS and senior people at Defra – the government department responsible for the system. The National Audit Office commented on the failings of the project and said:
There were deep and persistent personal rifts at senior levels and at times these led to counter-productive behaviour by the Programme’s leaders. The differences in strategic vision in the design phase were not resolved. Senior people told us that they found it almost impossible to work together at times. Interviewees reported confrontational behaviour between senior Programme staff at the RPA and GDS.
Rifts between senior Programme officials went beyond the creative tension that is to be expected in a multi-organisational programme, and impacted on implementation and delivery as well as staff morale and stress, especially from mid-2014. The dysfunction and inappropriate behaviour at the top was very apparent to Programme staff at this time, and created a frustrating working environment for them, preventing the culture of trust and collaboration needed to deliver a large and complex programme.
Simply put – this is old versus new. Digital versus legacy. Us versus them.
And herein lies the problem. It isn’t enough for GDS to go into Defra and tell it what it needs to do, when all of its processes, systems and people are operating in an ‘old world’ way. It’s not their fault either, it’s human nature to oppose the change.
Equally, it isn’t enough to hire someone digital at the top and assume that the rest of the organisation will follow their lead. Especially if that person has been brought from the outside in. Although I’m not privy to all the goings on in every department, I think we can safely assume that there are pockets of digital activity that ignore the legacy people and operations.
As one public sector digital leader recently said to me, the greatest challenge facing GDS at the moment is to convince civil servants that being ‘digital’ doesn’t require you to look a certain way, be of a certain age and have a GDS-vibe to you. GDS needs to convince the legacy teams that the new way of doing things, using internet architectures and user feedback based design, is both scalable and reliable. And better.
GDS and the current digital leaders in each department need to invest time in explaining how and why digital works. And a lot of it isn’t hard. Just convincing teams that user need workshops as a design starting point would be a great achievement. Getting that mindset to change is going to be key, because if we continue in this bimodal way, nothing will change at scale.
My take
The Whitehall past was about outsourcing technology – everything from skills to operations. The present has been about changing the conversation, through the use of a disruptive force at the centre. The future needs to be about embedding digital in every pocket Whitehall has.
If we don’t do this, we will continue to have small areas of innovation, without actually changing the structures of the institution of government itself.
Read more on: Digital government and public services

