
As I said on Twitter over the holiday period about Done Right, a recent book by Alex Shootman, CEO of Workfront that explores modern workforce management:

It’s rare for me to read a business book and find much to which I can relate or rather consider as applicable. This one is different:  Done Right by @shootman , CEO Workfront.  Check the number of cornered pages. pic.twitter.com/4lGRUD6slj
— ⒹⒺⓃ•Ⓗ ㋡ (@dahowlett) December 30, 2018

While I’m sure most business books are well-meaning endeavors to pass on nuggets of wisdom from proven leaders, most fall short in providing good clues about how the reader can apply the learnings.
A critical examination of these books often reveals that the authors based their ideas on experiences derived from a set of time fixed circumstances where the author has/had the power to influence change in a way that’s not available to the reader or, if applied would almost certainly be at the wrong time in the business development cycle. I found Done Right to be different in certain vital areas but leaving the door open to discussion about fundamental problems.
Real world led
One of Done Right’s key strengths lies in the extent to which Shootman doesn’t merely rely on his own experience but provides numerous confirmatory vignettes drawn from a broad spectrum of academics, corporate leaders, analysts, and military people. Another strength comes in the chapter specific worksheets or templates that serve to provide practical methods through which to navigate the various elements of Shootman’s approach.
As a side note, I like that Shootman avoided human capital management as a way to describe methods but prefers modern workforce management as his expression of the world of work management.
As an opener, Shootman challenges the emphasis of Richard Branson (he of Virgin fame), who firmly believes that employees come first, Jack Ha (he of Alibaba fame) who thinks it is always about customers first, and Warren Buffet, who believes in the supremacy of the stakeholder. Each leader is undeniably successful as measured economically. Shootman’s opening premise is that the trifecta of employees, customers and stakeholders share equal standing in developing strategies that optimize a business rather than these constituencies operating within the context of constant tension.
The cursed trifecta
The problem with Shootman’s argument is that he doesn’t develop a set of arguments that lay out why there should be equal standing. Instead, the book creates a contradictory tension by prefacing with:
Modern workforce management is about empowering your team to execute purpose driven work at the speed of digital. If you believe, like we do, that great work happens when your people finish strong and win together, then (as their leader), you have to orchestrate and automate what they are being asked to do. If you do, speed and scale will follow. This is the modern formula for delivering differentiated products and services to your market and customer base.
The topic of managing the tensions between the three constituencies is something I hope to explore in a future conversation, but for now, I’ll leave this as an open question. As a teaser, I argue that the tension Shootman sees as false is real and an artifact of recent but flawed thinking about the supremacy of management’s role as the purveyor of stakeholder, or specifically shareholder value. But then I also see that changing in small but dramatic ways. More of that in another story.
What’s your purpose?
The notion of purpose is central to Done Right’s main argument because as Shootman correctly observes, disengaged employees are a costly resource. Quoting from a conversation with Jay Baer (whose book Youtility should be on everyone’s reading list) Shootman says:
“Workers are always going to wonder why they’re there, how they fit in, if they’re being treated fairly, and how they can advance themselves. Those are. really the only questions that matter.”
It’s the difference between action and purposeful action…And making work matter is too important to leave to chance.
Corporate value statements are full of high sounding epithets that sound fantastic on the surface but which are meaningless or unattainable. Shootman again correctly punctures some of those ideas, endeavoring instead to distill what ‘purpose’ means in the context of alignment between employees, customers, and stakeholders.
It’s a noble effort, but as recent issues at Microsoft, Google, Salesforce and other firms demonstrate, the modern workforce doesn’t necessarily go with what the company is saying or doing and is prepared to make a big fuss. Shootman nods in that direction, noting that alignment does not equate to groupthink, but consensus arrived at through healthy debate. In a future conversation, I’d like to explore the topic of ‘purpose’ since it is one I believe is central to the modern workforce.
Tackling change
Inevitably, Done Right’s modern workforce management agenda talks to the vexed question of change, offering an approach I’ve not come across before. He uses work done at Duke University’s CASE center by the Heath brothers and laid out in Switch to articulate a three-part framework based on the elephant and rider concept. Put simply he says:

Direct the rider. What looks like resistance is often a lack of clarity.  So, provide crystal-clear direction.
Motivate the elephant. It’s critical that you engage people’s emotional side – get their elephants on the path and cooperative.
Shape the path. If you want people to change, you can provide clear direction (rider) or boost their motivation and determination (elephant.) Alternatively, you can simply make the journey easier. Create a steep downhill slope and give them a push. Remove some friction from the trail. Scatter around lots of signs to tell them they are getting close. In short, you can shape the path.

I like this idea, but then I know it is not easy, something that is acknowledged and understood.
Best Next Action
Another core concept the book explores is that of Best Next Action or BNA in the context of modern workforce management activities.
Like all astute leaders, Shootman understands only too well the difficulty we all face in attempting to look around corners or anticipating the next thing that will happen. We all strive for perfection and continuously experience disappointment. Shootman believes those entirely human responses are mitigated by utilizing a simple Q&A that has a bias towards action in the context of a project stream:
What are we going to do next?
What the one thing we’re going to do in the next two weeks that will take us closer to a milestone?
Viewing projects as a series of sprints, very much as has become the fashion in software development, project milestones become much easier to both see and act upon but only provided the team respond to one or both of these questions with a single answer. The book offers a handy set of illustrations covering how this works with the core focus on making teams successively successful.
Done Right isn’t short of caveats and warnings. For example, Shootman talks at length and in some detail about the problems that leaders face in communication, motivation, and focus. As a stark reminder of how badly the best intentions can go wrong, Shootman talks about the emergence of conspiracy theories inside organizations noting that:
Conspiracy theories are most prevalent when workers feel that they lack control, have little say over their duties, or experience workplace uncertainty…Where conspiracy theories flourish, your efforts to make work meaningful will wither.
He also says flat out that:
Never assume that what’s clear to one person is clear to someone else in the same way…If someone doesn’t get it, it’s on you.
Measuring the unmeasurable?
Finally, Shootman provides a cogent answer to the Taylor-esque arguments about measuring what cannot be measured. He breaks these down into five buckets:

Mix: What are you working on?
Capacity: How do you know if the work can get done?
Velocity: How fast are you working?
Quality: Making sure you’ve got the best work
Engagement: Is there pride in the quality of the work?

Done Right acknowledges that these measures are evolving as modern workforce management techniques evolve. Today, they are relatively simple, often expressed as up and down indicators. One idea is that ‘relationships’ in the context of AI augmented human effort might become an important measure. Another might be ‘growth and learning.’ The latter sounds prescient to me as a topic I hear more about on a daily basis.
My take
There are no easy shortcuts or quick fixes to establishing the modern workforce. Many have been there and ultimately failed. Done Right has enough to make its lessons worthy of consideration in a world where the workforce and the nature of work are changing.
The book is a short read at 137 pages of core content but as this long review has demonstrated, there is much to consider.
I like the fact that you can take the lessons in Done Right and apply them on an incremental basis so that purpose, meaning, fulfillment and work that matters is built like a layer cake. It’s not a one and done proposition but one that takes thoughtful and transparent servant leadership. Of course, much depends on the starting position of the reader as to the extent to which they believe the lessons can be made to work in any given organization.
Image credit - Photo by Crew on UnsplashDisclosure - Salesforce is a premier partner at the time of writingRead more on: Future of workHCM and the digital future of work 