
Joshua Browder – speaking at Next:Economy
One of the highlights of Next: Economy was hearing from Joshua Browder, a 19 year old Stanford student who invented DoNotPay, a free site initially dedicated to helping people who receive unfair parking tickets in the UK but which has since expanded. Like many brilliant inventions, it arose out of a personal need. Drawing giggles from the crowd, Browder said:
I kind of got into this whole topic by accident. I was a terrible driver and I got a large number of  parking tickets. After about the fourth ticket, my parents were fed up and told me I was on my own and I’d have to pay my own fines. The problem was I couldn’t afford to pay a lawyer or pay the fines so had to figure out a way of getting out of this mess.
Being the nerdy person that he is, Browder trawled the internet to discover the top reasons that could be used to defeat a parking ticket. After some initial success, it wasn’t long before family and friends were asking for help.
I quickly became the local parking guru of my area. It became obvious that I should create an automated system to help people en masse. When I approached lawyers about it, some were more polite than others but every single one said it was silly and would never work. It was a side project and I never imagined that in less than six months DoNotPay would take the legal world by storm. In just under a year, it successfully appealed over 180,000 parking tickets, saving motorists an estimated $5 million. All of a sudden, the same lawyers that had rejected me were phoning up wanting to buy the website. All of this made me realize that bots could do a lot more than just parking tickets…I started by going after the airlines.
Browder explained that in Europe, passengers can claim lots of compensation when flights are delayed more than three hours. The problem is that lawyers were charging huge fees for processing  compensation claims when a robot could do the work.
My robot is completely free because unlike the human equivalent, it doesn’t require a salary. Unfortunately, because I was helping with parking tickets and delayed flights, people assumed I could help them with everything. I had people asking for help with repossessions and evictions. I felt bad not being able to help, especially as people were being made homeless. I later learned that in the UK we have this really broken system. Instead of helping the homeless directly, government pays lawyers huge sums of money to file an application on behalf of someone which gets sent back to the government.
To solve that problem, Browder worked with CentrePoint, which is one of the largest UK charities dedicated to helping young homeless people. Browder’s robot lawyer takes much of the legwork out of housing applications. Browder discovered that there are other areas of the law that can be automated, including helping those with HIV understand their rights and responsibilities. His robot lawyer now helps people who are in dispute with landlords in San Francisco, New York and Chicago over refunding deposits.
It will soon work on Alexa so soon you can complain about your landlord from your house.
Browder has demonstrated that robot lawyers can help make certain aspects of government more efficient but more to the point, lawyers are going to get consumed by technology.
I may well have made some enemies in the legal world but I know there are programmers with decades more experience than me working on similar issues.
I’d heard about this service a month or so back but paid little attention to it. When you think about it, DoNotPay represents the tip of an iceberg in the sense that what should be routine services are either broken or too complicated for the average person to navigate.
I managed to fool the chatbot into taking nonsensical answers to its questions which were then used to complete a form the user can print. Even so, services like this that help the most vulnerable in society is definitely a net good and one of the more uplifting examples of robot technology at work.
Where next? Kevin Marks has an idea that may not be that far into the future:

@barneyp I was imagining @jbrowder1‘s AI lawyer getting into a plea bargain with Watson’s government regulations AI
— Kevin Marks (@kevinmarks) October 12, 2016

Image credit - via the authorDisclosure - O'Reilly Media comp'd my attendance at Next: EconomyRead more on: Future of workMachine intelligence and AIUse cases 