
Benioff
With the annual Dreamforce conference now within spitting distance, Salesforce CEO Marc Benioff was back on sabre-rattling form as the firm released second quarter numbers that cheered Wall Street.
The firm’s second quarter numbers narrowly beat Wall Street consensus expectations with revenue of $1.63 billion, up 24% year-on-year and profit of $302 million. The firm reported a loss of $852,000 in the three months to the end of July, compared with a loss of $61.1 million in the year-ago period.
Benioff’s now looking to the next milestone:
Just one quarter after crossing the $6 billion annual revenue run rate milestone, we have now surpassed a $6.5 billion revenue run rate. That’s faster than any enterprise software company in history, and we anticipate we’re going to reach a $7 billion run rate by the end of this year. We have a clear trajectory to accomplishing our goal of being the fastest ever to reach $10 billion in revenue.
We’re going to go from being the sixth-largest software company in the world to the fourth-largest next year. That’s awesome. That is next year, only Microsoft, Oracle and SAP are bigger than Salesforce. That is incredible. And then, of course, we’re going to go on to our next goal which is to become the third-largest software company in the world, first by market and then by revenue. Then only Microsoft and Oracle are going to be larger than Salesforce.
It’s interesting to note that after a few quarters of toning down the competitive rhetoric, Benioff was back on form on the analyst conference call:
The way to understand the future is to look at the past, and you can look at IBM with the mainframe business. I think we all know IBM still sells a lot of mainframes. That doesn’t mean that IBM is innovating, that doesn’t mean that IBM is creating value for customers or helping them to transform customers’ businesses or align them with modern trends. It just means they’re selling them old technology and upgrading it.
That’s what you see with companies like Oracle and SAP. These are old technology bases that are kind of meandering along like mainframes. And I think that is reflected in their license revenue growth, which has been poor, and then their movement to the cloud has been stunted because they don’t want to shift those customers into new models.
[That’s] exactly why IBM lost the PC business, because they were too afraid to let go of the mainframe. It’s the past replaying itself. But instead of IBM, you’ve got Oracle and SAP basically running the same playbook.
Companies who have built platforms like Salesforce deliver world-class growth like we’re doing in this quarter. If you haven’t done that, well, then you end up with a quarter like Oracle or SAP had. I think you’ve seen in the last four or six or eight quarters, they’ve missed almost all of them. That’s because their technology bases are degrading the way mainframes have.
But they can hang in there with their revenue, and meander along like big dinosaurs moving down the desert for a while.
Cloud fail
Of course, many will recall Oracle Chief Technology Officer Larry Ellison’s recent confident prediction that Oracle will turn in more cloud subscription revenue than Salesforce in the next fiscal year. Naturally enough Benioff is having none of this:
I think we’ve mostly seen Oracle actually fail in the cloud market. I mean, for a long time, Larry said that the cloud was ridiculous and then he started taking it more seriously, but I just haven’t seen any competitive cloud solutions from Oracle. And I think that’s the shame.
I do view Larry as one of the most capable leaders in our industry. He’s amazing. Of course, he’s one of my mentors. But in this area of the cloud, Oracle has not delivered.
A great example of that is in the CRM marketplace. Here you can see Salesforce is selling billions of dollars of CRM in the cloud this year. Oracle is selling millions of dollars. And I think if you are selling millions and you have a competitor who is a relatively new entrant selling billions, well, then I would chalk that up as a failure in the cloud.
Predicting
And it’s not just Oracle that’s in the firing line:
Microsoft, Oracle, SAP – they’re selling millions of dollars of CRM – that’s with an M. We are selling billions of dollars of CRM – that’s with a B – and that is the difference between us and the competition.
(Whether this is a boast that will be repeated at Dreamforce when Microsoft CEO Satya Nadella is on stage next to him remains to be seen…)
Salesforce President Keith Block took a more ‘by example’ approach to the competitive landscape, citing wins over and alongside Benioff’s so-called ‘dinosaurs’:
Enel is Europe’s largest power company with 61 million customers. This deal was significant in terms of expansion of an important relationship where the CEO was personally involved. We are now Enel’s strategic partner for the complete transformation of their customer engagement platform, leveraging sales and service and communities, analytics and platform. But that doesn’t stop there.
In addition, we’re building an agility layer around their legacy on-premise SAP system and we’re helping them extract information from complex order management and inventory and billing systems. They’re having trouble getting meaningful and timely information out of SAP and Salesforce is bringing all this data together, so Enel’s teams can get a 360 degrees view of their customers. And with Wave Analytics, they can drill down into their customer data right from the mobile phone in seconds.
And:
We also signed an exciting new relationship in the quarter with one of the largest hospitality vendors in the world. They have an incredible vision to bring all of their customer service together under a single platform to deliver a very personalized experience at scale to millions of their guests. The Service Cloud will now be the social mobile front office to the Oracle back-office and allow their hotel associates to better engage and service guests no matter where they are anywhere in the globe. It was a great win over Oracle and they chose Salesforce for our ability to deliver customer service on a flexible platform that would allow them to innovate with scale and speed.
So it’s full speed now into Dreamforce, where Benioff promises:
You’re going to see the future of Salesforce in my keynote with relationship intelligence, next generation of clouds, the Internet of Things. You’re going to see a whole new standard for an industry.
My take
A happy set of numbers to slide into Dreamforce on.
Disclosure – at time of writing, Oracle, Salesforce and SAP are premier partners of diginomica. 
Read more on: Analytics planning and data analysisCloud ERP financials and supply chainCloud platforms - infrastructure and architectureCollaboration sharing and digital productivityCRM and customer experienceDigital and content marketingHCM and the digital future of workMobileSocial 