
Much of the sex appeal in the HR software space is about the “cloud HCM suite.” But Workstride CEO Jim Hemmer has a problem with that. Understandably so – his company specializes in a narrower HR area: employee engagement through recognition and incentives. Hemmer believes that employee engagement is far too important to be an afterthought in a product suite. 
Since joining Workstride in 2014, Hemmer’s been focused on building out Workstride’s customer base on their new platform (Workstride has technically been in existence for twelve years, but last year, they re-platformed as Workstride). Prior to some nasty weather and travel, I had a chance to talk with Hemmer about the ongoing problem of employee engagement, and why recognition programs matter. We also dug into a field example, and looked at how you measure the success of such programs, which can be an elusive measurement if you’re not careful.
Jon Reed: So why should a business prioritize “employee engagement?”
Jim Hemmer: Gallup has been surveying employee engagement for many years. The latest statistics are that roughly 30 percent of employees are “engaged” at work. First of all, there’s a lot of room for improvement. But what it comes down to is this: I think the employees are buyers now, and the companies are the sellers. I think the models have flipped.
Reed: But lack of employee engagement isn’t a new issue. Is it the workplace preferences of millennials bringing this to a head?
Hemmer: Millennials are definitely a part of it. I think the balance of power has just shifted a little bit. Today’s employee, millennial or not, are looking for meaningful work. I think they are looking for a company that has a mission they can believe in. They are looking for the autonomy to do great things. I think they want to work with a team of smart switched-on people. They are looking for an environment where meaningful things can be accomplished.
Reed: Where else are companies falling short?
Hemmer: Well, this is the self-serving piece, but employees want to be recognized for their accomplishments, and not just monetarily. If you’re an employer, and you’re looking at these stats, these are things you’ve got to start introspecting on.
Reed: Give us the short shameless plug on how Workstride can address this.
Hemmer: Our platform helps companies use recognition and incentive programs as tools to improve employee engagement. I’ve been here for two years now; one of the biggest reasons is because I see this as a huge opportunity in HR. I think this is the next emerging area of investment in HR technology
Is there a place for specialty HR vendors in the HCM suite era?
Reed: Except that the trend in HR is towards consolidating onto cloud HCM suites. We keep hearing about the emergence of the HCM suite. The Workdays, SuccessFactors and Oracles of the world would have you think that the time of best-of-breed in HR is in the past.
Hemmer: Years ago, all these HR vendors were going after a singular problem – payroll or talent management or e-learning – and doing it well, for the most part. Then HR organizations, largely driven by the Fortune 1000 said, “Hey, we want to consolidate the vendors.” All these companies started buying each other and piecing together these suites. Of course, after they finished doing that, the likes of Oracle, SAP and IBM bought them, so there was this consolidation.
Reed: But you think recognition can stand up as best-of-breed?
Hemmer: If you look at the HCM suites, very rarely do you find recognition capabilities, at least in the way we address it. There’s a couple of reasons for that. One is that it’s kind of specialized. The challenge for the HR buyer is that they aren’t always empowered with a lot of budget to drive new programs. When we are successful, it’s typically a program that’s initiated by the CEO, such as when the CEO does their annual employee surveys, and the results show employee engagement is going down. Then the CEO is motivated. We try to help them with the question, “What are we going to do about it?” We don’t claim to solve that problem in totality, but we think we’ve got an important piece of that.
Reed: Employee rewards programs aren’t all that new though, are they?
Hemmer: True. The old model was points and catalogs and merchandise points. Or: you get a gold watch for your anniversary. That’s been then norm. When we engage with the HR organization, we try to help them put together a cohesive solution towards attacking this employee engagement problem. Given that these companies typically have some program already, we are kind of the disruptor. I think the key to our success is that we do a good job with those monetary rewards, but we also provide a social platform for non-monetary rewards. The non-monetary piece is the important change agent here.
Employee recognition – field examples
Reed: Give us some customer examples.
Jim Hemmer, CEO
Hemmer: We have one healthcare customer who is using our software as part of a culture change they’ve taken on. They have a number of awards they give to employees that are tied to their core values. Part of their core values is excellence in what they do and how they handle their clients. For them, that means looking after patients, and recognizing people who do the little things that would otherwise slip through the cracks. They tie these recognition moments around their core values.
Another good healthcare example is Cleveland Clinic, which is a world-class healthcare institution. A few years ago, Cleveland Clinic arguably had some of the finest doctors and medical staff in the world. They thought that was enough,
Reed: But it wasn’t?
Hemmer: When they did their patient satisfaction scores, they results were disappointing. Why? Not because of the doctors or the nurses per se, but all of the other things that come with your hospital experience: how you’re treated, how the food is delivered, how attentive are people to your needs – all these thousand little moments that happened during the day. They embarked on this whole culture shift, and every employee at the hospital became known as caregivers. They built this culture around care-giving, of course they use the Workstride platform as part of that.
They got so much non-monetary recognition from the change, just people calling each other out for great deeds, and that sparked a cultural change. Then they added one last piece, and I think this is the most important piece. They let their patients recognize people as well. That’s really empowering.
Reed: Did that caregiver’s mentality extend to everyone in the facility, including administrators and people that would check you in at the front desk?
Hemmer: Yes. It was a big culture shift for them, and it was very effective.
Reed: And how do you measure the results of such a change?
Hemmer: They were doing this because they want to build a culture, but in the healthcare world, there is a standardized patient satisfaction scores that hospital measure every year. It’s called the HCAHPS, and it’s a standard patient satisfaction score. Those scores are very important in how hospitals reimburse in funds they receive and everything else. Like everything in life, this project was for love and money, the love part was building a great culture, but it had a good business benefit as well.
As I mentioned, before implementing their recognition program, they were very average. Let’s call it middle of the pack. After implementing the program, they got into e top 8 percent of roughly 4600 hospitals nationwide.
Reed: And this ties into something you and I were talking about, which is that you don’t just want to reach the 20 percent of overachievers in a company. You want to engage the rest as well.
Hemmer: It’s the other 80 percent that aren’t getting recognized. Maybe they are not doing the most leading edge work. Maybe they are not the top sales person. But they are important too, because you need those people to perform well. And by the way, a lot of times those people are customer-facing. They are out there on the phones. Or with Cleveland Clinic, they are your touch points during your hospital visit. Guess what? If the employees engage and they feel like are appreciated, they are going to be a lot more effective. And: your customers are going to have a much better experience.
Image credit – Office emotion © Kenishirotie – Fotolia.com
Disclosure - Diginomica has no financial ties to Workstride. I was contacted by their PR firm, and found their story interesting.Read more on: HCM and the digital future of workHR admin and payrollUser experience 