
Selfies aren’t good
Booze, marijuana and selfies – three things designed to limit your chance of getting hired in a world of social media recruitment. Now, OK, the first two we might have guessed at, but selfies? Really?
Well, yes, according to the 8th annual Recruiter Nation study from cloud-based recruitment firm Jobvite, which polled over 1,400 recruiters and HR professionals on their use of social media as part of their recruitment practices.
It seems that a quarter of respondents cites selfies as a reason to mark a candidate down, so bear that in mind next time you’re reaching for your selfie-stick and gurning into your iPhone.
Actually it’s more likely that it’s not selfies per se, but booze-fuelled selfies that are the issue, as more than half (54%) of respondents look negatively on social media posts showing candidates drinking alcohol and even more (75%) aren’t going to be happy if you’re pictured with some exotic smoking material.
And if you’re chasing a job in comms or marketing, then don’t delete your profiles as a third (33%) of respondents in this field regard having a limited social profile as suspicious!
So if that’s what you shouldn’t be doing, then what’s the flip side? Well, it’s a bit like a beauty pageant it seems – a yearning for world peace and lots of charity work goes down a storm. Some 75% of recruiters will mark up candidates who post online content related to volunteer, professional or social engagement work.
Who knows who?
But social isn’t the be-all-and-end-all. In what might be read as bad news for the likes of LinkedIn, only 56% of recruiters say they find their best candidates via social channels and online professional networks, followed by followed by 37% who cite use of online job boards.
Source : Jobvite
What still works is simple: word of mouth. It really is still who you know – or rather who knows you and is prepared to put in a good word for you. A mighty 78% of respondents here agree that the best candidates are found via personal referrals – and interestingly that’s a belief that’s on the rise with this year’s percentage up from last year’s 60%.
That said, there’s clearly a prevailing trend towards increased use of social channels, with half (50%) of recruiters polled planning to spend more on social media initiatives over the next twelve months, making that the biggest spending priority.
For those recruiters who do already factor in social and professional networks, it’s predictably enough LinkedIn that dominates among respondents (87%), while just over half (55%) use Facebook and just under half use Twitter (47%).
There are geographic differences at play here of course. For example, breaking out UK stats indicates that 60% of recruiters there haven’t used social channels at all to identify candidates over the last twelve months.
Of those who have, it’s Facebook that leads as the most popular channel (75%), followed by Twitter (57%) with LinkedIn in distant third place (38%), tied with basic search.
In common with the US, referrals are still seen as the most powerful recruitment tools by respondents (64%), but they’re followed by direct applications (62%) and intern hires (43%). Candidate sourcing from social and professional networks is only used by just over a third (38%) of respondents.
Think differently
Dan Finnigan, CEO of Jobvite, says that recruiters need to think carefully about their approach to social engagement, especially as 95% of recruiters polled reckon that the next twelve months will see even tougher competition for talent:
Landing a highly skilled candidate can sometimes feel like hunting for an elusive unicorn.
Recruiters need to get creative and take a multi-pronged approach using social media, insights gleaned from analytics, and mobile tools, while engaging the entire organisation to help find and hire top talent.
Source : Jobvite
One way to increase the chances of getting a good candidate is to increase the potential of data analytics. This is a message that seems to be getting through as 72% of respondents cite data analytics as a somewhat or very important element of their recruitment strategy.
The Jobvite study notes that online networks offer rich seams of data, both personal and professionals, to be tapped into. The sort of information that’s on offer, if you dig deep enough, includes:

Length of a candidate’s average job tenure (74%).
Length of tenure with the current employer (57%).
Mutual connections (34%).
Membership of professional organisations (30%).
Examples of work (29%).

There’s also the question of brand awareness – how do you ensure that potential candidates want to come and work for you in the first instance. This is an area in which social media can definitely help, with 74% of respondents citing it as a profile-raising tool.
My take
It’s encouraging in some respects that it really is who you know, not where you post that still matters. But clearly social engagement is now a reality as part of the recruitment process. And the emphasis on using data analytics for profiling is encouraging.
But I would hope that recruiters will not lose the personal touch. It’s bad enough when an algorithm attacks and you find yourself turned down for a credit card. Neither recruiters or the would-be recruited should risk the same thing happening to the perfect candidate who just happens to have some social media going on.
Read more on: Collaboration sharing and digital productivityDigital and content marketingFuture of workHCM and the digital future of workSocialTalent management 