

A lot of the grey hairs I have today are because of this project, but we have achieved a lot.

The project in question and cause of a few grey hairs for Peter Schoof, senior vice president for HR processes and platform management at global logistics firm Deutsche Post DHL, is the implementation of Cornerstone OnDemand’s talent management system. 
With nearly 500,000 employees operating in 220 countries, any kind of global roll-out, however simple, is likely to cause a grey hair or two. 
Talent management was identified as a key priority for the company and it realized that could only be possible with a global, standardized approach across the organization. As Schoof points out: 

We wanted to move HR to be more process-oriented and therefore ensure there is a seamless experience along the employee lifecycle from hire to retire.

But to do that, it needed to replace its mishmash of legacy systems accumulated through acquisitions with a unified talent management system. Schoof explains:

They all bought along their own IT solutions which could be anything from Excel spreadsheets to more renowned solutions and we wanted to have an integrated talent management solution to support employees and managers. So we started shopping around.

The shopping trip led to Cornerstone. DP DHL was attracted not only by the functionality and cost effectiveness of the software, but also the attitude of the Cornerstone team itself. A solution that had longevity was also important, according to Schoof:

Our company is cost conscious and therefore we tend to run solutions for a long time and because of that we have to be very diligent when making our choices.

This is the first time the company has adopted a cloud solution and it is not a decision that was taken lightly, notes Schoof:

Cloud was a bit of a debate. We had and have reservations, so we went through proper due diligence on cloud applications. We looked at data protection and data security and accessibility.

While there are clear benefits of moving to the cloud, Schoof points out that it’s a very different operating environment and ecosystem: 

You need to have a good knowledge of the functionality and you need to have a good understanding of how cloud works – having quarterly releases, for example. It sounds nice, but you have to go through it a couple of times to understand the subtleties of the differences and that can have a significant impact.

Its talent journey started with performance and development, which the company knew would take them the longest to implement. This was followed by Cornerstone’s learning and recruitment modules.
With performance and development, the approach was to start rolling out to the executive population first, before gradually extending the reach to other groups and countries. This gave the HR team a chance to learn about the software and also learn the best way to roll it out to employees. 
Slice by slice
For Schoof, big bang is a big no-no. Instead, DP DHL’s approach is to “slice the elephant” and to gradually roll out each module to different groups:

I can live with a transition period…. business is not about taking risks in a non-diligent way.

This softly-softly approach was also applied to recruitment and to learning, he says: 

With e-learning we started with one division and as soon as that was a robustly working environment – and we had about 25,000 learners within four months – we then expanded elearning to other populations and divisions which took us 12 months.

It’s now piloting virtual classrooms and blended e-learning and classroom training in some areas.
Schoof believes the success of this measured style of roll-out is that it means the company has to continually keep the momentum and energy going. That clearly takes a lot of effort but it is worth it:

If you go for big bang, there’s huge pressure and then you launch it and it’s like a balloon that deflates – I don’t want to have that.  I want to have continuous momentum of change so people can get used to the change.

Communicating those changes is critical. As most of the workforce do not have structured access to computers in the workplace, the HR team use posters to get the message across to employees as well as digital channels. Managers play a key role by cascading information to their teams.
While HR wants to control the communication of the changes and the roll-out of the technology across its global offices, it’s difficult to keep a secret with the internet. According to Schoof: 

I can‘t count the days when I won’t receive and email or call from some country that’s figured out that we’re using Cornerstone  and wants to find out how we’re using it.

Another key challenge has been getting data together, particularly because a lot of it resided with third parties. 
DP DHL is now assessing succession planning, but says Schoof it requires a proper mapping of the organization which isn’t fully complete as yet. Onboarding would also be a natural partner to the talent management portfolio.
Although things like analytics and mobile access are areas that the company believes are important, for now, the priority is getting people used to the system, and that involves creating the best user experience possible:

At the moment we believe that here’s not so much buy-in for analytics. There’s more interest in making sure that people have a very positive experience.
Rather than expanding functionality we want to make what we have robust, because that way I hope to create some appetite with employees and managers to actually work with the system and use what it can do.

While the project is still ongoing, the company is already beginning to appreciate some of the benefits of the cloud-based system, according to Schoof:

We are creating transparency for managers and HR and first and foremost we are making people aware of what talent management actually means, because it’s not just about career steps, it’s about the need and the opportunity to develop yourself on a continuous basis and work on your own employability.

Image credit - DP DHL Read more on: Digital enterprise in the real worldTalent managementUse cases 