
Alex Dayon
Dreamforce is about wider conversations with business leaders as well as IT people, not just technology and products, according to the man who says his world is to build the products.
As Dreamforce officially kicks off today, Chief Product Officer Alex Dayon says:
We do talk about technology and products, but there is a bigger agenda. It’s about transforming around customers. How do you transform your business in a world of change? Your customers are now part of your information system. We talk very little about technology. You will hear a lot about customers.
But from a product perspective, Dayon pitches a simple message – Salesforce is about 8 applications (clouds) built around one platform. That’s a straightforward play, perhaps too straightforward given the way that Salesforce’s product footprint has expanded in recent times.
When the first Dreamforce was held 14 years ago, the conversations were about CRM and salesforce automation. This year they’re about those two topics, but also about customer service, marketing, analytics, AI, e-commerce, field service, collaboration/productivity and the inevitable Internet of Things (IoT). This past year alone has seen Salesforce make major acquisitions in the form of Demandware and Quip, as well as an abortive bid for LinkedIn and the ongoing scuttlebutt about a potential play for Twitter.
On the one hand this is indicative of a company that knows it has to keep on moving.  That’s all to the good.
On the other hand, I can recall a few years ago when investors got nervous about the number of clouds in the Salesforce line-up, leading to a move to consolidate and create a simpler message for the outside world.
There’s some indication that some investors have been unnerved by the recent spending spree – another $700 million yesterday for marketing AI firm Krux – which led me to ask Dayon how this ‘too much going on’ issue is being avoided today.
His response to that is that things are actually simpler than they seem:
We do one thing. We do CRM. We don’t do ERP. The core of our business is to connect customers in the new world. We are rigorous about our acquisitions. We buy leaders and we pay the right price.
That does rather beg the question of what the right price would have been for LinkedIn? Benioff publicly complained that he’d have made a higher bid for the firm, which was sold to Microsoft for $26 billion.
Acquisition strategy
But the main point of Dayon’s argument is the leadership one, pointing to Demandware as a case in point and its status as a perceived sector leader by analyst firms such as Forrester and Gartner. The purchase of firms like Demandware and ExactTarget are intended as extensions of the existing addressable market.
The other form of acquisitions is those that are based around innovation aka pushing into new market sectors. Dayon says the critical thing here is keeping in mind the core business and essentially not scaring the horses:
That’s different because you’re not expanding the market, but you are making the core better. Many of these recent acquisitions have been around AI. But we pay a lot of attention of being to the core. We serve our installed base first. We are a subscription business so there is nothing more precious than our customers.
But he makes an interesting point when he adds:
Our customers are amazed by the amount of innovation. Most of them can’t absorb all of that innovation.
He’s referring to the amount of sessions and topics at Dreamforce when he says that, suggesting that most attendees will end up focusing on 3 or 4 themes during the course of the week.
But his comments also bring back memories of the reaction of the SAP customer base last year when a survey of UK User Group members delivered the supplier a cautionary warning that too much innovation and new directions would be met with resistance and a declaration that customers would move at their own pace, not the vendor’s roadmap timetable.
That said, Dayon strongly argues that although there is “tons of innovation” at Dreamforce this week, the underlying thread is simple:
We have a series of products that are connected together to create a customer success platform. We empower customers to service every step of the customer lifecycle. We can manage each and every step of the customer lifecycle. There are eight mini applications, but there are all around one platform. We sell solutions that are as close to the value of the business as we can make them.
So what will customers and prospects be hearing about over the course of this week? According to Dayon, there are five main themes as follows:
The first is Intelligence. Einstein is a big thing for us. We’ve been working on that for many years. We’ve acquired many companies and spent $700 million acquiring the best talent in data science. This is not AI on the side, it’s AI right at the heart of Salesforce and it’s AI for everyone. It’s bringing your own personal data scientist into the application. Our CRM just got smarter.
Next up is Productivity, a move into what Dayon describes as a “brand new world” enabled by last month’s acquisition of Office 365 rival Quip. He says:
Quip is the most disruptive productivity app that I’ve seen in years. This is not just a new segment for Salesforce, it’s also about embedding it into the Salesforce market.
Speed is the third theme, which Dayon says plays to his earlier comments:
We don’t talk about tech. The goal this week is not to talk about the technology, but about what you can do with Salesforce to change your customers.
Fourth up is Mobility, with Dayon citing the example of Salesforce1’s now 1.5 million mobile active users:
This is about everything we do. Mobile is the number one form factor for us.
Finally there’s Connectivity, which is related to the first theme of Intelligence, argues Dayon, noting that customers are now hearing and dealing with millions of signal around them:
This is about the capacity to connect Salesforce clouds to high velocity systems.
My take
Discussions of this kind are inevitably a surface sweep. That leaves plenty to talk about this week with much more detail to follow.
Image credit - Salesforce Disclosure - At time of writing, Salesforce is a premier partner of diginomica. Read more on: Cloud platforms - infrastructure and architectureDigital and content marketingGoverning identity privacy and securityIoT robotics and AIRetail e-commerce and the omni-channelUX and application design 