
Salesforce wants us to stop using the long-established ISV acronym to describe partners in its ecosystem. Henceforth, it wants its application-building partners to be known as Application Innovation Partners.
Explaining the move on Tuesday, Tyler Prince, Salesforce EVP alliances and go-to-market innovation, said that ISV stands for a concept that is no longer relevant in the cloud era.
This category that we’ve always referred to as ISVs, we had this ah-ha moment in a conference room on a whiteboard. We spelled out the word independent software vendors and thought about the name and said, this actually doesn’t make sense.
Somebody googled it quickly and we figured out, that term is 50 years old. It was invented around the IBM ecosystem and it’s 50 years old.
The origins of the term in fact go back to government anti-trust actions in the 1960s that forced IBM to open up its systems to software written by third parties, allowing customers to buy software from vendors that were independent of IBM. That history is nothing like the way that application builders interact with Salesforce today, says Prince.
We have an opportunity to change the dialog and change the narrative around what this is.
Independent, it’s anything but that, what we’re trying to articulate. This is all connected. This is a relationship and a partnership. Independent’s not a good word.
I think our company Salesforce is well known for declaring it’s not about software either. It’s about service and solutions. And so the word software even just seems slightly foreign when you spell it out on a whiteboard.
And then the last word, a vendor. The value we’re trying to drive to our customers is not about us being a vendor and selling them something and nor is it that of our partners. It’s really about a relationship or a partnership.
So we really got pretty focused on how I-S-V, independent software vendors, this fifty-year-old term, doesn’t represent what we are, doesn’t represent this group of partners out there that are innovating on our platform. They’re building apps, they’re building templates, they’re building components for the AppExchange, they’re building integrations. It’s just a different world. And so it’s time that we referred to this group as something different, to change the narrative.
The new term that Prince’s team have come up with as a replacement is intended to get people to think about what these partners do in a fresh light:
It’s intended to change the narrative about what these third parties can do when they engage with Salesforce and leverage our platform to build incredible apps, to build components, to build templates, to build companies.
We just feel that there’s something that’s a new phenomenon, we’re providing new technologies, this is all about modern and thinking about the future. Using a 50-year old term repeatedly to refer to this group of innovation partners just seems a bit harsh. So we’ll see how it goes. I’m excited about it because it sets the tone.
My take
It’s certainly true that the origins of the term ISV are completely alien to what Salesforce’s partners are doing today. But the words we use often end up meaning something completely different from how they first originated. Whatever the underlying words actually mean, everyone understands and recognizes the term ISV. At the same time, it’s always hard to achieve similar recognition for a completely new term — especially one that’s been created by a marketing team working up ideas on a whiteboard.
On the other hand, it’s true that the words we use have a powerful influence on how we think about something. The term ISV is too constraining as a description of what these partners do today on the platform. Terminology that opens out the category will encourage new entrants that come from outside of the traditional software industry.
But it’s difficult to see AIP catching on as a replacement. It’s a little too anodyne. And if we’re going to reject 50-year-old concepts, perhaps the word application should be on its way out too. So while there are good reasons for retiring the term ISV, I’m not sure that we’ve heard the last of it just yet.
Image credit - Fossil © bastos - Fotolia.comDisclosure - Salesforce is a diginomica premier partner. Salesforce has not funded my travel to attend Dreamforce. Read more on: Cloud platforms - infrastructure and architectureCRM and customer experienceUX and application design 