
Dreamforce starts today though the sun hasn’t yet risen on it as I write this on the far edge of Western civilization. But the smoke signals that Salesforce has been emitting over the last few weeks tell an interesting story about what we can expect.
First, there’s a certain amount of rebranding that you come to expect at Dreamforce. Yesterday’s ideas get merged or they become even bigger as the company doubles down on something. It reminds me of Microsoft’s portfolio approach in the 1980s and 90s, but with a key difference. Salesforce has always been more methodical in its approach. Sure some ideas died after flopping but much more often, ideas get built upon and perhaps a major innovation becomes a feature. But Salesforce doesn’t throw way much. Here are some things to consider this year,
No new cloud
It seems like a new cloud introduction was par for the course for many years, but trees don’t grow to the moon and it’s looking like the foundational elements are mostly in place at this point. Still there is rampant innovation in the partner community in areas like vertical apps and leading edge areas like IoT, which became a cloud last time. This time, IoT is getting turbocharged with a builder environment that was just released and sources tell me is already selling well.
Vertical apps in financial services and healthcare are looking strong and high quality partners that are not traditional SI’s are stepping up.
Trailhead
The interactive and gamified training environment, Trailhead, is doing well. With over 350,000 Salesforce related jobs going begging, there’s plenty of opportunity to train new people. Add to this Salesforce’s opening up the course creation capability to its partners and you have a really powerful force to drive adoption and sales. Let’s face it Salesforce needs this to continue its growth. Selling seats is the name of the business and that only happens when there’s demand. So Trailhead is, among other things, a demand assist.
Whole product
More than 20 years ago we obsessed about whole product, the confluence of technology, business processes, and anything else that produced whatever customers needed to be successful with a product. Then the cloud emerged and we focused on something else, customer experience, which is allied by different. Whole product is back and this signals the coming end of the technology buildout. That no new cloud is being introduced is no accident.
As in the 1990’s there are many things that go into whole product and most customers won’t need everything available. But when you’re in a market where you want to be a general-purpose provider, you need to do everything. That’s the significance of this Dreamforce, I think. Salesforce is continuing down the path to whole product and all that it means.
Company of tomorrow
I’ll be attending a special session for analysts this morning that tries to outline some of the factors that will make businesses successful in the future (beginning today). They include corporate culture, not the old culture of work hard play hard though there’s that too. Tomorrow’s culture, if the agenda is to be believed concerns equality and fairness, innovation and philanthropy.
Recently Salesforce was again named one of the best companies to work for by Fortune magazine. This is important to the discussion because it demonstrates credibility on the subject.
Something else
There’s always something else not on the radar that, when announced, seems commonsensical and additive. There’s a press conference in the early afternoon and it could be about something we haven’t thought much about yet. It could be a new partnership, it’s probably not a product, but it could be some new initiative like the time the company embraced UCSF and its children’s hospital.
My take
Watch this space for follow up.
Image credit - Free for us Disclosure - At time of writing, Salesforce is a premier partner of diginomica. Read more on: Cloud platforms - infrastructure and architectureCollaboration sharing and digital productivityCRM and customer experienceDigital and content marketingIoT robotics and AI 