
B Lab is a not for profit organisation that is driving change through corporate culture, creating a new movement of companies that have a different idea of what it means to do ‘good business’. Instead of solely focusing on profits, B Lab works with companies to ensure that they’re also delivering excellent social and environmental governance.
The idea being that if you are delivering good social and environmental returns for all your stakeholders, customers and the community – you’re more likely to be a successful business overall in the long run, bringing greater returns for your shareholders.
We’ve highlighted examples of this in the past, with Etsy probably being the most obvious example of a public company that has committed to being a B Corporation.
B-Lab is creating this movement in a variety of ways. I got the chance to sit down with co-founder Bart Houlahan at Dreamforce in San Francisco this week, where explained the organisation’s goals. He said:
Our mission is pretty simple. We are trying to serve a movement of people that are trying to use business as a force for good. The long-term vision is to redefine the role of business in society, so that companies are contributing to a shared and durable prosperity. We want to redefine what it means to be a successful business. Where it’s not just about competing to be the best in the world, but the best for the world.
There are a number of layers to this. Companies can certify as B Corporations (or B Corps). Firstly companies are required to take and pass an impact assessment that measures the overall impact on your stakeholders. Secondly, companies have to embed purpose in the governance of the organisation by doing a legal change – essentially rewriting their corporate governing documents.
Houlahan said:
It’s about higher standards of social environmental performance that are built to last through a legal change. These commitments can survive new money, new management, even new ownership.
There certification is about shining a light on best in class and encouraging other companies to follow. There’s two ways that companies follow the lead of this community. One is through using our impact assessment, and it allows companies to measure and manage their social and environmental impact with the same rigour as their financials. We’ve got about 50,000 companies using that tool across the globe.
The other vehicle is our impact governance tools. Trying to spread the use of tools, so you really can get your governance aligned with the mission and purpose of the organisation. The best manifestation of that is a new corporate form, it’s called the Benefit Corporation. Imagine a C-corporation with a changed fiduciary duty.
Where the company is given permission and protection, and is also accountable, to not only create shareholder value, but also social value.
That legislation has passed in 33 states in the US, and is likely going to pass in another 6 countries in the course of 18 months. B-Lab now has about 4,000 legally certified B Corporations.
And whilst some may question if a company can both commit to returning maximum profits to shareholders and commit to being socially and environmentally responsible, Houlahan is adamant that there is a “tonne of data” that demonstrates that higher standards in these areas leads to long-term value for shareholders. He said:
That’s the reason for the legal change. If you get the legal change done you’ve aligned your entire set of directors, executives and investors around a long-term value creation orientation.
Working with Salesforce
Those that know Salesforce well will know that the cloud company has a long-standing commitment to help not for profit organisations, by offering them free licenses and a discount as they scale. As a result, B Lab has been working with the organisation since back in 2008 to both house its impact assessment data and as a CRM tool to engage with B Corps. Houlahan said:
They’re amazing to non-profits. The financial opportunities for young and growing non-profit are really meaningful.
However, despite the financial benefits of using Salesforce, B Lab also felt that the force.com platform was robust enough to house all the data collected for the 50,000 company impact assessments – each of which contains 200 metrics. The integration with the CRM was also a appealing. Houlahan said:
Salesforce offered the perfect platform to marry those two. Force.com for the last seven years has been the home of our impact assessment. Right now we are transitioning that entire platform onto Heroku. We will use Heroku Connect to bring all the data down back to Salesforce.
The platform gives you something that is scalable, totally secure, cloud-based and gives easy access for people to get to the data. Because the way that we reach companies is through partnerships. We are 70 people.
There is no way we are going to reach hundreds of thousands of companies – so we work with investors, cities, business associations, supply chains. All of whom ask their cohort of companies to use our impact assessment. They get access to the data, then they can benchmark against the other 50,000 companies in the database, all of which has been anonymised.
Building a community
Building on B Lab’s relationship with Salesforce, in the past year and a half it has also taken advantage of the software company’s Community Cloud to bring together B Corps online, so as to foster dialogue between like-minded companies that want to take the movement further.
Houlahan said it is used like a “local watering hole”, where companies come together to discuss everything from the challenges of the HR department, to ideas around investment decisions. He said:
They organise by region, by industry, by size, by job type. And it just creates this really robust place for them to gather and work with one another. It’s pretty damn active. It’s only about 18 months old, so I won’t say it’s a home run success yet, but it’s been growing steadily.
We are going to put another investment into it to improve the design of it. Part of it is we are learning. We are a big believer in pilots and this is a first pilot. It’s gone pretty well.
On example is around sustainability experts. One of our B-Corps was asking about whether to choose between plastic or aluminium or glass for a beverage product, and they just put it out to the community. And four different B-Corps provided 75 page reports on the analysis. That’s really cool, how they worked together.
The end game for B Lab is to place its impact assessment tool on Salesforce’s App Exchange, as it believes that it could provide great value for companies beyond its current network. Houlahan said:
What we really want from Salesforce, although we aren’t ready yet for that scale, is to be on the App Exchange. We have a product that people can use to measure the impact against a cohort of companies. And, so fundamentally, if you think of everybody from supply chain, investor, non-profit, anybody that’s trying to measure social and environmental performance, we have a packaged product that gives you a free tool for your companies.
There’s lots of other reporting tools out there. But they’ve largely been driven around compliance or regulation, and they’re typically received with pain. It’s about ‘I need to answer to my analyst at X,Y, Z company, and as a result I need you to fill out this questionnaire so that I can report my carbon footprint’. And it is just one more headache for an organisation, rather than a learning opportunity.
The whole positioning of the work that we do, is that this isn’t intended to be painful, it’s intended to be an opportunity to learn about your business. It’s a better way to do business.
Image credit - Hand writing the text: Good - Better - Best © gustavofrazao - Fotolia.com.Disclosure - Salesforce is a diginomica premier partner at time of writing. Read more on: CRM and customer experienceFuture of workUse cases 