
Salesforce announced its analytics platform Wave back in 2014 to much fanfare. Since then the outcomes have been a bit hit and miss, but we are now starting to get some real use cases come through from customers that are using it to tap into their existing Salesforce data.
The platform has since been rebranded Einstein Analytics, to coincide with Salesforce’s ongoing AI development. And from a customer panel on the first day of Dreamforce 2017, the cloud company’s annual user event in San Francisco, it seems that the analytics tool is helping companies leverage their existing data in the platform to help leadership and sales teams get away from legacy tools and help make them smarter.
Kerstin Uhl, head of CRM and analytics at financial services firm Allianz Global Investors, explained how she is tapping into Einstein to help make better decisions and to get her senior executives away from PowerPoint. She said:
Let me give you a picture of the past. We used Salesforce and the reporting dashboards extensively. But those reports and dashboards are not very flexible and have limitations. We created multitude of reports and dashboards to dig into the data to try and answer the questions we were getting. We also created reports in PowerPoint – leadership still wants to have PowerPoint because it looks nice and they can even tweak the numbers a little bit.
But we wanted to use the data to make leadership smarter, to make it self service, make it real time, make it visual and build on the Salesforce data. That’s when we evaluated Einstein to put on top of Salesforce data to create dashboards that are usable, so that they can dig into this in real-time.
Uhl explained that Allianz had been using a number of existing BI tools already, and so underwent an evaluation process to establish if another tool was necessary. It also assessed the capabilities of Einstein Analytics competitors, such as BusinessObjects and Tableau. However, there were three core reasons why Allianz ended up going ahead with the Salesforce offering. Uhl said:
It’s integrated into Salesforce, we can create actions right from Salesforce. The second reason is security – being in financial services means that there is a lot of compliance rules and regulations, it means certain people can only see certain data. We wanted to transport over our analytics and keep it dynamic, Einstein made that a lot easier.
The third reason is that once it is set up, Einstein can be managed by us and we aren’t IT, it’s a lot more user friendly than some of these other solutions.
Joining Uhl on stage was Robert Hansen, CRM development manager at Posten Norge, Norway’s postal service. He explained that he had begun implementing Salesforce for his sales team back in January 2016, having attended Dreamforce in the previous year. However, it soon became apparent that Posten Norge needed a new analytics tool, as the quantity of data was too large for the tools that it had been using previously. He said:
It would be too much for a standard report, so that’s why we were looking for something stronger. We used Qlik, I had a couple of years building dashboards in Qlik, but I wanted one Salesforce CRM solution. We had Service Cloud, Sales Cloud, Marketing Cloud, and I didn’t want different solutions. I wanted it embedded and I want to deal with one supplier.
For me I also wanted to have it within the salesforce team and something that I could control, instead of having a couple weeks lead time for change requests. Our IT were fine with it. We had a parallel project on BI and reporting, and for us it was important that it didn’t cross over, we just had to ensure that it was just reporting on sales. We didn’t really talk about Einstein as a BI tool, we spoke about it as a sales reporting tool and within our own environment.
The build
Both customers spoke about the ease at which Einstein was implemented, but coming from two different perspectives. Firstly, Allianz ran it as an agile project – something that was rare for the financial services firm. Uhl said:
We did an agile project – and those of you in the financial industry, you know it’s not usually agile projects, because the industry is not agile by nature, it’s very solid, there’s a lot of regulations. But we wanted to do this quickly and we wanted to get something quickly to management, so we did an agile project with IT and an external partner. So we prepared the data, which was the toughest part, which the partner helped us with. Then got running with the first prototype very fast.
However, Hansen explained that he contracted with Salesforce for help with building the tool, as he only realised that he needed Einstein quite late into the implementation of the Salesforce platform itself – and he didn’t have the skills in-house to get it up and running. He said:
This need for analytics came up quite late in the project, we didn’t have a lot of time to spare. And our implementation partner hadn’t worked with analytics before, so we worked with Salesforce consultants to build our initial solution and get the KPIs set up. But I knew that we absolutely needed it to go live. We went through all the requirements in one day, they took away a lot of notes and started building.
I think it took about six weeks to get the whole thing up and running. I didn’t have to go in a lot and steer it, we had a weekly catch up and there wasn’t a lot of tweaks. After go live we needed a bit of extra support, a bit of knowledge transfer, but after a few months we basically run it ourselves.
The use case
Allianz and Posten Norge also had two different requirements for Einstein Analytics. Whilst Allianz wants to better the decision making of its leadership teams, Posten Norge wants to better equip its sales people with data.
However, both have plans to expand its use. Hansen explained:
For us the analytics came as part of moving over to Salesforce, which was a massive change for 500 people. We try to keep the dashboards and the KPI reports quite simple. When a seller goes in they just see the data, they see year to date figures and they don’t really need to do anything. For a divisional director, they want to drill down more into their teams. But we kept it quite simple.
The focus going forward now is to get more actionable lists and also get the senior management team to go in and post a question on this or that opportunity. I don’t think they need to do that many times before the rumour spreads throughout the organisation. If the top manager is looking at the data, you get that attention.
Whilst Uhl explained, that whilst today Allianz uses Einstein for revenues and pipeline data, it is hoping to soon incorporate third party data and use Salesforce’s AI platform to help make predictive recommendations for its sales teams. She said:
We have two other components that we are looking at. One is third party data to integrate and correlate that with our data. Because today we only use the revenue numbers and pipeline numbers inside Salesforce. And the second thing we are looking at is doing a pilot with Einstein Discovery, so that the AI component is included.
We haven’t started, but what we want to do is put the data into Einstein Discovery and see what patterns and what answers it gives us. What patterns like, the opportunity that turn into revenue, what’s special about them. And derive some action triggers or some recommendations for our sales team to make them more efficient, without it being overbearing or controlling.
Uhl added that the key to making analytics a success within an organisation – which can be hard, given the culture of hiding behind complexity and a lack of transparency runs deep – is getting a senior advocate to shout about the benefits to the rest of the organisation. She said:
The secret is to have someone that has really bought into it, someone that is high up and willing to give it a try, someone that wants to be more advanced, and that made a big difference. You need an advocate at the top, the man or woman at the top, to push this and buy into it, to make it not dangerous. I think people can be afraid of this, so I think that it’s about open communication, about what works and what doesn’t work.
Image credit - Images free for commercial use Disclosure - Salesforce is a diginomica premier partner at time of writingRead more on: Analytics planning and data analysisDigital enterprise in the real worldUse cases 