
One of the great things about Dreamforce as a conference, is that Salesforce hasn’t put the discussion of diversity on the agenda as a token gesture. Whilst some companies may have a panel on ‘women in tech’, Salesforce is running multiple sessions on the complexities of identity, race and class – and why it’s important for companies to get this right.
I got the chance to attend one of these sessions first thing this morning, where a panel discussed how organisations can better understand intersectionality amongst their employees – focusing particularly on race and gender.
Intersectionality is the idea that people don’t often fall into one ‘box’ and that for many people there are overlapping issues that relate to their race, class or gender. For example, if you’re a black lesbian, you may not only be impacted at work by your sexual orientation, but also by your gender and your ethnicity.
Companies find this hard to deal with. Corporate systems for years have catered for cisgendered (and often predominantly white) employees, but have (often unintentionally) forgotten to embrace and celebrate people from all walks of life.
And often the fear of getting it wrong holds them back from trying.
Speaking on the panel this morning, Stefan Palios, founder of Ziversity, a platform that connects inclusive corporations with the best talent, explained some of his experiences in helping companies create a more diverse workplace. He said:
I think that a lot of corporations, very well meaning, look at intersectionality as a burden. I’ve had conversations where they say ‘oh gosh, understanding the LGBT community is so difficult, and now I have to talk about race’. And it’s well meaning people, but this becomes a mental barrier for them. What I always say is, this is absolutely possible. Think about it as two birds with one stone, because intersectionality, when it’s baked into your product development, your recruiting, your thought processes, comes up with things that do work for everyone.
The way to access that is through common ground, just trying to understand how we are connected, and how racism, sexism and homophobia, come from a very similar place. And if we can address that in our products and recruiting, we can create intersectionality. If we look at someone else as a human, as opposed to a category, that’s going to be great.
Miranda Sulley, recruiting coordinator at personalised radio service Pandora, agreed with Palios and added that when companies gets this right, it’s actually beneficial to the organisation. Sulley said:
Intersectionality is important because research shows that the more voices you have in a room, the more diverse perspectives, the more innovative an approach you’re going to come to. When I’m designing a panel for the women’s leadership month, I’m not just saying do we have a senior level woman and a person that identifies as this and that. What I’m really looking to say is, do we really have all those voices in the room?
Taking action
Salesforce itself works hard to create an inclusive work environment for all employees. For example, it has a number of Employee Resource Groups – which sit under the brand name Ohana – which focus on bringing together people that identify in a certain way, are from similar backgrounds or are of the same gender. These groups work together and with the leadership team at Salesforce as allies to promote equality and fairness within the company.
Jimmy Hua, a Salesforce employee and a leader in the Ohana programme, explained how the organisation is taking diversity seriously, by making it an agenda at the most senior levels. Hua said:
We recently rebranded as Ohana groups to promote the idea of family. Salesforce has been promoting us and giving us more funding, helping us support the things we need. We actually just announced our first Chief Equality Officer at Salesforce. It’s a way for us to have a voice. As one of the co-leads, I have one to ones with him every month now.
And it’s a direct line to our CEO Marc Benioff. So it’s great to see that Salesforce is putting someone in the spot to be our supporter, our ally and our advocate for our Ohana groups.
Hua provided an example of how Salesforce took action when there were recent shootings and tragedies within the US black community earlier this year, providing a safe space for employees to discuss how they felt. This is the sort of action that would more often than not be looked over at other companies. Hua said:
The first thing is listening. You have to listen. You can’t dismiss someone’s feelings because that’s who they are. You may not agree, and that’s fine, but you have to at least listen. The shootings that happened in the black and African American communities back in June/July, a lot of our employees were affected emotionally. There was a loss in the community.
What Boldforce (the Ohana group for employees of African descent) actually did was they actually decided to have a vigil. Have a safe space for employees to gather, all employees. Everyone supporting each other. To come to a location at the office and express their feelings, talk to each other, support each other.
We actually set aside a conference room for employees to go there and vent about their grievances, problems, who they were mad at. It was a safe zone for them. The interesting thing we didn’t know was that Marc Benioff was on the call. Listening to these grievances. And when he heard this, the next morning he did whatever he could to take a stand and communicate with us.
That is something that makes employees love their company. We were not expecting Marc to save the world. But we just wanted to know he listened.
Palios added that organisations that want to do better at addressing intersectionality and diversity can begin by both just listening and by taking action when asked to by the people that feel affected by it. He said:
I talk to a lot of companies about this and many people respond with ‘it’s really difficult, we don’t know the language’. Or sometimes even that it’s very elitist and only the most educated, wealthiest companies are able to have these diversity departments. But for me inclusion is a little more simple, it’s about how you as a person create your world. I define that pretty easily.
It’s about listening, if you want to find out more about a community you can ask someone in that community. Coming from the LGBT perspective, I’ve never felt that someone asking me a question is a problem, if the question was genuine.
The other thing I hear from companies is this very well meaning roadblock that they put for themselves, to say ‘I can’t be inclusive, we just have so much to do, there are so many intersections’. What I recommend is, act. If someone says they want to be addressed in a certain way, you do that. Those are really simple actions. It’s about human to human, listening to the needs of someone else, and acting any way that you can.
It’s intentional
One of the main messages that came out of the panel session, was that if organisations want to get this right, they have to make it an intention. This isn’t something that’s going to happen naturally, and so you have to put effort into driving equality throughout your company.
This is about creating a strategy, listening, identifying key people and providing resources that will benefit not only your employees but your organisation too.
For example, Sulley said that Pandora has had to work hard to ensure that there is a 50/50 gender split at her organisation – which isn’t typical of companies in the Bay area. Pandora is HQ’d in Oakland, and Sulley said that the company wants to better reflect the community within which it operates. One piece of advice Sulley gave was that companies could benefit hugely from creating feedback loops for their employees. She said:
We need to think about how we are creating spaces. Acknowledging who is in the room and who is not in the room. How we are creating informal spaces, so activities – whether they be happy hour, or coffee meet-ups, etc. – that are really inviting people cross-functionally into a space that is maybe not work dedicated. Especially if you are in a place of power, a senior leader, how are you really engaging new employees? And employees that have been there a while, to understand their values”
That doesn’t happen by chance, it happens by creating a culture of feedback. We really need to increase that feedback culture, so that employees can raise their hand and say that ‘this is important to me’.
Palios added that he was aware of a global bank that introduced transgender affirmation surgery and the associated support for its employees, and then monitored the outcomes and impact from an organisational perspective. The results speak for themselves. He said:
They actually had a metrics approach to it. Not only did they have a spike in people coming out. They tracked those employees specifically, and the productivity went up. Even taking into account the extra time they needed to take off for recovery.
But the second fringe benefit was that cisgender employees started to tell their stories about trans family members and trans friends. They suddenly felt more committed to the organisation and they felt attached to their organisation.
Palios said that companies should be thinking about a skills-based team to take this challenge head on. This may be seem obvious, but it’s something that is often overlooked. He said:
Create a team that will be able to overcome hurdles and obstacles later down the road. Some of the most successful companies have started their project with a cross functional team with the skills and action – what are we actually able to do and who has the knowledge to get it done? That’s really powerful.
He said that, in his experience, this team is usually formed of an executive champion, a social influencer, an implementer and a subject matter expert.
Your executive champion is usually someone in the C-suite that can not only bring your message upwards, but can also let you know about cross-functional things in the organisation that you did not know before.
Your implementer is usually someone that is in HR, project management type role, that can literally plan out and implement your project. Your subject matter expert is usually someone that is a trans identified person, or someone who has deep knowledge that these issues people are facing and suggested solutions.
And your social influencer is basically someone that is popular in the organisation, who can lend you credibility to the project, and be that trusted social source – folks often trust their friends more than the social experts.
My take
A hugely helpful session to kick off Dreamforce. I learnt a lot and many of the key issues discussed here will help guide future discussions around diversity and intersectionality. Listen, ask questions, take action and do what you can.
Image credit - Decision intersection business people © Rawpixel.com - Fotolia.comDisclosure - Salesforce is a diginomica premier partner at time of writing. Read more on: DiversityFuture of work 