
Ashfield Healthcare, which is owned by UDG Healthcare, is a contract service organisation, where, for example, it will contract with a pharmaceutical company and provide wrap-around patient care services for medications it prescribes. Patients, for instance, will get information on why the treatment was prescribed, why it’s important to them, get information on taking the prescription, and develop a strategy for care.
Working in the healthcare industry, and working both with pharmaceutical clients and directly with patients, is inevitably challenging, given the highly regulated nature of the industry. Historically, Ashfield Healthcare did not have a CRM platform that it could use compliantly to manage patient data.
It currently operates in 24 countries around the world and was using a disparate array of systems, some of which were simply pen and paper. Realising this wasn’t sustainable, it decided to engage with vendors to implement a global CRM platform for its clients.
The decision was made to rollout Salesforce Healthcare Cloud, and I got the chance to speak to Nareda Mills, President of Patient Solutions at Ashfield Healthcare, at Dreamforce in San Francisco this week about the company’s implementation programme. From the time the decision was made, to the platform going live, took just 18 months. Mills explained the motivation behind the programme was to give its pharmaceutical clients a consistent experience and more flexibility in the deployment of their treatments. She said:
So before, across all the countries that we operate in, it was a bit of a mishmash. We had some homegrown systems that have been built by our developers because there was nothing available in the marketplace, or we used traditional pen and paper.
It was really important to us to get a global platform because we have a lot of pharmaceutical companies that will come to us wanting to buy above country – drugs will get approved first in the US with the FDA, and they will want to build the structure, or the blueprint of a program, if you will. And then they want to take it to individual countries and implement it with that tool kit, because the regulations are different in every country.
In some countries you may not be able to send an educator in the home to work directly with a patient or even market directly to a patient, have communication directly to the patient. But, they basically want to be able to have a cohesive experience for that patient no matter where they’re getting their product in any country. So they wanted to be able to build it in one and then take it to the other.
Salesforce Health Cloud gave Ashfield Healthcare this capability and provided it with global reporting capability. It allows its clients, the pharma companies, to see exactly what’s happening in any country, in any programme, through one service provider.
It’s not always easy
Despite the speed of Ashfield Healthcare’s deployment, it didn’t come without its challenges. This was particularly true because of the global nature of the programme. Mills explained that Ashfield had to embark on a piece of work to implement a global vocabulary for the Salesforce system. She said:
There definitely were some challenges, especially given the language barriers and the way we do business in various different countries. We really had to come together and get a global vocabulary of what we call things, how we do things, so that we could really create one platform. That was really important.
We didn’t want individual countries with disparate systems. We wanted it to be one system, so we really had to work very closely together to come up with that common language that we would use.
Ashfield Healthcare was also the first patient support company to use Salesforce Health Cloud, which Mills said required a lot of learnings and configurations to be made, both by Salesforce and its implementation partner Appirio. Mills said:
There were a lot of learnings for everyone involved and it involved a lot of collaboration from all parties.
However, there is still work to be done – particularly around data cleansing. Thus far, Ashfield Healthcare has just been using the Salesforce system for new clients and programmes, meaning that there is still work to do in terms of migrating existing data. Mills said:
I think we still have to come over that hurdle because most of the programs we’re running live now on the system are brand new – new clients, new programmes. We’ve only had one thus far that we’ve actually had to migrate the data and it was relatively small program so we may still have some of those hurdles.
Benefits and learnings
This is Ashfield Healthcare’s first foray into using cloud-based systems, something that Mills said has provided huge benefits for the company, as it is able to take advantage of new capabilities provided in the releases throughout the year. She said:

So it’s not that you’ve built something and that’s it. It’s constantly evolving, which is exciting, to see the new technology that’s coming into play and everyone gets access to that and to be able to then give that to our customers.

One future capability that Mills believes may be beneficial to the company in the future is Salesforce’s introduction of Einstein’s voice interface. She explained:
Yesterday there was a lot of information shared during the keynote about Einstein voice and we definitely see a lot of potential there because we have field based educators that are driving from patient to patient and they need to document that activity that they’ve just had in the home, and often they have to do that when they get in front of their computer.
To be able to speak to Einstein voice after each visit as they’re driving to the next person, the efficiency would be incredible. Then even to have that direct to the patient, perhaps. If the patient can’t remember, say, how long they can leave their medication out of the refrigerator, they can just ask and get that immediate answer, rather than having to find the number to the pharmaceutical company.
Another benefit, Mills said, has been the reporting capability that Salesforce Health Cloud provides, which has been greatly received by its clients. She said:
Every company we work with is data hungry and there are so many out of the box reports that you can get out of Salesforce immediately, as well as being able to build your own ad hoc report. So our clients are thrilled.
They were salivating over the data that we can see, that we can get out of the system. And we’ve delivered efficiencies because we have both contact center educators and field based educators all on one platform. We can schedule for each component. Either have someone call the patient from the contact center or the contact center can deploy a field nurse to go see that patient if they’re struggling, so it’s all on one platform and it’s got that intelligence scheduling.
It’s actually connected to Google Maps and Waze, so it actually knows drive time between each place that the educator needs to be at. So efficiency and scalability is really important.”
However, Mills acknowledges that the programmes hasn’t been entirely easy, largely from a change management point of view. Ashfield Healthcare put in place a dedicated change manager to help manage the change – particularly in countries where pen and paper had been the status quo, and digital systems were non-existent. But Mills said that the one key piece of advice she would give to others embarking on a similar project, would be to get all stakeholders on the same page, early on. She said:
I think the biggest learning for us was that we did need to come together earlier, live, face to face, every country, and talk about what we needed and what our solution was going to be – decisions are made in silos and that happens in every industry and it was really important to get everyone at the table.
Get everyone bought in. Everyone agreed that we’re moving together towards this initiative and I think we waited a little bit too long to do that and that would be our biggest advice – get together early.
Image credit - Image sourced via Ashfield Healthcare Disclosure - Salesforce is a diginomica premier partner. Read more on: CRM and customer experienceDigital enterprise in the real worldUse cases 