
Cloud behemoth Salesforce is making a big play for the enterprise collaboration market at this week’s Dreamforce 2017 conference. It’s significantly beefing up its Quip collaborative document platform, acquired last year and led by Facebook alumnus Bret Taylor. One of Quip’s showcase customers is media and entertainment giant 21st Century Fox, who will be appearing on the keynote stage this week to talk about its use of Quip as a collaboration platform. But Quip isn’t the only collaboration tool in use at Fox. In a breakout session Monday, EVP & CIO John Herbert admitted that Slack is an equally important part of its collaboration stack.
We use Slack as our communication hub. [For] ongoing collaboration, Slack is definitely at the center of it.
It’s really when the document comes into play when we leverage Quip. We actually feel like they’re a great complement. What we’re getting out of Slack is actually a very different experience than what we’re delivering with Quip. So we do see a world in which they would coexist and we don’t plan on changing that strategy going forward.
Document collaboration
Quip is a mobile-first collaborative document platform that combines elements of documents, spreadsheets, apps, chat and live CRM data. Enhancements announced this week include the ability to embed custom functionality directly within Quip. Called Live Apps, examples include a shared calendar, updating Salesforce records or managing project tasks in a Kanban board. Functionality from third party apps can also be embedded using an API, with a first wave of partners including Atlassian, DocuSign, LucidChart and New Relic. At the same time, Salesforce is strengthening native integration of Quip documents into Salesforce records, Chatter feeds and groups.
For all its document functionality, however, Quip isn’t a Microsoft Office killer. Co-presenting in today’s session, Fumbi Chima, who is EVP & CIO of Global Fox Networks Group, said that Quip won’t be replacing the Microsoft Office 365 suite of document editing applications at Fox.
I think Excel will always have a place. I think what Quip does is provide us with that surface level.
I don’t think we’re trying to say we’re going to get rid of Office365. But in terms of collaboration, from a presentation perspective, I find the likes of numbers, for example, recorded in Quip a lot more easy to use.
Quip at 21st Century Fox
So what is Quip’s role? Its strength is in providing a home for collaboration that revolves around documents or a set of connected tasks. At Fox, that can not only be an Excel spreadsheet, it can also be a collection of stills and video as part of planning the roll-out of a new production. It’s much more effective than trying to communicate using emails and attachments, says Herbert:
I think if you can step back from the macro level, what Quip is really solving for us is the intersect of collaboration and communication with documents. One of the documents that we really focus on, like any large enterprise, is Excel. I don’t see Excel going away. What we’re seeing though is, spreadsheets are being pulled into Quip. And then you’re wrapping a narrative around it.
So whether you’re wrapping a narrative around a spreadsheet or if you’re wrapping a narrative around an image, or a piece of video content, it’s all about how do you bring the collaboration into the document, so that it’s all together.
It then really explains how you significantly eliminate email, because that’s what email was trying to do with attachments. But there was always a disconnect between the narrative and the attachment, especially if it was a complicated one.
An alternative to email
Providing an alternative to email-centric collaboration has made Quip a popular tool at Fox and adoption has been very strong, says Herbert.
I’m shocked how well embraced it’s been across the enterprise … Once they get on it, there’s no turning back. It’s an easy sell to roll it out when you tell people they can have less meetings and less email.
This is actually a business problem we’re solving, which is how do we really help deliver a solution around collaboration. There’s such a pain point when you’re dealing with global organizations. We’re really looking for a solution that enables a process that will really pull the organization together. It’s been a great solution that’s going to serve that need.
Tools like Quip are an important addition to the CIO’s armory in helping organizations transform their culture to be more responsive and fast-moving, says Fumbi:
When you have tools like Quip, that actually forces people to work together, real-time, quickly, collaborating more instantaneously than we have always done. That changes the dynamic of things.
Embedding content and function
The ability to embed content within Quip has been a popular feature at Fox, which has had early access to the Live Apps functionality. Embedding Salesforce functionality will be the next step, says Herbert.
I think what really has been a game changer for us is the fact that you can bring content in, both video and still, and have that creative experience. Because they don’t want to just work on the narrative side, they actually want their creative content in itself, and be able to collaborate on that.
Where we want to take it, we’ve got many of our divisions are heavy Salesforce users, where we can tie in a lot of the activity that we’ve already built out on the business application side and be able to integrate that into Quip as well.
One practical example is in planning roll outs of a new movie, which Fox manages at a global level. Having calendaring within Quip will be helpful when co-ordinating the timing of a release across dozens of markets. It’s another example of having somewhere to focus and collaborate around a shared goal, says Herbert.
So we’re looking at it on the calendaring side as well as on the overall business side. There’s a lot of business goals that we manage through Salesforce, and to be able to bring that information out dynamically into Quip. Everybody’s always looking for the narrative that goes along with the data. That’s the goal of why we want the integration.
My take
It’s not a surprise to learn that 21st Century Fox has built a collaboration stack on the twin pillars of Slack and Quip. In the battle for dominance of enterprise collaboration, messaging and content have reached an uneasy truce. Both play a part in the collaborative canvas required to channel effective digital teamwork.
I like Herbert’s analogy of building a narrative around documents and data as a way of expressing the role of enterprise collaboration platforms. Vendors are trying to find the right structure that can act as an effective container for that narrative, but without constricting it.
The new features announced for Quip this week considerably advance the platform’s contribution to that collaborative infrastructure. It’s important to embed functionality as headless applications into the flow of work rather than force users to jump between multiple application screens. Slack uses chatbot functionality to achieve a similar effect.
In some workflows, a messaging platform is enough. In many others, a document framework makes more sense, and for those scenarios, Quip has become a much stronger contender as a result of this week’s announcements.
Image credit - via the authorDisclosure - Salesforce is a diginomica premier partner at time of writing.Read more on: Collaboration sharing and digital productivityCRM and customer experienceUse cases 