
You always remember your first. I remember my first Dreamforce – which was, in fact, the very first Dreamforce. If memory serves, it was held in the St Francis Hotel on Union Square in San Francisco, with the ballroom there comfortably accommodating the audience.
It was on this occasion that CEO Marc Benioff almost ran over my toes on a Segway. (CEOs at tech firms did a lot of Segway-ing in those days.) It wasn’t a deliberate attempt at injury, of course – I have had one CEO at an ENSW firm throw a book at my head during a meeting, but that’s another story and one best left to the vaults of memory! – but it was a near miss.
While relatively small, that first event held many of the key ingredients that we now associate with the behemoth that Dreamforce is today – visionary keynotes, peer-to-peer learning, customer exemplars, a hefty dose of philanthropy and an even heftier dose of evangelical marketing  in the main arena.
Ok, there was no Foo Fighters to entertain delegates. Equally, there were no keynotes from the likes of Hillary Clinton or Richard Branson, no hangover-shattering 9am performances by Huey Lewis and the News, and Benioff’s fateful meeting with Will.i.Am by an LA swimming pool was still a few years off.
But from cloudy acorns grow mighty oaks.
Flash forward to 2015 and Dreamforce today starts to put downtown San Francisco into gridlock. Entire city center streets are  closed down for Salesforce as they had previously been for Oracle for its own jamboree. Hotel rooms are impossible to come by, bars run dry and Uber drivers are working overtime to calculate the current (and ever rising) rates. (Licensed taxi drivers love Dreamforce by the way, according to my cab driver from the airport – it seems that Salesforce customers are good tippers! He was a lot less keen on other ENSW vendors and their customers!)
I am a veteran of all this by now, having attended all-but-one Dreamforce. (That was the year in which my best friend thoughtlessly made me best man at his wedding and then got married during Dreamforce!). As such I’ve watched the conference grow from that early start to the sprawling tech conference/philanthropy drive/music festival that it is today.
What lies ahead?
So what should we expect from this week? We’ve already had some pre-event announcements, such as the App Cloud and Financial Cloud. Both of these will come under the spotlight at this week’s show, as will the Healthcare Cloud as Salesforce drills down on vertical clouds.
There will be customer exemplars of course and here I have a particular wish. Over the past year, we’ve heard a great deal about Salesforce’s push into Europe and watched money being pumped into the region to match the rhetoric, as well as seeing Benioff summer-ing in France and enthusing over all things European.
With all of that in mind, I’m hoping that we’re going to see European customers up on stage during the keynote alongside their US counterparts at what is, after all, Salesforce’s main global customer-facing event. While both the US and Europe of course have their own World Tour events to focus on local customers, Dreamforce is is the one big global instance of Salesforce qua Salesforce on view. This is the global platform for a global provider, so a combination of US and non-US customers on view is an opportunity not to be missed.
(I’m disappointed that the much-trailed Salesforce Global Economy report – or whatever it is to be called –  isn’t apparently going to be released at this global platform event.)
Other than that, it will be interesting to see the emphasis placed on the existing clouds and offerings in the Salesforce toy box. Each of them gets its own keynote session to drill down into its current status and wheel out some customer testimonials, but I’m always curious to see which elements get the most air time in the main Benioff keynote.
Personally I’d like to see greater focus on the Service Cloud than perhaps we’ve seen in recent years. There’s a very important story to tell here around service that sometimes I feel doesn’t get heard as much as ‘sexier’ topics such as the rise of the CMO or the importance of analytics in business decision-making.
It will also be necessary to set aside more time this year than before to tour the show floor. The expo this year is bursting at the seams. I know from the sheer volume of invitations to come and talk to X-Y-Z vendors galore that there’s more competition out there than ever in the Salesforce ecosystem to get voices heard above the din.
This is increasingly something of interest – how Salesforce can continue to square the circle of being agnostic platform provider to a multitude of 3rd party partners while  its own expanding footprint takes it into competition with its ecosystem members. The old tech industry ‘co-opetition’ cliche only stretches so far.
With that in mind, it’s always interesting to see which partners get to share the spotlight on the big day. Satya Nadella, CEO of new BFF Microsoft, gets his own keynote session on the main stage this year of course, but who else will pop up for a cameo with Benioff?
Elsewhere, there’s the Foo Fighters and The Killers for the show party, a Women’s Leadership Summit, a bid to create the world’s biggest book donation drive and of course, the really big question: what will Marc Benioff’s shoes look like this year?
Welcome to Dreamforce!
diginomica has a team of four on the ground at Dreamforce this year. We’ll be bringing you all the best news, analysis and commentary from the event across the week. 
Disclosure – at time of writing, Salesforce is a premier partner of diginomica. 
Read more on: Analytics planning and data analysisCloud platforms - infrastructure and architectureCRM and customer experienceDigital and content marketingHCM and the digital future of workMobileSocial 