
One of the world’s largest suppliers of commercial airline engines, GE Aviation, is using Salesforce Wave to try and help break down data silos across its commercial organisation, giving customers, sales, supply chain and senior executives a better understanding of its operations.
Maria Jose Lloret Crespo, Commercial CIO at GE Aviation, was speaking on the second day at Dreamforce 2016 in San Francisco, where she explained how the company has been working to better understand not only where its data sits, but also the purpose of it.
She said:
In GE Aviation, I focus a lot of my time on data. But not so much about what is the data I need to get. We take time to understand who is going to be looking at that data. We have to enable data. When we sell a customer a commercial engine, there are different people engaged in that process.
The customer just wants to have the issue resolved, so how much data do you really need to enable for him or her? If it’s a service engineer, you do not need to know all the customer history, but they need to understand the engine or asset performance history. So the level of detail, the type of data, is different for each of these roles. For each of the personas.
We also need to understand our customer’s landscape. Are they global? Are they regional? How is the organisation working to support those customers? We need to understand who is who, what are the roles and responsibilities.
Lloret Crespo explained how when GE Aviation began using Six Sigma, which is a disciplined, data-driven approach and methodology for eliminating defects in any process – from manufacturing to transactional and from product to service – that the company began to realise that they needed much better access to their data. She said:
That meant process engineers started to come to me, asking for data. Because they have to data to go through that analysis. I had a lot of requests. In those days we did have technology to get data out of the engines, but I did not have drivers (APIs) to connect to some type of physical asset. I had to write software myself. That took me weeks, between someone asking me how a valve works, to the moment that I could get the data. It was really hard. The queue was so so long.
And this of course had a knock-on effect on GE’s customer service with the airlines it supplies, who when things go wrong, want to know quickly how it can be resolved. Lloret Crespo said:
Customers don’t want to be waiting. So our customers, Delta, Iberia, American Airlines, they call us and they need to know what’s going on if a situation happens. Most of the time it’s not bad, but sometimes we have to look at a few things.
Do you think you want to wait for Delta to fly you somewhere? The answer is no. Or the help desk, when the customer calls, they need to know if that customer falls under that contract. Speed is key for success.
This has since changed. Sensors, cheap storage and the use of Salesforce and Wave has enabled GE to collect piles of data and get insight into it very quickly. She added:
We cannot have those weeks of waiting. That’s not acceptable. So get the data from the different personas, understand who is going to support the data – but do it fast, drive with a sense of urgency and let technology help you do it faster.
Connecting the dots
GE Aviation’s use of Salesforce and Wave has also helped Lloret Crespo’s team provide information quickly to senior executives and VPs. She said that in days gone by, a VP would ask for some data on the fly and the IT team would scramble to try and collate it and present it in a reasonable format. However, now, this can be done in a responsive way. She said:
These days they turn to someone in my team, my employee just makes the change, and a few seconds after we have a complete new dashboard for them. So, the speed is amazing these days. We can now collect data from sensors, we can store massive amounts of data and we have data visualisation tools like Wave to create dashboards fast and easily.
Lloret Crespo also told a story of how she visited one of her favourite holiday destinations in Spain in recent months, where she was looking forward to sailing on the lagoon. However, when she arrived, the lagoon was dirty and the water was unsafe to enter. Upon asking the locals how this had happened, she got various answers depending on who she spoke to. Some blamed industry, some blamed the famers, some blamed the government.
On her flight back to the US, Lloret Crespo realised she may have a similar problem internally inside GE Aviation – because each of the teams doesn’t have insight into the same data, or have an understanding of what each other are doing, it’s easy to play the blame game. However, she is now trying to change this so that GE Aviation as a whole can access data across the entire organisation, to get a full understanding of operations. She said:
On my way back from Spain, I was reflecting back on that Lagoon story and I realised that I may be behaving the same in GE. I support sales and marketing, I also support commercial engines and operations (after sales). Do I really care about my sales team? Do I really care about them getting the forecast right? Do I really care about that forecast data across the organisation, down to supply chain?
They have to make parts if we need to repair the engine. When my sales team signs a contract they get money. But do I as an IT manager for GE care about that contract data being fed down the organisation? Do I care that that contract data goes to the supply chain so that my fulfilment is right from the beginning? The answer is that I didn’t care much.
But now, analytics, data, it’s the way we learn to operate. If you look at the opportunity pipeline, usually I would only enable that dashboard to my sales team, or maybe my VPs. Why would a product line use that dashboard? They should. They need to know how many are being requested for next year.
We learned that we are not going to be successful if we operate in silos. Our business leaders, depending on the persona, can now see things together. Instead of trying to navigate through the different organisations to try and understand who are the competitors, where is the fleet, how many types of engines this customer is having and so forth. This is the new way of working in GE.
A predictive future
Lloret Crespo also gave an example of how GE is using Wave and Salesforce to help shift away from using PowerPoint and Excel. She said that every Wednesday the executive team has a meeting with all of the regions’ commercial teams to go through forecasts. Previously this required an intense consolidation of data into spreadsheets and the like, so that the regions were prepared to answer questions from the VPs.
However, now that silos are disappearing, everyone on the team can just look at the same data, at the same time. She said:
Guess what? 80% of the data was coming from Salesforce. So why would they still have PowerPoint and Excel? So we took the time to understand the remaining 20%, and it was not that hard. Now this dashboard is a 7am meeting that happens every Wednesday, with a few VPs and all the regions. Before there was a lot of people consolidating Excel because it was a VP meeting and they wanted to be ready, taking the time to understand region by region the commercials. But now they don’t talk Excel, they now just go to the tool and see everything together.
I want all these silos to work together, even closers. Not just in GE, even outside the organisation.
Finally we have the technology to help us go faster. It drives the organisation to be faster, so we get money faster.
Finally, Lloret Crespo mentioned that the company was excited by the recent Salesforce Einstein announcement, as he believes that there is real potential for GE to us AI to help provide predictions for the commercial teams. At the moment they’re just using visualisations, but she wants to take this further. Lloret Crespo said:
I’ve been impressed by Einstein. I think, what we have done so far is only open the box so that my business leaders and my team understand possibilities. But this is only showing data and getting things together.
I want to be able to tell people what they have to do. What is the probability of an opportunity to be won? What are customers saying? What are competitors saying about us? That’s what I’d like to understand.
Image credit - Images sourced via Salesforce and GE AviationDisclosure - Salesforce is a diginomica partner at time of writing. Read more on: Analytics planning and data analysisUse cases 