
Amid all the hype around AI and Einstein at Dreamforce this week, it’s easy to overlook the ‘bread and butter’ clouds in the Salesforce portfolio.
Take the Service Cloud, a $2.3 billion contributor to the company’s ambitions to be the first $10 billion run rate cloud company, chalking up 29% year-on-year growth in the most recent financial quarter.
I caught up with Mike Milburn, General Manager for the Service Cloud on the eve of the service keynote at Dreamforce, to pick up the story and talk over recent and future developments not least the acquisition of HeyWire, a purchase that will see the addition of some valuable new functionality and direction for the Service Cloud.
HeyWire is a six year old mobile messaging cloud provider that has been a member of the Salesforce ecosystem during that time, which according to CEO and co-founder Meredith Flynn-Ripley, makes it fitting that the next step is to become part of Salesforce:
HeyWire will bring this new communications channel to the Salesforce Service Cloud with fully integrated mobile messaging capabilities that enable companies to connect with their customers in entirely new ways.
From the Salesforce side of the transaction, it’s the important of messaging and texting in today’s society that makes this an important move. Milburn says:
We all have phones full of messages, SMS messages. It’s the way we communicate. It was ten years ago when the number of messages exceeded the number of calls we made. But the service department has been cut out of those conversations. What we’re going to do is enable businesses to use this rich and powerful messaging capability, starting with SMS.
Emoting
An interesting aspect of this idea is the role of the emoticon as a communication tool. Milburn points out that servce should be all about empathy with the customer:
As human beings we desire a more empathic service. As humans we are empathic of one another.
That empathy isn’t always there in traditional customer service, he adds. But is this really a problem that be solved with a smiley face emoticon, I wonder?
There are companies that use emoticons on Twitter to address complaints, but in too many cases those can serve to irritate or patronise rather than placate, let alone empathise.
Milburn agrees that there needs to be care taken, but this segues neatly into the theme du jour – AI and specifically Einstein:
Our approach is through Einstein and intelligence. The promise of intelligence is that it can make complex things easier. One of our biggest assets is that we have lots of service data, which is the fuel for intelligence. In the service industry, this blessing turns into a strategic cadence. Einstein for Service Cloud wil help you to classify cases. The goal of intelligence in the service world ist to improve things and to help.
So it’s not about machines taking over the customer service function; the human element remains essential. Einstein is an enabler to those humans, says Milburn:
The goal of Einstein is to provide you with your own data scientist. When you talk about very large companies they may have their own data science department, but the rest of the world doesn’t. Einstein is going to be their data scientist.
We think the right approach is to use machine-assisted help and learning, For some functions and customer service issues, we might help make those fully-automated in time, but for there others there will be a desire and need to interact with human beings.
Field service
Away from messaging, Milburn highlights Salesforce’s push into the field service management space, an area that has previously been executed upon by third party providers in the Salesforce ecosystem. There are great opportunities here and beyond the simple ‘man in a van’ perception of field services:
One of the things that has surprised me about this is that it’s more than just ‘Chuck in a truck’.
That’s a familiar message, one that’s been pitched by ServiceMax for some time. ServiceMax has been a long term Salesforce partner, but is the latest example of a member of the ecosystem which finds itself now a competitor. Milburn insists that Salesforce is simply delivering on what its customers want:
Our goal is to listen to our customers and to respond to them. Our customers have been telling us for some time that they want a native field service offering. So we did that. Our customers wanted field service, a Salesforce native field service offering.
My take
It’s important to break new ground, but it’s also important to remember the ‘bread and butter’ stuff.
Image credit - Freeimages.com Disclosure - At time of writing, Salesforce and ServiceMax are premier partners of diginomica. Read more on: CRM and customer experienceIoT robotics and AIIT service management 