
Healthwise, a 40-year-old non-profits healthcare education company located in Boise, Idaho, has been a Salesforce customer since 2009. I met its CFO Darra Wray at Dreamforce this week to learn about its use of Apttus quote-to-cash alongside the Salesforce system. It was an interesting conversation that brought useful insights into the impact of automating quote-to-cash as well as some of the challenges customers face when implementing multiple partner applications alongside Salesforce.
Originally a book publisher, changing consumption patterns led Healthwise to move its business online around 15 years ago. It now operates an online educational database and content delivery tools that integrate with electronic medical record systems and care coordination systems at its customers, explains Wray:
Our clients are the largest payer and provider organizations in the country who license our healthcare education content to provide to their patients.
Legacy relationships
Healthwise put in Apttus CPQ in 2011 to automate a complex set of configure-price-quote processes. This superseded a 60-70 page paper price list and had to accommodate recurring and usage-based pricing models.
We need to make sure that our products are delivered and packaged in the way that is most appropriate for the portion of the health care market [in each contract], using the usage metrics that they are accustomed to. When it’s a payer, we have to be able to price by member. When it’s a provider, maybe it’s by beds, or by outpatient visits, or all of these various elements. It’s very complex pricing.
That implementation went well, and in 2013 Healthwise added contract lifecycle management (CLM) capabilities from Apttus, initially for use in buy-side contracts. Then last year Healthwise became an early lighthouse customer for the new revenue management solution Apttus was introducing. This adds billing, invoicing and renewal management, integrated back into the existing CPQ implementation.
While bringing new customers on to that system is straightforward, it’s been a lengthy journey to bring across the existing installed base of relationships, some of which date back 40 years. So far, Healthwise has moved across 50% of the customer base and 60% of its revenues, says Wray.
Let me remind you, this is really hard, this is cross-functional — and did I mention, it’s really hard? It looks easy, it sounds easy, you’ve got these tools, but it’s business process transformation. Business process transformation is really hard work.
Putting in the revenue management system has given Healthwise the flexibility to embrace new business models, making it a lot easier than it otherwise would have been to accommodate changes, says Wray.
When my Chief Client Officer came to me about 6 months ago and said, ‘I’ve got this really great opportunity, but I’m talking about maybe half again as many clients by number as we have today in a period of two years.’ I said, ‘OK.’ He said, ‘Really?’ He was just completely shocked that I could say, ‘Yes, I think I can support that.’
Growing the business
Healthwise has been able to enter into three partnerships that enable it to deliver its content to smaller providers. One of those partners is Salesforce Health Cloud, the others are Cerner Smart FHIR and the Allscripts Pro electronic health record system. These new business models use automation to extend the organization’s reach, Wray explains.
To further accelerate my mission, I need to be able to efficiently and effectively reach smaller businesses and smaller providers and smaller organizations …
Health Cloud is one of the business models that we are enabling now on Apttus Quote-to-Cash, where I can quote to a client for the specific Salesforce Healthwise for Care Co-ordination app that we have launched. We have a standard contract that we are standing up. We’re going to put that right into CLM. It will flow directly into revenue management.
With these three new business models, I expect to double or triple my total number of customers, but not necessarily my revenue because the revenue dollars are smaller.
Automation is key to growing the business while keeping costs under control. Wray is adding further Salesforce-native applications to help streamline operations and add new capabilities — but there are obstacles along the way, she explains.
I’ve got a lot of work to do with CPQ and CLM and revenue management and I have visions of where I want to go with that, but some of those visions require other vendors to be part of this.
Staying in sync
Healthwise is just starting to implement FinancialForce HCM, for example, and the vendor would like to see its financials adopted as well. But Wray is wary of potential integration issues, having already learned from implementing applications alongside Salesforce and Apttus, such as Avalara sales tax management, Xactly for sales compensation management, and Jitterbit middleware to link out to an ERP system. Problems arise when changes to each vendor’s applications get out of sync, and Salesforce partners need to do a better job of supporting customers with that, she believes:
This is really challenging and can be quite fragile. If the upgrades and the changes on these individual platforms modify, and if you had custom configurations there, you have to go modify those connections. If you’ve got connections all over the place, anything I might save [from efficiences] in an accounting team, if I have to hire more Salesforce admins to help me manage my connections, it starts to erode the ROI …
The promise of the platform says, ‘Oh, but that’s easy because everything’s on the platform.’ The reality is it’s easier, but it’s not easy. You still have management that you have to do.
So Wray has been on a mission this week at Dreamforce to persuade Salesforce’s application partners to do a better job of helping customers manage those integrations — even when they have competing offerings, such as FinancialForce’s own quote-to-cash functionality, which overlaps with what Apttus offers.
I’m challenging these vendors. They are going to have to cooperate even if they’re competitors, in some form of co-opetition. If FinancialForce, for example, wants to win some of the rest of my business, they need to help me understand how they’re going to help me manage the connection with Apttus. If I’ve said I’m going to stay with Apttus Quote-to-Cash and I don’t want to leave there, FinancialForce has to help me with that.
To really harness the power of the platform is going to require more and more integration not just between a single organization’s tools but across and among all of those tools …
If I’m evangelizing about anything this week, it’s really to all of these vendors saying, the platform provides a framework and a simplification at one level, but it introduces additional complexity that together we all have to learn how to better manage.
My take
One of Salesforce’s big messages at Dreamforce this week has been the concept of Ohana, which is the Hawaiian word for family. As Tyler Prince, Salesforce’s EVP alliances, told delegates in the opening partner keynote:
It’s really about how do we engage with each other, do we think of each other as family?
It’s also about how you engage with each other. I continue to preach this message of a connected ecosystem.
Wray’s comments show that there’s still some work to be done here to fully bring the Ohana spirit to the ecosystem. Of course competition is important, but if the customer is going to remain the focus of an extended partner family, Salesforce and its partners also have to nurture the ecosystem’s community ethos.
Image credit - Healthcare technology concept © pixtumz88 - Fotolia.comDisclosure - Salesforce and FinancialForce are diginomica premier partners. FinancialForce contributed to my accommodation costs to attend Dreamforce. Read more on: Cloud ERP financials and supply chainCloud platforms - infrastructure and architectureCRM and customer experienceHealthcare transformation 