
Just because you’re hosting your biggest single event of the year this week doesn’t mean there isn’t time to slip in another acquisition before things kick off.
Or at least it doesn’t mean that if you’re Salesforce, which today announced the $700 million purchase of San Francisco start-up Krux, a six-year-old provider of information enabling customers to mine data across the internet and analyze it to better understand and target customers.
Salesforce said in a statement:
Krux is a leading data management platform that unifies, segments and activates audiences to increase engagement with users, prospects and customers. Following the acquisition, Krux will be a wholly owned subsidiary of the Company.
Tom Chavez, CEO & Co-Founder, said in a letter to customers, which include Ticketmaster and L’Oreal:
We’re trading gas for rocket fuel. Becoming part of Salesforce is great news for our current and future clients, our partner network and our employees. Being part of Salesforce gives us the opportunity to pursue our mission of driving more relevant and valuable consumer experiences by putting people data to work, with greater reach and impact than ever before. We will continue to deliver world-class enterprise data infrastructure and breakthrough business results for our clients.  We’ll now be able to do so faster by leveraging the global reach and resources of Salesforce.
For its part, Salesforce will use Krux’s technology to boost the AI capabilities of its Marketing Cloud offering. Chavez said:
Krux will extend the Salesforce Marketing Cloud’s audience segmentation and targeting capabilities to power consumer marketing with even more precision, at scale. In addition, Krux will feed Salesforce Einstein with billions of new signals, enabling companies to be even smarter about their customers. Krux and Salesforce together will empower every company to deliver more relevant and valuable consumer experiences across every touchpoint.
My take
What this latest deal brings to Salesforce is its own data management platform, having partnered with third parties on this front (including Krux). It’s also further indication of the firm’s strategy of expanding its market reach around its cloud portfolio through tactical acquisitions. Earlier Marketing Cloud acquisitions included Buddy Media, Radian 6 and ExactTarget. Alex Dayon, Salesforce’s Chief Product Office, talks more about the firm’s ‘innovation via acquisition’ strategy  tomorrow.
Image credit - Freeimages.com Disclosure - At time of writing, Salesforce is a premier partner of diginomica. Read more on: Cloud platforms - infrastructure and architectureDigital and content marketing 