
When employees at strategic design consultancy Designit first started using Dropbox to share files, it put the IT department in a quandary that’s all too common at many such enterprises.
Morten Thomsen, Global IT Administrator, had reservations about the lack of governance tools the platform offered back then. But he could see it was a popular choice that reflected Designit’s own values of “human-shaped thinking” about the user experience. While other platforms at the time offered tighter security, none measured up from a user perspective, he says:
We’re so much into design that we feel that if a product wouldn’t live up to our own standards, I have much difficulty getting people to use it.
Design is our DNA, so presenting our employees with a solution that is less than we would deliver is not an option. So they chose Dropbox and I had an issue as it wasn’t safe enough. But if we didn’t implement it they would just adopt it as shadow IT.
Two years later, the decision to standardize on Dropbox has been vindicated, as the platform has added functionality to fill in the gaps that had worried Thomsen. Today, he has no hesitation in recommending it to Designit’s enterprise customers, even to the point of authoring a white paper to allay their concerns:
Dropbox is a true enterprise product today. I see no difference — we have single sign-on, full encryption, multi-factor authentication, true EMM [enterprise mobility management] and DLP [data loss prevention] — these are what you would expect from a true enterprise product.
Many of our clients — a few don’t allow us to use Dropbox — their knowledge of Dropbox is based on two-year-old technology. I’ve made a small white paper to explain the safeguards and what we can do with Dropbox today. I’ve managed to convince a few of these clients we can use Dropbox for their confidential documents too.
Mission-critical collaboration
Being able to easily collaborate on shared files is mission-critical for the type of consultancy project that Designit takes on. Its 450+ employees work in cross-disciplinary teams to help clients develop modern, digitally enabled products and services. Making sure people have access to the right content at the right time is crucial — but since these projects are commercially sensitive for clients, keeping it safe from unauthorized access is equally important.
Before cloud-based alternatives came along, Designit relied on local file servers in each office, but this was never satisfactory, says Thomsen, who has seen the company grow from a single office since joining 14 years ago to 13 today spread across the globe. Bandwidth constraints, file locking conflicts, and a lack of local IT resource to maintain the servers had been frequent headaches.
We lived with independent file servers in each office before coming to the conclusion this was not the best way to collaborate across offices.
As laptops and mobile working became more commonplace, the demand for a cloud-based solution grew and individual teams began adopting Dropbox. It gradually became the de-facto standard solution for users, and two years ago it finally became an officially supported tool, as Thomsen explains:
All along we wanted to get rid of the local file servers.
Today we only have a small handful of servers left and we have all new offices only working from Dropbox.
If clients have confidentiality requirements we have other measures, but for most of our clients Dropbox is accepted as the centralized file-sharing, single storage platform.
In the past two years, Dropbox has made a series of enhancements to its platform that have gradually answered Thomsen’s initial reservations. These include last year’s introduction of team folders and administration controls, which made it possible to centrally manage access permissions. A new Dropbox data center facility in Germany later in the year added compliance with EU data protection law. Meanwhile, Designit had early access to two major features that were officially launched this January — Smart Sync and Paper.
Applause for Smart Sync
Smart Sync, formerly known as Dropbox Infinity, was a particularly popular feature, says Thomsen, earning him “the second biggest applause I’ve had in my career” when he introduced it to Designit’s users (the biggest applause had been “when I introduced Dropbox in the beginning,” he explains). The feature syncs files when needed, instead of storing every shared file on the user’s local disk. Thomsen says:
It actually solves the major issue we faced. We ran out of disk space, that was our main concern a year ago. It really solves the most important issue.
Two years ago we started buying bigger hard disks to be able to work in Dropbox and work on these heavy projects. We were starting to see some cost issues here — this will definitely be a cost saver to us.
In a company of Designit’s size, especially considering the type and range of files being shared in a typical project, the Smart Sync model of effectively providing what the vendor’s CTO calls “a company-level Dropbox” in the cloud means that team members no longer have to manually select which folders and files to download. Thomsen observes:
Selective sync was already the biggest pain because people needed to deselect projects they were working on due to lack of disk space. They would have to go in and out of different projects to have the files they needed to work on. It was a compromise, it made it very difficult.
Another aspect that Designit’s users like is that they can manage their files directly from the desktop, rather than needing to go to the Web browser when files or folders aren’t available locally:
This new Smart Sync feature makes it possible to almost entirely adminstrate your Dropbox from your desktop. You rarely have to go to the Web interface. So you’re in the environment you know and you’re familiar with, making it faster to work on the documents you need. A lot of other tools force you to work within the Web interface.
Collaborative editing
Dropbox Paper has also proven useful. It allows users to collaboratively edit in a shared document that also acts as a container for connected files. Thomsen uses it for documentation:
The great thing is you have unlimited history. you can have it as a changelog as well. That’s actually a great benefit when working with documentation.
It’s especially useful when working with outside collaborators, he adds:
Back in the days you’d send a Word document. Everyone had to submit their own version, and someone had to write it all down in a new document. This way it’s so easy to work across teams and be collaborative in a new way.
The combined effect of the functionality Dropbox has added in the past two years has answered all of the earlier doubts, resulting in its signing up for a 750-seat Dropbox Enterprise contract. Thomsen concludes:
We’ve made so much progress in the past two years, in terms of security and admin, and from the end users’ point of view. We’ve reached a point where everyone is happy — but of course we’re always trying to push the boundaries of being able to work smartly.
My take
Designit’s story will be a familiar tale to many others with similar experiences of file servers, VPNs to remote locations, and the gradual uptake of unsanctioned cloud services. Until recently, the capabilities of the technology have lagged behind the needs of enterprise teams collaborating on complex projects.
Only now are the various pieces beginning to click into place to deliver truly frictionless collaboration. But it remains a work in progress as enterprises like Designit begin to coalesce around a few solutions. While it uses Dropbox Paper for co-writing documents, it has also rolled out Office 365 for email and more structured documents, and Slack has rapidly become the preferred medium for chat-based collaboration.
This reflects the reality that there’s still no single platform that provides everything an enterprise needs for modern digital collaboration in all its various modes. But has changed compared to a few years ago is that the cloud-native solutions have caught up with the governance and user management needs of larger enterprises. That means companies like Designit no longer have to weigh up security and compliance against convenience, ease of use and adoption. At last, they can have both in the same platform.
Image credit - Teamwork meeting at table with cloud thought bubble © alotofpeople - Fotolia.comRead more on: Collaboration sharing and digital productivityProfessional services 