
Earlier this week, we took a look at the marathon race ahead of sneaker retailer Foot Locker if it is to up its digital game, while previously Nike has reported passing a number of omni-channel markers in its own race to grow.
But outside of the dedicated sporting footwear sector, the wider shoe retail marketplace faces the same e-commerce and digital challenges as other verticals, a situation articulated by CEO Roger Rawlins when he says:
Over the past year, we’ve been working to answering the question…’What are you doing to differentiate DSW in this dramatically changing retail landscape?’.
His answer isn’t staggeringly original, but nonetheless true – it’s about getting close to the customers and understanding what they want and how they want to get it:
Customers have become more product and experience-oriented than ever. As a result, operators who compete solely on transactions and price can offer no differentiated experience or customer connection have lost relevance in competitive appeal.
As we look at the retail landscape and assess, what truly separates the retailers with opportunity from those that are simply melting away, the key differentiator is a relentless obsession with deepening the connection with the customer and creating the experience you can only find through engagement with you.
Underlying all this is a need to believe that shoes are more than just, well, shoes. Rawlins is positively evangelical on this point:
We know that shoes are more than just a necessity. They are an extension of yourself. They help you tell the world what you are made of. People love their shoes, because of the way they make them feel. That’s where we come in. We foster our customer self-confidence by giving them access to a vast assortment of great products, because the amazing thing about shoes is the right pair of shoes lets your personality shine, and the right pair of shoes can make you feel like a whole new person.
This worldview is based on personal experience, he adds:
When I was in the seventh grade, yes, seventh grade, I was on the basketball team. Now I wasn’t all that great, and in fact I was the 12th man on a 12-man team, if that tells you anything.
But that was the year I got a new pair of Converse leather sneakers. I remember the first day I strap those on, I felt invincible despite never entering the game. I was Larry Bird. I know firsthand how the right pair of shoes can let a kid from the middle of Ohio feel like an NBA All-Star. Those shoes certainly inspired me to express myself both on and off the court.
That’s the kind of experience and emotional connection we will create with our customers. This mission feeds our vision to be the obvious first choice for shoes. Just your emotion and inspiration with engaging experiences we like to call music for your feet.
Practical strategies
Ok, so stepping back a bit from the colorful, life-affirming ‘vision thing’, how does that work in practical terms without tripping over the corporate shoelaces? Rawlins articulates a three pronged strategy built around:

A revamped and elevated rewards program that “goes beyond transactional-based points, and introduces services and experiences”.
“Exciting and innovative new store design.
Co-developing new technology that empowers DSW to deliver “differentiated and seamless customer experience”.

On the first point, Rawlins makes the bold claims that DSW was the pioneer in the footwear industry when it comes to loyalty programs and is therefore well-placed to evolve the model into a new iteration that will debut next Spring :
With our 25 million customers that we engage within a regular and personalized way, we are putting the finishing touches on the totally new loyalty program that will bring new and differentiated experiences and services to our most loyal customers. The new rewards program will be structured to allow customers to earn rewards quicker with compelling incentives to buy more to unlock additional value, and will offer exciting services, like shoe repair rental.
The company’s physical warehouses and stores are also seen as an asset in the omni-channel world. DSW cites “a strong and direct” correlation between digital demand growth in a geographic market and the existence of a brick and mortar warehouse. Physical proximity to the customer incentivises customers to shop online and pick-up in store, which in turn shortens lead times from three to five business days to two to four hours.
Rawlins, in common with an increasing number of retailers, is out-and-proud of his physical assets:
I think it is something that a pure play you cannot match. That’s why you see many of the pure plays getting into this space, where they have a location that they can open to the consumer day in and day out.
When you have 70% of all of the engagement of people who come to a store, 70% of them engaging with you digitally, as part of their experience, you can’t think of it as stores versus dot com. That’s just not the way in which we operate as a business.
Roughly 50% to 60% of our digital demand is being fulfilled from what has been historically called the brick-and-mortar location that we have the ability to [offer] buy online pick-up [in store], all the things we have been building out. We are making those come to life in a meaningful way.
When you add into that a whole new customer-facing technology that’s in the physical warehouse that will allow that consumer to find their product more efficiently to pick up the product more efficiently, and more importantly give our associates information about that customer, we think the combination of those things is a clear differentiator.
We have warehouses across [the US] and layering on a digital platform on top of that, that is unique and different, we think that differentiates our brand.
On the technology front, the main driver is to provide store associates with tools to make it easier to enable customers to make buying-decisions, explains Rawlins:
We are co-developing proprietary technology that freeze up more time for customer engagement by increasing operational efficiency. This technology puts customer-facing data, such as personalized offers, wish list, and past purchase history, all in one place, finally enabling the customer and associate experiences to converge across all mediums.
This so-called ‘data infrastructure’ is DSW’s second-largest asset, argues Rawlins, albeit one that’s not being exploited to its full potential at present:
If there is anyone that should be able to read how that customer is reacting, how they are engaging, how they are using digital to influence their brick and mortar experience or vice versa, it’s us. We have all the data that we would need to understand what the customer is looking for and how we position ourselves to meet that demand.
That’s not enough to execute against that, but a lot of people get credit for their ability to play in this space in data. We have our foundation. I mean, it’s genius 25 years ago, whoever’s idea it was, kudos to them, but we started the rewards program before anyone had died in the space, and we have all this data. We’ve got to figure out how we leverage it more efficiently and effectively to meet that customer’s demand, so that we know in advance where they are heading.
In conclusion, Rawlins’s view is that there’s a lot of work to be done, but that DSW has put in place the necessary strategic planning to make a difference:
As we’ve already have seen across multiple sectors of retail, office supply, electronics, sporting goods, at the end of the day only the strongest will survive. And DSW will be one of the few survivors in this retail consolidation.
My take
An upbeat assessment of DSW’s prospects against a backdrop of massive disruption. I confess I find it hard to contemplate making shoe purchases online, this being an area of retail where you need to be in the store and trying on the potential purchase. That being so, Rawlins is entirely correct to point to the physical outlets as a major asset.
He’s wrong on one thing though – or at least, more colourful than pragmatic. Footwear is a necessity. As such, it’s a market sector that isn’t going to disappear. Against that backdrop, getting a solid omni-channel strategy in place is essential. DSW has certainly taken the right steps to date.
Image credit - DSWRead more on: Retail e-commerce and the omni-channel 