
Focusing on cloud rack rates is like arguing about corporate tax rates; they have little correlation to what one actually pays. Cloud vendors depend on inertia, inattention and forgetfulness to inflate monthly bills through overprovisioning and service sprawl. RightScale estimates that 30 to 45% of cloud spending is wasted. By my estimate, that adds an extra $10 billion annually to AWS, Azure and Google Cloud coffers.
No cloud user is immune; myself included having recently tracked down a strange $50+ charge to Microsoft over a couple of straight months to some services I’d been testing, but forgotten to deactivate.
Users must be vigilant, but amidst all the other tasks and fire drills that face the typical IT worker, looking through cloud cost spreadsheets, even data that’s been nicely summarized in dashboards, is far down on the to-do list right next to “double-checking the security settings on my Slack channels.”
The sorry reality is that if cost controls are not automated, they’re not going to happen…which sounds like a job for machine learning. As I’ll detail below, companies like Cmpute.io, FittedCloud, ParkMyCloud realized the business opportunity and are pioneering the use of adaptive, data-driven machine learning to optimize cloud usage and maximize the bang for your cloud buck.
Waste components
RightScale nails the chief cause of waste, cloud complexity, which manifests itself in an immense and exploding number of services and multidimensional billing models.
As I detailed in an earlier column on cloud cost modeling: 
There’s no uniformity among cloud providers in how they size or configure infrastructure services [and] to make sure that apples-to-apples comparisons are impossible, each of the providers has somewhat different, often confusing, schemes for price discounting.
Given the way most organizations currently use the cloud, namely as an extension of existing virtual server infrastructure, it’s no surprise that RightScale finds that most of the waste is traced to provisioned but unused compute instances and storage. Such cloud waste is the reincarnation of VM server sprawl that’s plagued IT since ESX systems started popping up in data centers over a decade ago.
Complicating matters is the organic way in which cloud services entered most organizations, with individuals and small development teams using departmental budgets to provision resources for particular projects. Balkanization made it impossible for IT to track overall cloud spending and look for efficiencies
Although many IT shops have corralled cloud users back under some semblance of centralized management, getting them to proactively reduce waste isn’t easy. As RightScale points out, the costs to an individual or group seem small, making big-picture efficiency measures a tough sell.
Reactive cost control tools
Traditional cost control measures have focused surfacing information to those with budget authorities via comprehensive reports of usage and spending coupled with dashboards and visualizations to illustrate trends, metrics and anomalies. By resting on the premise that once exposed, wasteful cloud spending will be eliminated, such tools are reactive.
While better than nothing, these tools are often ineffective since they still require some expertise of the information consumer about the various services and their resource requirements. While reporting tools are good at triggering inquiries that might lead to cost reductions, those same tools have little or no direct effect on billed costs.
RightScale reports summarize service usage and highlight potential areas of waste including underutilized instances, reserved instances without consistent workloads, unattached storage volumes, old space-wasting disk snapshots and test/dev workloads that are suited for temporary spot instances.
Never satisfied to let a customer need go unmet, AWS has responded with continued improvements to Cost Explorer, a service that summarizes overall spending with various reports and visualizations. It recently enhanced the service with an API that lets users programmatically access cost and usage data that can be filtered and grouped in many ways such as by AWS resource, account, deployment region and availability zone or date. Azure offers usage and spending management features in is Cost Management Service which also makes sizing recommendations based on historical data.
Proactive, automated cost optimization
FittedCloud is one of several companies pioneering a new class of cloud service optimization that shifts the focus from periodic cost management to continuous efficiency maximization by dynamically matching resource usage to workload requirements. According to co-founder Prakash Manden, the software, which only works with AWS so far, has three elements:

Cost visibility similar to what RightScale and Cost Explorer provides along with anomaly detection to flag unusual spending and malicious resource-wasting attacks.
Optimization insights that use machine learning to model workload requirements and resource usage and create recommended actions that can increase efficiency and lower costs.
Optimization automation that puts a subset of the aforementioned insights on autopilot by automatically resizing, configuring and scheduling services including EC2 instances, EBS (block storage) volumes and DynamoDB (NoSQL).

Several features differentiate FittedCloud from prior approaches to cost management and optimization, the most obvious being its use of machine learning algorithms for modeling a cloud environment and tuning its recommendations based on a continuous assessment of usage patterns.
Such modeling allows the software to automatically scale resource deployments up and down without needing to write explicit policies like those required with AWS autoscaling groups.
Furthermore, FittedCloud is unique in its ability to automatically scale EBS volumes based on actual use by changing service types and sizes without stopping an application, a feature enabled by a proprietary kernel driver (Linux-only for now).
The net result according to Manden is that the typical FittedCloud customer sees service costs decrease by 30-45%.
Other companies applying dynamic resource optimization and scheduling to cloud cost control include:

io (recently acquired by Cisco) which can dynamically move AWS EC2 types between on-demand, spot and reserved instances based on performance and availability measure or scheduled times.
ParkMyCloud with its new SmartParking feature that uses usage patterns from AWS CloudWatch data to recommend schedules for automatically shutting down and restarting instances during idle times. ParkMyCloud recently partnered with CloudHealth to also provide sizing recommendations for AWS and Azure instances.

My take
Cost overruns and sticker shock becomes an increasingly severe problem as organizations shift more workloads to public cloud services. However, those costs are impossible to avoid without some form of structured, centralized cost management process.
Unfortunately, most software, such as services offered by the main cloud providers, are reactive, focusing on information and recommendations, but still requiring action by the user.
Adding overhead to already strapped IT organizations, such approaches are prone to disuse and atrophy. A better approach is to automate sizing and scheduling decisions through an adaptive policy engine that can ‘learn’ baseline usage patterns for a given environment.
As with any application of machine learning, cloud cost optimization software must earn users’ trust by demonstrating significant savings while avoiding money-wasting mistakes.
Once systems like FittedCloud’s show that they can repeatedly reduce an organization’s cloud bill, they should become an easy sell. Even though such automatic sizing technology costs the cloud vendors money in the short term, don’t be surprised if they cede to customer demands and incorporate the same kinds of tool into their service portfolio. This is because proactive tools allow providers to reduce the growth in CapEx spending by increasing resource utilization. Viewed this way, dynamic cloud service optimization is a win-win for customers and providers alike.
Image credit - via the author and © Oleksiy Mark - Fotolia.comRead more on: Cloud platforms - infrastructure and architecture 