
This is why my carry-ons had to go in the hold?
The fix that airlines have got themselves into over carry-on baggage seems almost calculated to maximize customer dissatisfaction. It’s a classic case of sensible outcomes being frustrated by poorly thought-out policies imposed on bodged processes, and compounded by a lack of transparency.
It’s only since the rise of budget airlines and cheap short-haul travel that this has become such a bugbear for air passengers. Today’s deeply unsatisfactory status quo is the result of a succession of attempts to satisfy several distinct and sometimes conflicting outcomes over time. A recent easyJet flight from Rome to London highlighted how these all come together to produce the worst outcome for all concerned.
Policy twists and turns
It used to be quite straightforward — charging for hold baggage often meant the difference between profit and loss on low-margin fares. And if enough passengers traveled with hand luggage only, the airlines needed fewer staff on check-in desks and baggage handling.
But as more and more passengers started to travel with hand baggage only, full flights often ran out of space to stow everyone’s carry-ons in the cabin. Meanwhile, tighter security led to higher costs inspecting carry-ons. In the past few weeks, a plane evacuation at Dubai demonstrated passengers’ inclination to take their carry-ons with them even when fleeing for their lives, raising a new safety dimension that hadn’t been apparent before.
So when we dropped our bags at Rome, the check-in attendant told us we wouldn’t be charged if we wanted to put any of our carry-ons in the hold. This truly illustrates the absurdity of the airline’s policy, in which a chargeable item randomly becomes free depending on how many seats have been sold on that flight. There have been so many twists and turns in the various policies over the years that none of it makes any sense any more. Do they want us to carry on as much or as little as possible? The answer seems to vary depending on the time of day.
Had we known about this proposition before setting out for the airport (or been offered an incentive), we might have arranged things differently. But we didn’t have much in carry-on, so we opted not to take up the offer.
Random absurdity
After waiting an extra two hours for our now severely delayed flight, much later that evening we finally joined the line for boarding. Shortly after, an Easyjet official came up to us and told my two children their roller bags would have to go in the hold. Here was another random absurdity. I remonstrated because between the four of us, three of our bags were small enough to fit under the seat, so we were not even using up our overhead space entitlement.
But he was implacable — it was a full flight, the rollers had to go in the hold, and in any case if we had wanted to keep our luggage with us we should have joined the line earlier (something I had avoided doing as we were in row 10, near the front of the plane, forgetting that the rule when boarding Easyjet is to be first if you want to stow your baggage conveniently).
The punchline of this story is that, when we got on the plane, we discovered that the baggage compartment directly above our row was completely empty — see the above photo, showing the space left after I’d put in my backpack. And this space remained unused for the duration of the flight. Easyet’s arbitrary removal of our carry-ons to the hold had not helped in any way. It merely left us with a sour experience.
My take
From a passenger’s point of view, what we really want is to keep our hand luggage close at hand — it contains valuables and necessities we may need while in flight. For short trips, taking everything as carry-on saves on waiting in line to drop bags and then waiting in the baggage hall on arrival. But if we’ve been given a carry-on option, we expect it to be honored. The airlines have got themselves into a fix because they don’t have a reliable system for making sure the carry-ons will all get stowed. And as our experience showed, the current system is completely broken.
As with so many enterprise processes that have evolved over time, this is one that needs a complete refit. One of the problems is that there’s no single standard for carry-ons, and no standard size of overhead bin, so what works on one flight for one set of passengers won’t work on another. That in turn encourages passengers to try and game the rules, either deliberately or unwittingly.
But given the level of sophistication the low-cost airlines are able to achieve with pricing their tickets to achieve maximum profitability and passenger loading, why can’t they apply at least a little of the same sophistication to carry-ons? Differential pricing for weight, size — perhaps with discounts for volunteering to stow if needed — would earn extra revenue as well as giving passengers more transparency about what they’ll actually be allowed to take on the plane. It just needs the application of a little common sense and some smart technology.
Image credit - Feature image by Easyjet; carry-on baggage compartment by the authorRead more on: CRM and customer experience 