

Taking our customers from their keyboard to the curve by digitizing the end-to-end customer experience.

That’s the digital philosophy outlined by easyJet CEO Carolyn McCall as one of the budget airline’s differentiators after announcing a half-year loss of £24 million, down from a profit of £7 million for the same period in 2015. 
In large part, the decline is due to external factors, such as the terrorist attacks in Paris and Brussels which has resulted in a drop in passenger numbers.  But McCall remains confident that the firm’s investment in IT and digital will pay dividends despite the tough market conditions. She says of easyJet: 

The network structure is very, very distinctive, the digital structure is very distinctive, our customer focus on what we do with customers is only a unique advantage. Our loyalty is very distinctive. There are some things that we just do and what we’re doing on cost just underpins all of that distinction. I mean everybody can do cost, but the way we’re trying to do it is also a bit different.

What that means in practice is effective exploitation of data analytics to define the service proposition. McCall says’s it’s all about: 

the use of data to make things more personalized and simple for our customers, and constant innovation for the sake of efficiency and customer experience, not innovation because it looks smart and it looks clever. It’s really to have benefits, really tangible benefits for the airline.
We use data as a powerful tool to drive demand and indeed loyalty. Seventy-four percent of all seats are booked by returning customers, a 6 percentage point improvement from 2011 and obviously on a growing passenger base.

Innovation is a keynote, she adds: 

We have led the field in innovation for a number of years now. The mobile app has now only been downloaded almost 16 million times. More importantly it accounts for around £600 million of revenue and approximately 15% of our e-commerce sale. 
The quality and functionality of our app is recognized by our customers’ 96% satisfaction from those people that use the app. They tell us they like online self-service as we extend the digital capability through the journey. This drives revenue and saves cost. [We have] 95% of our customers booking and checking online, a very high figure indeed. They can download passport details onto their profile. Up to 60% of passengers use mobile boarding passes. 

McCall also points to the fact that 14 airports now offer easyJet’s mobile host that gives real-time information on flight status and departure gate and indeed where baggage reclaim is going to be. This is a big achievement, she says: 

For us to have gone from one airport to 14 shows how much has been achieved in quite a short space of time. Looking forward, we’ve continued to roll out a number of new initiatives including that one. We will soon make available pre-paid vouchers for in-flight use, and we are the first European airline to have Apple Pay functionality at scale.

Loyalty programs and CRM also play large parts in the wider easyJet strategy, says McCall: 

We’ve recently launched our customer loyalty program, Flight Club, which drives increase satisfaction and sales. And it targets easyJet’s highest frequency and highest value customers. So, a really important segment for us.
We’re giving  [passenger] the benefits they told us they most value such as a dedicated call center and the flexibility to change names and dates are free. I get loads and loads of e-mails from passengers. The thing I get – the best e-mails I get is actually around Flight Club just saying thank you, thank you, thank you. So, it’s obviously working. And we will roll that out over the next few months.
We have also around 25 million customers in our CRM program as we continue to invest in understanding what they want and personalize our marketing. We will see continuing improvements in revenue here. The effectiveness of how we use this information was recently validated when easyJet was ranked second out of 60 top US and UK retailers for e-mail marketing.

My take
In tough market conditions, battered by factors over which the airline clearly has no control, easyJet’s turning to digital investment is a sound move, particularly its focus on data and analytics in order to know its customers better and to tailor its proposation towards them. 
Image credit - easyJetRead more on: CRM and customer experienceDigital and content marketingMobileSocialUX and application design 