
As the CEO and founder of Bureau of Trade, Michael Moskowitz tapped into the idea that smart curation that sells an experience can create a unique online shopping experience and drive up prices. He told TechCrunch back in 2013:
The average good on eBay will sell at X purchase price. That same piece of merchandise when covered by the Bureau – when written about by us – created in many instances a 50 to 100 percent price increase. That’s profoundly valuable.
That price increment arose because Bureau presented the goods in a way that made them irresistible to a certain group of men. It told a story about how certain products would fit into mens’ lifestyle. It’s difficult to explain how Moskowitz did it, but the smart curation, categorization, words and imagery made for a delightful shopping experience. Which was exactly the aim of the exercise.
 Having raised over $1 million in seed funding, Bureau (and Moskowitz) were then acquired by eBay a couple of years ago. Moskowitz is now eBay’s Global Chief Curator and at a Design Driven NYC event last week he explained how his role is essentially to “make people uncomfortable”. He said:
When I was brought to eBay (by now eBay CEO John Donahoe), his belief was that he wanted me to take that same recipe of taking a situation or a story and service of a sale and do it at scale for eBay. Can you curate 800 million listings and make them more meaningful, more memorable and more emotional?
But my role has flipped. Rather than trying to curate eBay for the world, I’m now trying to curate the world for eBay. So it’s about activating relationships with emerging contemporary artists, it’s about bringing in start-ups that are going to be directly applicable to our business, it’s about holding us accountable for things we should be doing, or want to be doing, or have to be doing to compete. I’m sort of hired to make people uncomfortable.
I want this company to win, because I believe that as people begin to start making more responsible purchase decisions about the things they love and about the things that are going to save us from collective oblivion, from spending indiscriminately, companies like eBay will win. Because we have the world’s most interesting inventory. It’s about curating the world for us and giving people the permission to think about this site in a new and dramatically different way.
Competing for slivers of attention
If you watch Moskowitz’s presentation online you will soon find out that this is a man that thinks (and speaks) very quickly. His presentation is full of very interesting, and sometimes quite complex, ideas about the future of e-commerce and the shopping experience online. Some of it is almost too conversational to nicely articulate into a story here, but there are definitely some bits worth highlighting.
For example, Moskowitz sees that there are six “hard and fast rules” in commerce (he doesn’t like to talk about e-commerce, as he sees the two as one and the same). These six rules are:

Site design
Shipping
Sent Mail
Services
Social
Speed

He says “if you do at least three of these things you could position yourselves a success” and that if you do all six, you’re on a fast track to strong growth.
However, one of his main points is with regards to the saturation of content on the internet. Users now have so much choice that companies can no longer be idle in the expectation that consumers will want to come to their websites and stay there. Engagement and personalisation are both key, but also incredibly difficult. Moskowitz says:
In 2004 when eBay was 10 years into its tenure, there were only 8 million websites on planet earth. That’s it. Today there are a billion websites. Just ten years later. That’s the nature of the competition. It’s a competition for people’s attention. It’s not eBay versus Amazon, it’s eBay versus anything else you could be doing with your life. We are competing for slivers of attention.
When somebody lands on your site you have four seconds to defend your life. To give them a compelling reason to stay. It’s even harder to get them to come back on a routine basis, unless you’re making it comedic, or compelling or controversial. Bull riders have twice as much time as you do.
That’s the challenge that faces entrepreneurs, how do you grab somebody by the proverbial shirt collar, drag them to the site and force them to stay and a compelling reason to come back? That’s what we are trying to pull off every single day.
Moskowitz goes on to talk about the idea of ‘experience design’, where he provides the example of the coffee bean, which increases significantly in value depending on where it is sold e.g. a Starbucks versus an up-market Venetian coffee store. The bean itself hasn’t changed much, but the experience of buying it has. He says:
We have to think more seriously and critically about delivering superlative experiences.
The greater challenge still is creating physical or digital encounters that leverage the power of hyper-selectivity, to reveal the unseen and make people feel something new or familiar. That’s the nature of the beast. It’s no longer about pushing products, its about cultivating personal experiences. To discovery online to the delivery on your doorstep is a scripted journey, or at least it should be.
Moskowitz is also interested in the impact of combining genetics with digital and the future of commerce. Although he said that this isn’t something particularly on eBay’s radar at the moment, he said that it could be an interesting factor in the future of the web. He said:
I’m deeply curious to see where we are headed in what I call Tiramisu tech, this layered approach of powerful tools coupled with expert human intelligence. Lots of people have said that everything in web and mobile is already saturated, those wars have been won.
The great opportunities for innovation are around genetics and AI. What would LinkedIn look like if we were being genetically matched to the things that we were predisposed to do? What would a Match.com look like if our own DNA was being filtered to other compatible DNAs? What would eBay look like? These are the questions that I’d love to wrestle with in the months and years to come.
Failure is overrated
Finally, Moskowitz also had some words to say about how companies should be developing products and striving for success. For example, whilst he believes that companies shouldn’t be focusing too much on encouraging failure, he does think that they need to learn to iterate and prove why they are aiming for what they are aiming for. He says:
I do think that failure is overrated. It’s hugely important to iterate. If you look at individual success – these were often men and women that were constitutionally incapable of computing failure. They couldn’t tolerate it. They hated losing so much, they figured out a way to win. That’s the principle here. It’s how do you keep going after it again and again and again, until you succeed.
You have an insatiable thirst to create a meaningful impact at scale.
He adds:
I’m also making a case for more experiments. I know I said not to use the word failure, but where is that evidence of trialling things before blowing it up into bigger and bigger experiments? It’s a harder thing to do at a big company. But I want to see that longer, fossil record. I want a long, clear record of things that didn’t work until we find the one that does.
Read more on: CRM and customer experiencee-commerce 