
Back in February, French electricity giant EDF Energy outlined how it had taken just one month to define a 1,000-point requirement specification for its planned implementation of SuccessFactors cloud HCM to 20,000 UK staff. The implementation was due to begin in April and there were hopes of starting go-live by the end of the year. So I took the opportunity at SuccessConnect in Vienna two weeks ago to catch up on progress to date with Ben Wharfe, programme director for future HR at EDF.
Given the complexity of completely redesigning more than 75 different processes for digital HR, it’s inevitable that it was going to take a little longer than the most optimistic projections. Nevertheless, the system is about to go into testing not only for core HR and recruitment but also compensation and performance, which together make up the first two phases of a three-phase plan. Learning, analytics, succession and career development planning will make up the third phase of the 18-month project for the complete SuccessFactors suite. Wharfe remains pleased with the rate of progress:
We’re in testing at the moment, and we’ll look to start to roll it out through the back end of Q1 next year — which is still a pretty fast implementation.
You’re looking at an implementation, for the first phases, of about a year, which is a lot faster than what we’re used to in EDF Energy.
It’s different this time
A lot of the issues that cropped up have been caused by the baggage that comes along with a pre-existing system, Wharfe explains.
We’d be fine, if we were plumbing a relatively standard SuccessFactors solution into a relatively standard SAP solution — but find a customer that has a standard SAP solution!
It’s nothing to do with the design of the SuccessFactors solution or building the integrations. It’s anomalies that have been thrown up through our legacy of having a complex system that’s met a lot of divergent needs in the past, and we’ve let it get very heavily customized.
A big difference from previous, conventional implementations has been the more iterative model that’s possible with a cloud-based HCM system. People are able to see how processes will work much earlier in the design cycle, which means that process designs can go through several iterations.
You’re seeing a system in an end-to-end walk through, designed and built before we go into SIT [system integration testing]. In the old world, the first time you’d have ever seen this is during UAT [user acceptance testing], which is much further down the line — much more expensive to fix things, much more complicated because you’d be fixing things as you’re coding, rather than in configuration.
If there’s things we need to resolve and fix and change, the earlier you find them, the cheaper and easier it is — and we can still go through the full testing cycles that we need to.
Engaging in process design
The engagement of users in the process design workshops has remained strong as these iterations have run their course, says Wharfe. But it’s taken longer than foreseen, and some issues have required more detailed work, he adds.
It has taken up more resource and more effort than we anticipated. Part of that is that lots of people are interested, they can engage in sessions. So there’s been a real pull from the business to be involved in the sessions.
But also as you go through, it’s a nice concept in theory — that you can make all the decisions in the workshops and involve all the right people — but there are a number of workshops out the back of that to work through some of the really crunchy issues.
We’ve had over 60 workshops for the first phase. That’s much more than we anticipated. So the engagement has been great, but it’s a challenge.
Nevertheless, being able to show people how the system will operate has been an important factor in building enthusiasm for the project.
We were able to give the HR team leadership a demo of the system after only four weeks of workshops. That’s amazing. We’ve never been able to do that before.
It’s been so well received. People can’t wait for the functionality to come along. So people are waiting with bated breath to receive this and start using it.
Continuing evolution
One of the considerations during a large-scale implementation of an enterprise cloud application is that the software continues to evolve throughout the project lifetime. All the while, SuccessFactors is introducing new features in its quarterly releases so there are choices that have to be made about whether to include these as the project progresses. Unless those features are mandatory, EDF generally isn’t taking the new functionality. But the recent introduction of a new user interface proved an especially difficult choice. After initially deciding they would implement it, the team eventually decided against. Wharfe explains:
You create all your training material, all your communications, and then to change something six months after you go live would make all that training material redundant. Also that’s quite a change then for our organization — a step further than they’re ready for at the moment.
All the same, the experience provided a useful demonstration that it is possible to try out a new feature and still be able to back it out if it doesn’t work out.
Business impact
Looking ahead, I asked Wharfe what he thinks will be the lasting outcome of rolling out the cloud HCM system. He emphasizes the business impact of automating HR processes and thus freeing up resources for strategic planning.
This is not an IT implementation, this is a business change project, and we need to understand what’s changing for the business.
For me as a manager, my role is fundamentally going to change in the organization. People are going to have different approvals. People are going to have to get used to self-serving reports. It’s much more a business system for the business, rather than an HR system [that’s] only for HR …
By standardizing, automating, using things like intelligent services to guide people around the activity they need to do better, by increasing self-serve, you’re reducing your time that HR, and the business, is spending on those activities.
[People can] focus on more value-adding activities like, ‘How am I going to manage my talent? How am I going to make sure I’ve got the right people in the organization? How am I going to model my future workforce using the workforce analytics?’
So that’s really focused on reducing what I call HR-for-HR processes and focusing on HR-for-the-business processes. That’s quite a journey that you have to go on, and you can’t pretend that putting in a system’s going to change that overnight.
Preparing for the future
Wharfe is looking forward to the final phase, when the introduction of workforce analytics will add capabilities that he sees as highly relevant to some of the challenges ahead for EDF.
We run nuclear power stations, and the planning horizon for that obviously goes up to a 50-year time horizon. Understanding how you’re going to resource those power stations, when you’ve got an ageing workforce of engineers and a skill shortage in the market place — the workforce planning piece — is a huge piece for our business.
Looking further out, EDF will face challenges such as managing a more flexible workforce that is expected to become at least 50% contingent workers, and being able to retain talent against competition from fast-moving smaller players. This is where the new system will really earn its stripes, Wharfe believes.

HR has a huge role to play in being able to develop the business into the new world. If you haven’t got those basics in place and you haven’t managed to free up that head-space to do the value-add stuff, how’s your business going to survive?

My take
The  experience at EDF replicates what we’ve seen at other organizations, such as Jaguar Land Rover. The ease of getting started with a cloud HCM system leads to initial optimism that the project can be completed rapidly. But that assessment underestimates how much work people have to put in to get to a new set of HR processes that fully exploit the potential of the digital platform. The technology is straightforward — it’s the human and organizational dimensions that take the time.
It’s worth all the effort though in order to put in place a more flexible, efficient system that can deliver the kind of long-term value that Wharfe envisages. We’ll continue to track progress at EDF Energy to see how the company fares once the implementation rolls out.
Image credit - Worker at West Burton power station © EDF EnergyDisclosure - SAP is a diginomica premier partner and paid my travel costs to attend SuccessConnect in Vienna. Read more on: HCM and the digital future of workUse casesUser experience 