

York University
Essentially the expansion of the level of staff at the university meant that managing by spreadsheet was finished.

Instead, says Allan Aikman, learning and development manager at the University of York, it was high time for a cloud-based learning system to end its grip on the university’s staff education.
The respected UK university had expanded rapidly and looking after the education and development requirements for more than 4,000 staff using spreadsheets was becoming cumbersome.
As an open campus university, the university has a duty of care to ensure that staff, students and visitors are safe and that requires having an accurate record of employees’ competencies and training. 
With electricians, plumbers, gardeners wielding chainsaws, and people working in chemistry and physics labs, there is a raft of different health and safety and compliance education that the university needs to be on top of, says Aikman:

And then, of course, there’s the standard stuff like equality and diversity, fire training, information security and things like that.

On top of that, the university is often asked to provide evidence of people’s competencies or staff development roles to external agencies such as the Health and Safety Executive or research councils. 
Dealing with all these tasks using spreadsheets, explains Aikman, was tricky:

There was a significant and time consuming and inefficient administrative effort going on to keep everything going.

Different managers had their own ways of doing things, so that when something like ISO 9001 compliance came up, it meant trying to pull in information from all over the place. Aikman notes:

What I was looking for was the ability to give staff a true and accurate record of their training allied to their role and to identify compliance and developmental needs for each individual.

The university needed a system that could store training records and would automatically update records when someone completed a course.  Just as importantly, it had to be simple to use and accessible to staff not only using Explorer, but Firefox and iOS browsers as well. 
In addition, Aikman notes that the system needed to be accessible from mobile devices and easily integrated with the university’s HRIS:

I also thought about other things, not just records and efficiency. I wanted a user friendly customized workflow and an approval system that was very straightforward, but also flexible enough to suit different department requirements and the ability to create our own learning content.

All of which led the university to door of Cornerstone OnDemand, which could not only meet these requirements, but had a good reputation in education market. 
The system went live in February 2015, and implementation went as smoothly as you can ever expect an implementation to go. Aikman says: 

There is always is pockets of resistance when you make a change as big as this one what often is the silent majority get on with are  comfortable with it and do it.

There is a vast difference in technical competency of different user groups, which means some people needed more support to move to the system. As Aikman wryly notes: 

When I see some of the people try to use it, I think that’s a good job that’s not a chainsaw because they’d have their leg off by now! They just don’t know how to use a computer.

There are some administrators who are also slightly reluctant to change, but for many of those who have embraced the learning management system the difference is “night and day”, says Aikman. 
The health and safety department have saved several hours a week and it has made things far easier for Aikman’s learning and development team.
Challenges
The main challenge (and something that would have been a issue whichever route the university chose) was to locate, transfer and standardize the format of the records from spreadsheets all over the university.
Another issue was dealing with pop-ups.  The way the university’s IT is set up made it impossible to disable pop-up blockers centrally. Instead, this has to be individually done by each member of staff.  To help get round this, Aikman has created a help pages which automatically takes users through the steps, according to the browser they are using.
Compliance was the starting point for the university, but things have begun to grow organically.  Learning and development is still very classroom based, as you’d expect from an academic institution, but the number of e-learning tutorials to supplement that classroom learning, is growing rapidly. 
Usage is spreading organically to other departments too. While it began with specific HR compliance training, now IT and health and safety are on-board, together with services. The finance department is beginning to use the LMS and for booking training. Aikman adds:

What we’re trying to do is essentially to end up with a one-stop-shop and we’re pretty much there.

Because it’s behind a single-sign on, once someone has logged on, it takes just one click before someone can start on the LMS. Aikman says: 

That just makes things so much easier because you’d be amazed how many people don’t want to click three times.

Of course here have been issues along the way, mainly people rather than system related, but for Aikman, the proof that they have done a good job came from someone’s exit interview. This leaver highlighted that the LMS was a refreshing change from the norm, because it did “exactly what it said on the tin” rather than something chosen purely for monetary reasons. Aikmann concludes: 

It’s actually pinned on my wall.

Image credit - University of York Read more on: Digital skills and trainingHCM and the digital future of work 