
You got talent?
Adam Spearing is Salesforce Senior Area Vice President, EMEA, for Platforms and Communities. As such he is responsible for the Salesforce platform, the App Cloud and the ISV community. But he’s also someone whose focused on the need for talent across that entire ecosystem:
We have huge growth plans, and if you look at our revenue growth, from an economic point of view, we still have massive room for growth. We see phenomenal opportunities and are investing all over Europe. We are hiring sales and pre-sales people, and as we need to make sure they are successful.
So we also need to expand our delivery capabilities, our CSG team and our customer success groups. And as we don’t do all those customer builds ourselves, we do have a successful ISV channel, but we are also looking to grow our ISV teams in line with our revenue.
The estimated number of new jobs to be created is in the region of 149,000 in the overall ecosystem.
But the wider point here is that there are a lot more customers the company is still failing to reach, and opportunities to fill. So, the demand is across the board of sales teams, solutions engineers, delivery capability, and both new and enlarged ISVs.
The Salesforce ecosystem now extends not just across both ISVs and partners but also down through specific jobs and, in particular, the developer community and Salesforce specialists in larger companies.
The company is building new development capabilities, as well as having plans to grow by acquisition. The biggest problem Spearing sees is finding a sufficient supply of the talented people the company feels it needs.
Einstein and Watson
One of the company’s major messages at its recent World Tour event in London was about the potential for new tools, such as the Quip content collaboration platform and the Einstein AI toolset, to businesses increase productivity.
Such a claim has, of course, to be set against the fact that, despite its collective best efforts, the IT industry has yet to make any discernible difference to productivity.  Spearing readily acknowledges that deficiency but held the view that we now stand on the cusp of a new surge in productivity, with AI providing a pivot moment:
It’s like building a house. It seems to take ages to build the foundations and then suddenly the house appears. And I think AI is one of those technologies that will release us and empower us to do more interesting things and be more productive. It is very good at doing those repetitive tasks. There is a potential that we are going to grow the demand for human capital bigger than it has ever been before.
As an aside, that may be so, but there are those that suggest that, while AI might be good at doing many repetitive tasks, no-one has yet built a robot that can clean a toilet, and that this might be the level of job left to humans to do. Every tech company says ‘release people for more interesting work’, but the majority of current jobs are in those repetitive tasks.
Spearing pitches the impact of Einstein in this context, where a salesperson with 300 customers could use the tool to identify a small customer as the one to target first. An experienced sales person might spot the opportunity, but an inexperienced one might take some time to realise the potential. That, he suggests, would see their productivity increase significantly.
This does then raise a question about de-skilling, or perhaps de-energising, sales staff. They may just decide to leave it all to Einstein rather than learn or up-skill themselves. That might be more attractive if it means they are more productive without trying or learning. And the goal is to put AI in the form of Einstein on every relevant desk.
A collaborative piece of string
Spearing did see one future advantage of AI and employment possibilities – the way that AI can increase the level of granularity of what can be achieved. The example used in the World Tour keynote session, of the combination of Einstein identifying an insurance company’s individual policy holders at specific risk from events that have been predicted by IBM’s Watson predictive analysis tools, shows what could become commonplace as a more granular level of customer service:
I think there are a few that get it and are starting to plan for that now, and there are those that aren’t, who are likely to get overtaken. That example shows how it can be possible to reach out to specific communities. If this is applied to providing something like personalised medicine the potential could be unbelievable.
We are already at the stage of working with known knowns – where if this, this and this happen, that is the next step to take. But now we need to start working with the unknowns, the data that users don’t know and don’t understand, and working with Einstein and our other tools can help them get there.
But where is the employment? All that needs is an automated email or text message. However, he sees this being the driver of new services such as pre-emptive emergency teams pulled together by Einstein-based tools feeding off predictive analyses of upcoming events generated by Watson.
Talk of such close collaboration between Salesforce and IBM is, of course, good. The whole notion of collaboration between major businesses, rather than having the start-point of  ‘enemies’ and ‘competitors’, has to offer the user communities more advantages than threats.
For example, while Einstein reaches up from the intra-enterprise level, Watson reaches down from the geo-global-political level. Making sense of that conjunction for business users is therefore a good goal.
My take
The underlying trend of collaboration between the likes of IBM and Salesforce at the ‘business objectives’ level, rather than the purely technical, can only be seen as a `Good Thing’ that can provide demonstrable business benefits to a wider range of potential customers. And for those with the relevant ‘smarts’ the jobs potential won’t go amiss either.
Image credit - Twitter/Britain's Got Talent Disclosure - At time of writing, Salesforce is a premier partner of diginomica. Read more on: HCM and the digital future of workIoT robotics and AITalent management 