

Election 2015
While the next Prime Minister of the UK will be either the leader of the Conservative or Labour parties, the close-run nature of the election polls at present indicates that some form of coalition with smaller parties will be needed to get one of the two into Number 10 Downing Street.
In this second part of our manifesto overview, we look at the digital and tech policies proposed by the Liberal Democrats, the Green Party and UKIP (sort of),  with commentary from Julian David, CEO of techUK, and some personal views from me. 

Nick Clegg, Nigel Farage, Natalie Bennett
The Liberal Democrats
The manifesto – here – says:
In the modern digital age, the power of the state and of corporate interests can threaten our privacy and liberty. We have achieved much in rolling back the over-mighty state…but we cannot be complacent.
For the Liberal Democrats, the party has already published its bold call for a new Digital Bill of Rights, which we looked at in some detail last week. Away from that, there’s digital meat aplenty to be found in the wider manifesto, beginning with the inevitable broadband for all:

Complete the roll out of high-speed broadband to reach almost every household (99.9%) in the UK as well as small businesses in both rural and urban areas.
Aim to double innovation and research spending across the economy, supported by greater public funding on a longer timescale, more ‘Catapult’ innovation and technology centres
Build on the success of Tech City, Tech North and the Cambridge tech cluster with a network across the UK acting as incubators for technology companies.
Retain coding on the National Curriculum and encourage entrepreneurship at all levels.
Maintain and develop the award-winning Government Digital Service, and the principle of Digital by Default in public services, pressing ahead with plans to extend this to local government.
Continue to release government data sets that can facilitate economic growth in an open and accessible format, including on standards in public services.
Continue our work to open up public procurement to small and medium-sized companies and to the voluntary sector.
Ensure the technology implications of government activity are properly considered by introducing Technology Impact Assessments into the policy design process.
Develop cutting-edge digital skills courses for young people and the unemployed, working with private sector employers and education and training providers.
Develop platforms on which government can provide feedback on its suppliers to help quality providers to grow.
Require the highest standards of data protection by public service providers, including requiring that where data is used for research purposes it must be anonymised wherever possible, and impose a moratorium on the creation of new government databases without Parliamentary authority.
Safeguard the essential freedom of the internet and back net neutrality.

techUK’s take
The Liberal Democrat Manifesto contains a raft of commitments that have at their core a recognition that tech and digital are driving the future economic success of the UK economy. It’s right that parties recognise the importance of having the right skills and expertise to maximise the potential of tech across the UK There are also thoughtful pledges on the next wave of digital public services, including at local government level. The Manifesto gives attention to important questions arising about the expiry of DRIPA surveillance powers in 2016. techUK will continue to make the case for a clear legal framework that outlines how Government and industry work together on this area.
My take
The manifesto with the most digital content – but then perhaps it would be since the whole document runs to 33,000 words and 158 pages! But no-one can accuse the Lib Dems of not diving deep into digital. Inevitably, given the past five years of coalition government with the Conservatives, there’s some overlap here.
The Lib Dems are the most explicit in their praise and support for the GDS which is good to see. I was interested to note that the idea of extension of GDS-like powers into local government is included. This is something that any winning government will have to address over the next five years. (It’s something Labour talks about as well, although not in its disappointingly digital-light manifesto.)
According to the current polls, the Liberal Democrats are in line to lose a lot of their seats at the election, including possibly that of party leader Nick Clegg. We shall see on 7th May. But whatever the outcome, the digital ambition is certainly there in the manifesto.
The Green Party
The manifesto – here – says:
We live in an information age and we know that information is power. But how should information be controlled? What information should be available and to whom?
While the Lib Dems have made a Digital Bill of Rights a central plank of their manifesto commitments, the Green Party isn’t so sure on that point,  only going so far as to say it would “consider” creating “a comprehensive Digital Bill of Rights”. Compare and contrast that to its absolute commitment to ban keeping pet bunny rabbits in cages and we might proceed on the expectation that there won’t be a lot of digital detail coming up.
Bucking the trend, there’s no promise of broadband for all from the Greens, but there are digital-related proposals in the manifesto, albeit couched in the vaguest of terms and some dither in the main:

Support and protect internet freedom.
Support human rights judgements on data retention
Support the European Union’s plans to “strengthen data protection laws against opposition from large US companies”.
Limit censoring or takedown of content to exceptional circumstances.
Make copyright shorter in length.
Introduce a “more satisfactory” law malicious comments on social media.
Oppose the privatisation of data held by the government or by companies providing public services (citing bus timetable Smartphone apps as a for instance).
Oppose the sale of personal data for commercial or other ends.  Use government purchasing power to support open standards in information technology.
Prevent patents applying to software.

techUK’s take
By providing a framework for legal protection, the patent system facilitates the early dissemination of innovative technologies by UK companies, enabling them also to engage in collaborative and follow-on R&D with other companies which is mutually beneficial.
My take
Julian’s being very polite in his comment above. The Greens ‘no software patents’ policy would be a fast track to killing off UK start-ups and TechCity-style innovation in one go. They’ve got form on this front, mind you. Look back ten years and they were arguing that software patents only help big companies, so full marks for consistency, if not for commercial common sense. Fortunately there’s little chance of the Greens policy being put into practice or I shudder to think of the impact on innovation in the UK.
Elsewhere there’s a darkly amusing contradiction at play. On the one hand, the Greens are right behind the European Commission (not the Union, as the manifesto states) in its anti-US tech company rhetoric and using data protection law as a weapon to that end, but at the same time want to limit content take-down, something ferociously backed by the Commission following the Right to be Forgotten legislation and something that the Commission wants to see embedded in that self-same data protection overhaul.
Still, at least the bunny rabbits would roam free.
UKIP
The manifesto – here – says:
Er…nothing.
Not a single reference that I can find in all 76 pages of its manifesto to digital or technology.
So there you have it. Make of that what you will.
 
[mailmunch-form id=”14637″]
Image credit - YouTubeRead more on: Data privacyDigital government and public servicesG-Cloud and the Digital MarketplaceRegulation

