
Election 2015
With less than a month to go until the General Election, the Liberal Democrats have demanded that the next UK government must introduce a Digital Bill of Rights.
With the state of the polls at present, there is a chance that the Liberal Democrats could be part of ruling coalition with either the Conservatives or the Labour Party. If so, then leader Nick Clegg has committed to the introduction of Digital Rights Bill within 6 months of the new government.
The legislation would include:

Beefed-up powers for the Information Commissioner to fine the government for data breaches.
Prison sentences for companies conducting large scale data theft and illegally selling on personal data.
Legal rights to compensation for consumers when companies get people to sign up online to deliberately misleading or unreadable terms and conditions.

An idea
Clegg said:
As technology has advanced, more and more people interact online. Whilst this has brought the UK enormous socio-economic benefits, it has also left people open to exploitation and misuse of their personal information by criminals, commercial interests, and public.
The way in which we work, socialise, buy products and use services has changed at lightning speed since the digital revolution. However, government and politicians have responded at snail’s pace, with a poor understanding of new technology and the impact it is having on our lives.
Our Digital Bill of Rights will finally enshrine into law our rights as citizens of this country to privacy, to stop information about our lives being misused, and to protect our right to freedom of speech.
Big ideas
Clegg’s proposed Bill has four aims:

To ensure that the civil and human rights that apply in the physical world also apply online.
To establish the key rights that are particular to the digital sphere.
To ensure greater transparency around the ways in which government and private companies use personal data.
To protect and empower citizens to take control of their own data and to make informed choices about their digital lives.

The  legislation would be based on 13 so-called Big Ideas, as follows:
Control of personal data
THE BIG IDEA: Personal data should, in principle, be subject to the control of the individual to whom it refers.
Control of user content
THE BIG IDEA: Everyone should be able to access, edit or remove any online content which they themselves have created.
Limits on the use of personal data
THE BIG IDEA: No public body is to collect, store or process personal data without statutory authority or explicit consent.
A free and open internet
THE BIG IDEA: An open and neutral internet is essential for open government, good democracy, a strong economy, connected communities and diversity of culture.
Freedom of speech
THE BIG IDEA: The right to free expression applies online just as it does in the offline world.
Privacy
THE BIG IDEA: People have the same rights to privacy in their telecoms and their online lives as they do in the offline world.
Surveillance
THE BIG IDEA: State surveillance of the internet must be the exception rather than the norm, and must only take place where it is clearly justified for the protection of the public and in accordance with the fundamental principles of necessity and proportionality.
Consumer rights
THE BIG IDEA: Consumers have the same rights to fairness and transparency online as they do in the offline world.
Encryption
THE BIG IDEA: Strong cyber-security is the basis of a strong digital economy: individuals, businesses and public bodies have the right to use strong encryption to protect their privacy and security online. 0. Right to unrestricted internet access
The right to unrestricted internet access
THE BIG IDEA: The ability to access information on the internet is an essential right that supports the ability of citizens to be informed and engaged in public life. It is also vital for the proper functioning of public services, and helps to ensure the free flow of information that underpins the functioning of markets. The overarching objective of a neutral network means that there can be no unfair discrimination against content or users.y do in the offline world.
The right to access and use publicly funded data and research
THE BIG IDEA: The first 25 years of the internet was a Web of documents. The next 25 years will see the evolution of the Web of data. Data that is created and maintained by government using public funds should be accessible to the public to use and share. The outputs of publicly funded research should also be published under an open license, fostering innovation and knowledge sharing.
Digital literacy
THE BIG IDEA: Children and young people should be able to enjoy the benefits of digital technologies without compromising their safety or privacy.
Enforcement of digital rights
THE BIG IDEA: Anyone whose digital rights are breached has the right to complain to a competent authority and to have that complaint acted upon.
The Labour Party has carried out its own major review of digital government policies in advance of the election, led by Chi Onwura, putative MP for Newcastle Upon Tyne Central and the opposition shadow for the Cabinet Office Minister in the last government. Onwura seemed unimpressed by the Liberal Democrat proposals:

My take
Given that there’s a fairly strong chance of the Liberal Democrat vote collapsing according to the current polls (and the possibility of Clegg himself losing his seat), all of this may be enormously academic on the morning of 8th May.
That said, Clegg’s call for an updated Bill of Rights in a digital age is not unwelcome. It would be encouraging if whatever complexion of compromise government emerges picked up a lot of these topics for legislative consideration.
[mailmunch-form id=”14637″]
Read more on: Data privacyDigital government and public servicesG-Cloud and the Digital MarketplaceRegulation

