
Elite girls
For over three decades, Elite Model Management has discovered and represented some of the world’s most famous fashion models. It represents more than 2,000 female and male models across five continents, offering its luxury-brand clients a truly international range of ‘faces’, through an international network of more than 20 subsidiary agencies in 14 countries.
Yet when Fabio Pelino joined the company as finance director last year, he quickly discovered that the company’s financial systems were a long way off being ready for a close-up shot. Elite’s network of agencies, he found, was running on 13 different financial accounting systems and numerous Excel spreadsheets.
What was missing, he says, was the ability for him as finance director to get a single, consolidated view of the company as a whole, and to share that view with the company’s senior management team. Prior to his arrival, Elite had gone some way to tackling the problem by using financial software-as-a-service from NetSuite as a centralised reporting system, but that wasn’t far enough, he says:
It means that all our individual agencies have to submit their reporting data to us and we have to re-enter it into NetSuite manually. This can be quite slow and very frustrating.
It also hampers reporting, delays accounts-payable processes and can prove error prone, he adds:
What I need as finance director is a single financial accounting system that comes with a user-friendly interface, provides real-time information to users and allows them to take different views of financial data, according to their role.
This has been my goal since I started with Elite. It has been clear to me that the goal must be to centralise all information, to standardise processes across our operations, to reduce the time it takes for information to reach managers, and have accounting staff using the same processes and workflow, [regardless of] which agency or country they’re working in.
Adding up
Since NetSuite had already been chosen as a centralised reporting system, he says, it added up simply to extend its use for day-to-day financial accountin:
It seemed like a natural progression. And since I was quickly satisfied that NetSuite would be able to support the multiple currencies, multiple languages and different tax regimes [with which] Elite works, we didn’t need to evaluate other systems.
Elite boys
The process of moving each agency in its network over to NetSuite began earlier this year, but will take up to two years to complete, Pelino reckons. So far, the UK, Italy and Switzerland have been moved across, he says. The next regions on the ‘to do’ list are subsidiaries in the US and Asia:
It’s going to take time and it’s a challenging project. I can’t tell you right now whether I’m satisfied or not.Because we only started this year, we’re not able yet to truly appreciate the benefits of financial consolidation – but that is certainly the goal and our expectation.
Using a cloud-based system is good news, too, he says, for Elite’s small IT team:
Our IT department at head office is only three people. We have maybe four or five others around the world. These people are dedicated to supporting the management software that we use as a company, but now, we don’t need to burden them with support of financial software as well.
Ultimately, Pelino expects life to be very different for he and his team once the financial consolidation journey is over:
We’ll have one button to push to get the latest figures. When I need information about a subsidiary’s performance, or a colleague needs it, we won’t be making telephone calls to the different accountants in each country. And I’ll be able to offer managers access to dashboards and reports that show them the most current information available, from wherever they are in the world.

Read more on: Analytics planning and data analysisCloud platforms - infrastructure and architectureUse cases 