
Jim Ollerton, live at Inforum 2016
All the so-called “big ERP” players have the loveliest things to say about their next-gen SaaS offerings, with overwrought scintillating Powerpoint decks to match. But what do their customers think? That’s where the stories get real – and really interesting.
At Inforum 2016, Jim Ollerton, Director of Information Technology at Elsinore Valley Municipal Water District, gave us an insightful and frank view of their ongoing transition from Lawson to Infor’s CloudSuite, starting with CloudSuite Financials.
Speaking to a small group of media, including myself and diginomica colleague Derek du Preez, Ollerton dished views on how to approach general ledger migrations, and cloud transitions in general – including cultural change management. He also provided a gut check on where Infor’s next-gen SaaS offering is at, and how his experience as an Infor customer is changing.
Elsinore Valley Water is based out of Southern California, about an hour north of San Diego. 160,000 customers count on Elsinore Valley for their drinking water. A non-profit public utility and recycled water facility, Elsinore Valley is, as Ollerton put it, a “complete monopoly – if you live in our district, you have no choice but to get water from us.” Needless to say, the bottom line counts in California’s water industry. Everyone must make the most of what is allocated:
I don’t know if you guys heard about the water crisis in California, but we’ve been going through a pretty severe drought. We’ve been dealing with that, encouraging our customers to conserve, and leverage local water supply versus imported water. We’re still pretty heavily dependent on imported water from our master agency called the Metropolitan Water District of California, which is the largest wholesale purveyor in the state.
An important shift – rethinking the general ledger
Elsinore Valley Water serves its 160,000 customers with a lean staff of 165 employees, all of whom touch Infor ERP systems in some way. Elsinore Valley Water bought Lawson software in 2008. They got a lightning round introduction to Infor in 2012 when Lawson was acquired. Now, they are embarked on the CloudSuite move:
What’s exciting for us this year is that we’re part of the early adopter program with Infor for their CloudSuite Financials and Supply Management product, which is their next generation ERP.
Being an early adopter isn’t all handshakes and smiles. So what motivated the move? One reason: rethinking their general ledger. Ollerton:
We had an organizational goal of re-architecting our general ledger. It’s a big deal – especially for the public sector. Lawson’s been around forever. Even though it’s a very elegant software package, under the hood, it’s Cobol and 4GL and all that. It’s got technology challenges. As part of the Infor CloudSuite, they have introduced a really dynamic method of setting up your general ledger foundation. They call it Global Ledger Enterprise.
So is the “Global Ledger Enterprise” just a shiny new cloud name, or a functional breakthrough?
It’s enabled us to realize our goal of redesigning our general ledger and consolidating. In the public sector, we do fund-based accounting. We originally had 70 funds. We’ve been able to consolidate that down to eight, and move a lot of our funds into various “dimensions” – as they call them in the CloudSuite world. It’s enabled us to really simplify things. It’s going to help us with reporting, which is going to save us on staff time, and paper.
On cloud benefits, data security, and AWS
Moving from Lawson on-premises to Infor CloudSuite is two moves in one. Did they consider a move to the Lawson cloud?
To implement our general ledger code block when we wanted to, we would have had to re-implement the GL and Lawson. It would have been tough, because we have a fully-integrated system across finance, HR payroll, and procurement. It wasn’t an option for us.
Working with the Infor services team, Elsinore Valley Water embarked on their CloudSuite migration in March 2016. Their target go-live? July 1, 2017. The project has a few moving parts. For now, the HR and payroll will be integrated via a Lawson cloud instance and Infor CloudSuite.
Eventually, they will move to CloudSuite Talent Management, and – when it’s available – CloudSuite payroll (which is, to the best of our knowledge, 1-2 years from release). The project’s end goal: a 100 percent cloud-based Infor solution. Though it’s too early to look at business results, from a pure cost outlay, Ollerton envisions a break-even. Maintenance costs on CloudSuite increase, but the projected savings from having to patch and maintain the system internally offset that (note: Infor is partially subsidizing the project implementation as part of their early adopter agreement with Elsinore).
Given the data scrutiny the public sector receives, I wondered if Ollerton’s team had any hesitation about AWS, or cloud migrations in general. Turns out Elsinore’s employees already had experience with cloud moves, including the customer bill pay portal. Last year, they moved to Office 365, which affected all employees’ email and calendars. That sold employees on cloud:
All of our staff realized the benefits… [including the 24/7 access. We don’t have to deal with anything on-prem with Microsoft solutions anymore, which is great… That really got our feet wet with the cloud.
And as for data security, the biggest requirement is that all Elsinore Valley Water’s data remain in the 48 states, within U.S. boundaries. That goes for Infor’s ERP system as well – no international boundaries can be crossed, which is agreed-upon in Infor’s cloud SLA (service level agreement) with Elsinore.
The wrap – the cloud as an IT innovation philosophy
I wanted to know: is this move to the cloud about IT efficiency, shrinking the staff and reducing costs? Or is there a business agenda? Ollerton:
With the staff that deals with the ERP system from an administration standpoint, I want them to focus on innovation and automation and to get heavy into the business process. They already are now, but I want them to really help the end users, really work with them, and not have to worry about servers and backups and disaster recovery because that’s really all out-of-sight, out-of-mind at this point.
Ollerton was clear: this is not about headcount reduction. It’s about reallocating staff towards innovation:
We don’t envision any staff reduction as a result of this. We’re just going to have more time, because we have a relatively small staff. We have a total of eight people. They all do different things. We hope to let them focus more so on the business versus babysitting servers.
There is an efficiency play here though: saving time through avoiding IT administrivia. Ollerton has already seen that payoff from their Office 365 install. He expects the same here. The savings will include a faster and better user experience on the front-end:
CloudSuite is really going to impact IT as well as the power users, as we call them. It’s going to increase their efficiency. From requisition to payment is going to shrink, just because the nature of the software. Staff will hopefully be more efficient, as well as all of our accountants, our accounts receivable, and our billing folks. It’s just so much simpler and faster and has way less steps, less clicks, less jobs to run.
To get users on board, Ollerton has relied on that old staple: good old fashioned, direct communication:
We’ve talked a lot about it. They all understand my philosophy and why we’re doing this stuff. Some of my initial IT staff were a little nervous about our cloud plans: “Oh God, am I going to be out of a job?” [But I told them]: “You have plenty to do. You should be happy about this.” The power users, there’s no concern about head count going down. They’ve been very receptive to the new software, to their class of financials, because it’s very user-friendly and very intuitive.
We ended our talk with an open discussion about how Ollerton’s perceptions of Infor have changed. When Infor originally acquired Lawson, Ollerton’s team perceived Infor as a massive ERP holding company: “There was a few bumps when Infor took over. Infor, at that time, didn’t have the best reputation. They were just a company that gobbled up all these obscure products.” But through their CloudSuite partnership, that perception of Infor has shifted:
The CloudSuite is the end product of all this [older software]. How do we re-architect this legacy Cobol beast that we have thousands of clients on? It’s going to have to happen someday. They’ve really realized that… They’re doing a good job. They retained a lot of the Lawson folks that we worked with, which is good. We didn’t get to the point where we started looking elsewhere.
Ollerton said they found no functionality gaps in the CloudSuite Financials offering. That surprised me, given that Lawson’s financials are rich in public sector capabilities and CloudSuite is relatively new. But Ollerton says they’ve been able to address their functionality in standard configuration:
That’s been a lot of questions I’ve seen from a lot of Lawson users: “How do you do this?” I’m like, “It’s there; I’ve seen it; we’ve used it; they’ve thought about it.”
Granted, the project is still has a ways to go, and Ollerton hasn’t started the Supply Management side of CloudSuite yet. Best of all? Leaving Cobol customizations behind:
We were able to make it work for us. We didn’t have to customize it at all. A lot of places will actually customize Cobol and build their own modules, but we didn’t have to do any of that. We were able to run it essentially out of the box.
Sounds like a good start. I look forward to the go-live update.
Image credit - On-site photo of Ollerton by Jon Reed.Disclosure - Infor paid the bulk of my expenses to attend Inforum 2016. Infor is a diginomica premier partner.Read more on: Cloud ERP financials and supply chainDigital enterprise in the real worldFinancialsUse cases 