
First Round recently published a revealing email marketing use case, What Startups Can Learn from Watsi’s Wildly Successful Email Campaign. I know what you’re thinking: “Yeah, I don’t have time to read a long-form study of email nuances.” Maybe not – but what if it was packed with clues about delighting – and retaining – customers?
As I sliced and diced my way through the article, I saw plenty of insights with enterprise relevance. But I also saw a few danger areas where non-profit brand love might not translate. Watsi, you see, is a different kind of non-profit.  Billing itself simply as “a global funding platform for medical treatments,” Watsi is the first non-profit backed by Y Combinator. Watsi’s mission:  re-invent the non-profit model via Internet startup tactics.
Since the Y Combinator funding round in 2013, Watsi has been perfecting the art of brand engagement and turning loyalty into donations, with email playing a surprisingly central part. The Firstound piece goes through those email learnings, peeling back lessons for startups. This is a condensed/enterprisey take.
1. Don’t assume your audience has the same buying pattern. Customers take the next step in for their *diverse) reasons, not yours. Watsi’s Grace Garey, whose self-proclaimed job title is “Connecting people @Watsi,” got heaps of lessons after Watsi launched the Universal Fund – where users can donate on a pre-set monthly basis. Each month, they get an email update about the patient their money supported. As Garey said to First Round:
When we started thinking about how to make these efforts more sustainable, we had to get serious about segmenting our audience around their self-identities and how that feeds into their reasons for donating. Some people will donate after reading about Watsi once. Others need to go through the full cycle of giving and receiving a patient update. We made sure to market the Universal Fund differently to these different groups. We would change up the language and also our timing on outreach in particular.
2. Transparency of motivations makes email authentic (and readable). Enterprises are prone to sending one-size-fits-all announcements or “newsletters” that appear out of nowhere, with no connection to our preferences. Watsi finds ways of reminding their readers why they’re donating, and  why they’re reading. Garey:
During this campaign, it became really critical for us to overcommunicate to people where there money was going. We spent a lot of time engineering a new type of monthly email that Universal Fund members get that reminds them that they are donating on a monthly basis, even if they aren’t coming back to the site.
3. When rolling out new features, turn to your most engaged readers first; they may even lead you to superior content. Our most engaged subscribers are not always seen as the ideal focus group. After all, they may not be representative of the whole. We may also worry about overwhelming them, since they are already highly active. But Watsi discovered that their core readers appreciate the recognition. And the feedback they provide is indispensable:
We sent an email to the first few hundred people who had checked the box for recurring donations in the normal signup flow and basically asked them to describe in their own words what the concept of the Universal Fund meant to them. When we launched it in November of last year, we lifted many of the words they used verbatim to build the fund’s site and for our initial outreach. A lot of that language has also been repurposed to talk about the organization and service in general.
4. Be ready for feedback that surprises – and disrupts – your plans. When Garey’s team reached out to subscribers, they heard something they didn’t expect. Turns out, their subscribers don’t just see themselves as donors:
We didn’t expect that people really bought into a much broader vision for what Watsi was about — that they didn’t want to just help the person whose profile they were looking at, but underserved patients in general.
Later on, Garey made a sticky-note-worthy comment:
We wanted people to feel like, when they took action, they were buying into a much bigger vision of themselves and who they are.
5. When marketing to new communities, win over the power users first – they’ll help to tell the story and overcome issues. As Watsi expands, they are becoming a discussion topic on new platforms such as Hacker News. Garey found that connecting to power users on those communities paved the way for better community engagement:
We thought about all the communities where we might gain traction like Hacker News and we wanted to reach out to power users there so that there would already be people using it when the conversation popped up.
These moves paid off:
Even more encouraging than that, though, were the long comment threads of Watsi fans and users answering people’s questions and urging them to join. Existing users were quickly becoming the org’s best source of word-of-mouth marketing and customer service.
That’s a good stopping point. In part two, coming tomorrow, I’ll share a few more provocative Watsi tactics, and offer my critical review.
Image credit: Business man pointing the text: Reinvent Yourself © gustavofrazao – fotolia.com
Read more on: Analytics planning and data analysisCRM and customer experienceDigital and content marketingSocial 