
While the likes of Elon Musk continue their armageddon peddling around the rise of the robots, a leading UK politician has a markedly different stance, urging us to:
Embrace an android.
That’s the headline-grabber from Tom Watson, Deputy Leader of the main UK opposition Labour Party in his role as co-chair for the Future of Work Commission. The Commission has tapped into experts across the globe, including Nobel prize-winning economist Sir Christopher Pissarides, and Professors Michael Sandel and Michael Osborne from Harvard University and Oxford University.
Today the Commission releases its finished report on how the UK should deal with increased automation and the use of new technologies in the fields of machine-learning, Artificial Intelligence and robotics. Specifically it focuses on the impact of technological innovation and disruption on the nature of work in the future.
The report is remarkably upbeat and positive about the potential of this particular revolution, stating that while there are big challenges, there are also big opportunities:
The technological revolution is behind some of the most challenging social and economic trends which bear on work… These trends describe reality now for many people…falling real wages, increasing inequality and the growth of a vulnerable workforce. These are not the inevitable consequences of technological change, but of the failure of governments to face up to this responsibility.
New technology has vast potential to change the work and lives of all our citizens for the better. A sharper and more consistent focus on good work is the best way to generate and spread the benefits of technological innovation and build a genuinely inclusive economy. Now, more than ever, this is a moral, social and economic imperative.
At present, productivity is falling and the benefits of technological innovation are not fairly shared. We need bold, integrated and consistent policy action to grasp opportunities, buck trends, and avoid pitfalls. We need to shape the industries of the future and create good, fairly-paid work for our citizens. We can be optimistic about the future of work in Britain, but we must act now.
When considering the trends set in motion by new technologies, the Commission is alert to a potential new divide in the workforce:
Without policy intervention, the power of the high-skilled over the low-skilled will increase further. Technological change is likely to both raise the productivity of high-skill workers and increase competition for low-skill jobs which are not susceptible to automation.
But it takes a welcome step back from the cliche of robots stealing everyone’s jobs, concluding:
Mass technological unemployment is highly unlikely. There is no substantive evidence that Britain is heading towards widespread technological unemployment, exaggeration is unhelpful. We need a more nuanced debate about the impact and potential of automation – one that recognises that technological change is already having social and economic e ects. The main problem we face is not the number or availability of jobs but their productivity and quality.
For his part, Watson comes over as a techno-enthusiast:
Much has been written about the impact of technological change and the dystopian future we could all face as a result of the rise of the robots. It can sometimes feel like we are preparing for a world in which Artificial Intelligence, algorithms and automation, rather than human endeavour and hard work, will shape every aspect of our society and our economy. That sounds like a frightening prospect, but it needn’t be.
He paints a picture of a workforce where humans can be freed up from tedious jobs and able to pursue activities that can benefit society and the economy:
That is liberating. So I suppose what I’m really saying is: robots can set us free … A former Prime Minister once famously said ‘hug a hoodie’. Today, I’m asking you to embrace an android.
To support the positive vision for the future of work in an age of automation, the Commission makes a number of key recommendations, highlights of which include:
Prioritise ‘Good Work’

Create a Charter for Good Work that would identify national commitment to building a future of good work as a central objective of its social and macroeconomic policy, define the components of good work, and set out how those components should be protected.
Set up a Futures Unit at the heart of government, headed by a Chief Futures Officer.
Produce an avatar of the German government’s Work 4.0 strategy document.

Skills for the future

Create a specific AI curriculum for secondary schools, incorporating ethics training.
Add a ‘preparedness for work’ objective into the National Curriculum.
Establish a universal lifelong learning Future Skills account to enable individuals to learn, re-skill and develop new careers over a lifetime.

Promote innovation

Fund a higher dedicated technology R&D budget set at a fixed percentage of GDP.
Reform tax and business rates regimes to incentivise business to invest more in new technologies.
Adopt a more accommodating regulatory environment for experimentation with AI and related technologies on a trial basis.
 Set up an independent review of the application, adequacy and enforcement of competition law principles in innovation and digital markets.

New models, corporate governance and alternative ownership

Impose a new requirment on companies to ‘involve’ stakeholders, which must include workers, in order to encourage the application of technology to meet common goals.
Create a new private sector equality duty to ensure diverse representation on corporate boards of directors.
Stronger reporting requirements for companies, covering ownership, workforce contract types, pay, pay ratios, pay gaps, benefits and staff turnover.

Labour rights and standards

Pursuit of a single category of worker in terms of job protection, whether employee, agency worker or contractor.
A freestanding right not to be subject to significant decisions based solely on automated processing and a right to algorithmic fairness.
Set up a new representative body for entrepreneurs to challenge the strong voice that large tech firms have in government circles.

Ethics and the new technological revolution

Set up an independent, cross-disciplinary Standing Commission on Ethics and Technology to produce guidance on promoting equality, training, regulation, trials, best practice and algorithmic accountability.
Ethics training for anyone involved in the production process of machine learning tech.
New kite marks and standards for old and new business models, including online platforms, in order to promote better work practices.

My take
This is a very thorough and detailed report that is deserving of a lot of dedicated attention. I’ve only skimmed the surface here and I’d strongly recommend that anyone with an interest in the automated future should grab a large mug of coffee and take the time to peruse a lot of thought-provoking ideas. It’s a UK-produced report and there are aspects of it, particularly around trades union rights, that won’t play well in Trump’s MAGA worldview. But equally there’s a lot in there that has universal applicability around the world. You can access the full report here.
Image credit - TwitterRead more on: Digital government and public servicesFuture of workIoT robotics and AIMachine intelligence and AIRobotics

