
David Goulden – EMC
EMC’s David Goulden thinks the merger with Dell will create a great splash in a revitalised data center market. At what will probably be the last EMC World in Las Vegas as the Dell merger goes ahead David Goulden, CEO of EMC’s Information Infrastructure division, spoke to diginomica about how the combined company’s hopes a combination of the two organisation’s strengths will tap into a surge of demand for new generation data centers.
The affable Goulden, like most of the EMC staffers at the three day event, exuded optimism about the merger that’s expected to be a formality when it is put up to a shareholder vote later this year.
While critics of the match up see the two companies coming together as a marriage between the walking dead, Goulden is enthusiastic about the complimentary nature of the two companies’ product lines:
This is one of the nice things about this merger. We keep on saying there is little overlap and there is really not much overlap. From a technology point of view there is really only one small area where we overlap and even  there it is not as much as people think.
Core competencies
Part of the opportunities Goulden sees the merger is Dell’s strength in supply chain management and its strong channel presence opening the mid-market to the enterprise focused EMC.
The ability to bring the EMC product set into the mid-market where Dell is strong is a huge opportunity. We’re going to have a global enterprise segment that’s going to focus upon the enterprise class customers and a global commercial segment that’s going to focus on the direct to marketplace. That enterprise segment will be largely based on the current EMC
Asked how EMC’s senior management are managing the transition, Goulden flagged the importance of open communications.
Change creates uncertainty. One thing I’ve learned from this is you cannot over-communicate and that’s true internally and it’s true with our customers. We’ve put an incredible amount of effort in communications so our teams are engaged to go and speak to their customers.
Favorable reactions
The important thing for the companies is how customers are reacting to the changes:
In terms of customer reaction, it’s been neutral to favorable. There hasn’t been much negative.
A lot of customers are excited as they see a couple of big trends. They see the reconvergence of storage and servers. For the last twenty years the storage industry has existed in its own ecosystem around Storage Attached Networks and Network Attached Storage and there’s almost a firewall between that and the servers. With converged and hyper converged, customers see those technologies coming back together.
They see the industrial rationale for consolidation. I haven’t met a customer yet who says they want to deal with more suppliers. They want fewer, more strategic partners. They see us as seeing coming to them with that mindset.
Sources of growth
While Goulden looks to the future, the current performance of his division has been far from stellar with last years revenues falling 4% – flat on a ‘constant currency basis’ – and when asked about where he sees revenue growth coming from he flagged EMC’s strength in newer data centre technologies.
We did better than the industry as the industry is transitioning a lot. From your more traditional technologies to new technologies. The big drivers are when you look at the market share of the new technologies we have a higher marketshare in all of the new elements of the storage markets.
If you look at the storage market in 2015, about half of it was traditional disk based or hybrid storage systems – roughly sixty percent – our marketshare there is in the low thirties. The rest of it is either in all flash, in converged, hyperconverged, in purpose built appliances and in scaled out file object systems, our market share in those segments is a minimum of forty percent and in some cases higher than sixty percent.
A tale of two worlds
The storage industry is a tale of two worlds right now. If you’re living in the traditional segment the market looks pretty tough to you. If you’re a startup in one of theses new segment it looks like there is an infinite upside. We have the ability to play across all these fields but we uniquely have invested in all these new technologies where our marketshare is higher and therefore as the market moves our way… this will live our growth rates.
Goulden also flags how enterprises are refining their cloud policies as they now understand the public cloud economics.
There’s a lot of cloudwashing at the moment. It turns out though the cloud is an interesting place to squat, but it’s an expensive place to live.
At the end of what will probably be the last EMC World, Goulden sees one more big party once the deal is finalized.
You will see us have some fun and make some noise around the day we actually close. There will be a nice splash in the industry and we’ll do some nice things for our employees, our customers and our partners to mark the beginning of a new era.
My Take
Goulden makes a good case for why the Dell Technologies merger makes sense for EMC and it’s striking how upbeat the company’s staffers are about the changes which in turn validates his point about the communications.
The real test though is going to be in the marketplace where both Dell and EMC are often portrayed as yesterday’s businesses. Anecdotally it appears larger enterprises have learned that public cloud providers aren’t necessarily cheaper than on-premise data centres but it seems there’s little hard evidence of how big the market for modernising in-house infrastructure will be. At least in the short term.
Even if it turns out that market is substantial, there’s no guarantee the EMC II division of the merged Dell Technologies will be competitive against newer upstarts in the sector. Whether Goulden and his team can meet that challenge is something we can look forward to seeing along with the splash he promises to mark the company’s new era.
Image credit - images via recode.netDisclosure - EMC covered most of the author's travel expenses for attending EMC World. Read more on: Cloud platforms - infrastructure and architectureInfrastructure 