
EMC World
EMC is one of the blue bloods of enterprise IT, making its name by selling gold plated hardware and concierge level service and support to the largest of enterprises. Like IBM with mainframes and Cisco for networking, no CIO ever got fired for buying EMC storage systems.
The company still has the largest, most diverse product line in the storage business and has gradually added server hardware under the auspices of the VCE consortium, which it fully absorbed in buying out Cisco’s stake and has rebranded the converged infrastructure business.
Yet like other old-line IT suppliers, EMC faces the growing threat of public cloud services, primarily from AWS and Microsoft Azure, each of which is pulling in revenue at an annualized rate of about $10 billion. EMC also faces complex organizational and product rationalization challenges arising from Dell’s acquisition. EMC’s strategy to address its shifting business environment were the centerpiece of EMC World this week.
Marketing is about crafting a narrative whose denouement puts your products and technology in the most favorable light. Vendor events like EMC World are the ultimate form of marketing where the sponsor controls the entire agenda, wields elaborate stagecraft and softens a sometimes skeptical audience up with perks, praise and attention.
By presenting a well-planned sequence of often extravagant presentations that hew to a world view shaped by its product legacy, most vocal and profligate customers and internal groupthink, the vendor’s logic and conclusions seem incontrovertible. Few vendors do this better than EMC. Its vision of a hybrid (mostly private) cloud future stocked with elegant, well-engineered, supremely reliable hardware (and supporting software) that of course, is also quite expensive epitomized the show’s theme of ‘modernize.’ But does it work? Not for this analyst and here’s why.
Making clouds safe for enterprise IT without upending the organization
It’s a message that undoubtedly resonates with EMC’s traditional customer base of conservative, career-protecting IT executives, many of whom see AWS and its ilk as the end of IT as they’ve known it and are receptive to a message that guarantees the primacy of internal systems under their control.
They’re right to feel threatened, however the vision may be more dream than realistic strategy. As Michael Dell himself said during a Q&A session with analysts and the media,
Technology doesn’t care whether you’re ready for it or not,
and those that position the cloud as this generation’s private mainframe, keeping existing IT infrastructure and operating models, are badly mistaken.
The rise of cloud services as a popular deployment option has catalyzed dramatically different ways of designing and implementing applications using on-demand microservices, not heavy, purpose-built application servers.
EMC acknowledges that cloud-native apps, think of the backends for any popular online and mobile service, are the future, but knows that its customers will be primarily running legacy, client-server systems using big, monolithic databases and storage arrays for many, many years.
Thus, many of the products featured at EMC World, things like big consolidated all flash arrays (new VMAX and DSSD), a cloud archive service for on-site storage, new data management software and growth in its converged infrastructure, (tightly integrated rack scale systems that have more in common with mainframes that cloud infrastructure), were targeted to this legacy business and customer.
This focus is understandable since two-thirds of EMC’s business comes from storage products, the vast majority of that undoubtedly big iron like the VMAX and VNX and large deployments of Isilon and XtremeIO, all targeted at traditional, on-premise workloads, however it can blind both EMC and its customers to more disruptive alternatives.
Admittedly, EMC has broadened both its storage and converged server portfolios to include scale-out building blocks tailored for cloud-like distributed workloads. With its effective subsidiary VMware, EMC has also built a broad software portfolio that has evolved from virtual servers into a proprietary cloud stack for enterprises unwilling to embrace shared public clouds.
The impressive cloud orchestration demonstrations during the EMC keynotes were all based on a VMware substrate and while it includes public cloud integration and workload deployment, these are afterthoughts. The ‘cloud’ foundation is VMware software running on EMC hardware all tightly integrated into a nice management interface and support experience. If not a walled garden, it’s certainly a gated community that both controls and deters the use of public clouds.
Yet EMC, and more importantly, its customers can’t ignore the exploding popularity of AWS and more importantly Azure, since Microsoft preaches the same hybrid cloud message, but backs it up with a rich, growing public cloud service that in Azure Stack will largely also be available as a seamlessly integrated private instantiation.
Azure is an opportunity that I believe the post-Dell EMC will finally exploit since Azure Stack, which I discussed here and here, is definitely not a DIY project and needs a well-integrated and tested hardware platform. Given Dell’s historical relationship with Microsoft, including building custom systems for Azure and other hyperscale customers, it’s inconceivable that Azure won’t become a preferred cloud platform for Dell-EMC, perhaps to VMware’s detriment.
Virtustream: EMC’s under-utilized cloud platform
EMC owns an innovative public cloud platform in Virtustream, still led by a founder, Rodney Rogers that is utterly cloud savvy. Paradoxically, the company positions Virtustream as a way to extend traditional, business critical database and ERP systems to a public cloud, not as a platform for building cloud-native services. It has for example had success moving SAP workloads to a cloud environment.
Virtustream creates some cognitive dissonance for EMC. Its unique technology for granularly carving up cloud resources and optimally placing and packing workloads on the available resource pool to guarantee performance (including IOPS) and maximize efficiency should be strategic for the future Dell-EMC conglomerate. Yet by focusing Virtustream solely on high-end applications and as a public cloud alternative in a private-infrastructure-first world EMC isn’t exploiting its full value.
Ironically, some of Virtustream’s customers don’t see the service in the way EMC intends.
During a press briefing, the CIO of one of its earliest customers, Florida Crystals, described how it used Virtustream to entirely eliminate the company’s IT infrastructure, including running mission critical SAP systems on the Virtustream cloud. CIO, Don Whittington wore his lack of data center ownership as a badge of honor, claiming that the company saves 20-30% by being entirely in the cloud.
If public cloud first and always works so well for this multi-national company, I’m left wondering what’s wrong with all those EMC customers buying million dollar systems? Is it inertia, ignorance, incredible IT efficiency or a such a unique set of requirements that no cloud would suffice? (Editor’s note: the same could be said of SAP’s customers.)
EMC claims that private cloud infrastructure has a big cost advantage over AWS, especially for predictable workloads with much storage, however sophisticated IT organizations like GE, Florida Crystals and Time Inc. are capable of doing the math and have come to a very different conclusion.
Given that hyperscale clouds are built with thousands of relatively cheap, commodity building blocks, not gold-plated hardware like EMC’s, the company had better hope that more organizations don’t follow suit. Or….Dell could step in with its ‘pizza box’ servers and save EMC’s blushes.
My Take
The dichotomy between private infrastructure and public clouds, along with a corresponding schism between traditional enterprise application architectures and cloud-native designs was on full display this week at EMC World as the company did its best to paint a comprehensive, all-inclusive strategy that straddles both the old and new worlds of IT.
EMC’s vision is to be the system integrator for internal, cloud-like infrastructure that is only weakly coupled to public cloud services. Its overemphasis on large, internal system deployments, essentially keeping the existing IT operational model, but wrapping it in easily consumed and deployed cloud-like services is a mistake.
By largely ignoring public cloud services, or expecting companies will just layer Cloud Foundry on an IaaS of choice, EMC doesn’t yet have a credible hybrid cloud message. In Azure/Azure Stack, Microsoft actually has a seamless hybrid software architecture, but one that needs a robust, scalable, pre-integrated hardware foundation. Dell-EMC should provide that substrate since it ignores Microsoft and Azure at its peril.
Image credit - via EMC World websiteDisclosure - EMC covered most of the author's travel coasts for attending EMC World. SAP is a premier partner at time of writing. Read more on: InfrastructureIT service management 