
Employees worldwide are increasingly fed up with their experience of work and need to be given the right tools. That’s one of the conclusions of a rather mixed report card on employee engagement from Aon Hewitt’s annual global survey.
A 5% increase in employee engagement creates a 3% rise in revenue growth the following year, according to Aon Hewitt. Not surprising then, that the world’s best performing organizations have fully bought into the idea that engagement and the good leadership that turbo-charges engagement aren’t just nice to have, but crucial for business success.
The report reveals that engagement levels actually rose to 62% in 2014, a 1% increase over 2013, although the world’s 20 largest economies displayed no growth.
Source: Aon Hewitt
But this slight improvement in engagement levels was tempered by a marked drop of 28% in employee satisfaction with their work experience between 2013 and 2014.
The biggest problems affecting their work satisfaction were identified as a lack of tools and resources, plus a lack of people programs (down 7% on the previous year’s figures). There was also a fall in the numbers of employees who felt valued by their employer (-7%). It was worrying too that career opportunities – acknowledged as a top engagement driver – dropped 3%.
Another key on-going frustration was that more than half the employees (54%) didn’t think their pay matched their contribution to the workplace.
There’s a “disconnect”, notes the report, between profit and productivity on one hand and wages on the other. Ultimately, business strategy and talent strategy are mismatched, affecting engagement.
Despite engagement hogging the limelight over the last few years, many organizations still need to “fix the basics”, according to Jenny Merry, engagement practice leader for Aon Hewitt UK. That means workers need to feel safe, with the right tools and the right resources they require to get the job done. Only with those basic requirements in place will organizations be able to begin to reap the rewards of better performance and growth.
Engagement is not solely an HR issue – successful firms take a more holistic approach. Aon Hewitt identifies for groups of people critical to creating a culture of engagement – HR, people managers, senior leadership and the individual employees – but it is the leaders that are the lynchpin to success. The report makes this clear:
Engaging leaders who engage others are not just a nice to have – they are the key ingredient to creating a culture of engagement that sustains business results in an ever-changing and complex global environment.
In other words, good leaders drive better financial performance.
Source: Aon Hewitt
There are differences between the regions. Latin America has the highest levels of engagement at 71%, North America has made a small improvement of 1% to 66% while Europe brings up the rear with 57% – the only area to show no improvement at all. In fact, it is poor performance in Europe that drags down the average results for work satisfaction levels too .
The findings in the Trends in Global Employee Engagement study are pulled from nine million plus employees in 1,000 companies and 164 countries.
My take
I’m not a big fan of the word engagement, but it is a concept that makes perfect business sense for the simple reason that engaged staff are more productive staff. Simple. This report is by no means saying that something is terribly wrong in the house of engagement, but there is clearly room for some improvement.
But it’s a confusing picture. Engagement levels have actually grown very slightly, albeit this not the case in Europe, where levels have stagnated. And workers seem to appreciate their leaders more – and they are biggest factor in driving home engagement into all corners of the organization. All good news.
But the list of things that had got worse or stayed the same outstretches the things that improved. And the results in Europe are markedly more negative than other global regions.
Overall, engagement is doing okay, but could do better. And that’s a major opportunity for companies like Workday, Oracle, SAP et al.
Disclosure – at time of writing, Oracle, SAP and Workday are premier partners of diginomica.

Read more on: HCM and the digital future of workTalent management 