
Established enterprises face a long journey to transform their old command-and-control structures into the cross-connected, agile business flows they need to prosper in today’s digital world. For many, the first step towards replumbing those processes is to inject more flexibility into how their IT systems are connected together.
That was certainly the experience at the French business market division of global giant Engie, which has grown from its origins as France’s former state monopoly natural gas provider GDF to become the world’s third largest energy group. At the end of an eight-month project to transfer integration from a centralized IT system to the business division’s own implementation based on Dell Boomi, there was a palpable sense of relief, says Alain Abenhaim, Cyber Information Security Officer and Systems Architect at Engie E&C:
When we put Boomi in place, we took control of our system. We don’t have to have interactions with other departments that introduce some delays. We have Boomi on our own operations and we have trained our teams to maintain it.
Previously, integration flows between different systems, such as billing, pricing and CRM, had been maintained by Engie Group’s central IT function. That meant Abenhaim and his colleagues at Engie E&C, which markets gas and electricity to French business customers, had to submit requests for any changes and then face a long wait to find out what came back:
That was a very heavy process, very expensive. Each time you asked for a change, it was very complicated.
Integration is always a bottleneck
The Boomi implementation formed part of a larger eighteen-month program to replace and rebuild around two-thirds of the division’s IT systems. Every integration was built or recreated in Boomi, not only the connections to new components such as Salesforce CRM, but also those to existing legacy systems such as the mainframe-based customer database and SAP invoicing system, and to functions operated by other divisions or external partners such as websites, printing and so on.
Having control of the integration wasn’t just a matter of reducing costs — although that has been a major benefit — it also means the division now has a clearer view of business flows and can react or make changes more easily. Integration is always a bottleneck, says Abenhaim, but by choosing a platform that is very visual, easy to learn and includes a large library of pre-built templates and connectors, it’s been possible to speed things up:
Even with Boomi it’s still a bottleneck — you have to combine many applications in an integration, there are five to six applications in a process, and you have to take the elements from each and create an integration contract. The tools make this easier and that’s what Boomi gives us.
The implementation involved the creation of 250 processes connecting 20 applications and was completed by a team of 3 people, with help from Boomi consultants and a third-party integrator, in less than eight months. Because Boomi is a cloud-based system, work was able to start on the live platform within two weeks of signing the contract. More than a hundred new processes have been added since the initial 250 were completed. The system now carries out up to 75,000 workflows every day and processes around two million documents.
Completing Engie’s transformation
What’s particularly valuable for the business is having a single view of an entire process, rather than having to design each step separately as the old system required. This means process owners can visualize what they’re designing and ensure that it’s going to meet their needs, says Abenhaim:
We can now sit with the application managers in front of the process and it’s really simple to explain and to say, ‘Is that what you really want? Do you want me to make this change?’ — and they can see. It’s better than exchanging documents with hundreds of fields that are hard to read.
Monitoring tools also give users the ability to get reports on processes as they are running, so that they can find out what’s happened and how it’s performed. This kind of feedback helps the business provide a more responsive service to its customers and react faster to changing market conditions. This is important in completing the digital transformation from Engie’s origins as a state monopoly. That heritage means that agility is not part of the organization’s DNA, says Abenhaim. The business has to discover a new entrepreneurial spirit:
We went from a monopoly in gas to a company that now has competitors and has to go into different markets and compete for business.
When you go from a monopoly, you can only lose your customers. So you have to replace your customers from other markets.
That means being ready to add new applications and processes as new market opportunities emerge, he adds:
Our market is always evolving. There are new opportunities, on solar energy, green energy, battery storage — many new markets are appearing every month and for these we have to build new applications and processes, new IT systems we can put in place quickly.
What Boomi brings to this use case is that we are focused with the platform and we know that we can do it. A few years ago, we could not imagine doing it. We could not know how the application would integrate.
Having a better overview of the integration landscape enables the business to take on more contracts and process different types of sale because it reduces the risk in the IT system, Abenhaim explains:
The risk previously was that we didn’t have a global view of the processes so it was often very complicated. We took control of all this.
Also the critical processes are being mapped better — we can feel more confident in the system.
My take
Many organizations attempting some form of digital transformation find themselves in the same situation as this team at Engie. The old IT landscape concentrated everything at the center, under the control of the technology experts who were needed to run these complex systems.
A modern IT landscape emphasizes business agility, which means the business owners need more visibility into what’s going on, the flexibility to make changes, and the ability to react quickly to make course corrections. The first step towards enabling this is to bring integration out from the center to a place where it can support that visibility, flexibility and responsiveness. Engie E&C shows how that can be done.
Image credit - via engieDisclosure - Salesforce is a diginomica premier partner at time of writingRead more on: Digital transformation - frictionless enterpriseInfrastructureIT service management 