
Diginomica picks – my top four stories on diginomica this week

KFC and Pizza Hut get “REDdy” for digital – Stuart greases up the omni-channel with analysis of two fatty storied franchises looking for RED (which stands for relevant, easy, and digestable, err, I mean, distinctive). For KFC, it’s about pickup and delivery (Finger-lickin’ good digital transformation as KFC aims to be in the RED). Pizza Hut wants to free customers up from having to sit down for a boilerplate experience slice of pie (Pizza Hut looks to digital delivery to shake off legacy dine-in brand). Hey, if you’ve got to cannibalize yourself, at least it’s (mostly) edible.

AI’s impact on hiring – and content management – Two different angles on AI impact. As Barb says, AI’s impact on CMS is greater than you’d think: How artificial intelligence is changing web content management. Meantime, I confronted my AI skepticism in Is AI an asset to hiring, or will it bring us down a sinkhole of algorithmic bias?
Daimler drives new HR insights with graph database technology – Use case maestro Jess revs up: why a graph database? “The neat row-and-column format of a relational database struggles to encompass the complex web of interconnections that exist in a workforce.” And that’s relational database disruption in a nutshell, folks.

Vendor analysis, diginomica style. Here’s my three top choices from our vendor coverage:

AWS broadens machine learning portfolio at re:Invent with services for both novices and experts – Kurt’s got a bit more to say from AWS, this time on the AI side: “The new AWS application services provide similar benefits to enterprise developers that simply want to analyze data and solve a problem, not become AI experts.”
ThoughtSpot users advice on analytics – ‘Jump in, make mistakes, keep talking’ – Martin shares frank customer views via ThoughtSpot: “In my company the data engineering team was tasked with managing the job, and to begin with they didn’t bring in the other stakeholders. This was probably a mistake.“
Want a better project? Get a better partner. How Cintas and SAP partner NIMBL are changing – A story from yours truly, by way of the SAP partner business forum in NYC. Sitting down with a customer and partner together is a win – learning how they push each other to stay on the edge was all too rare.

Jon’s grab bag – Fed up with the indignities and (dis)service of big banks? Then you’ll dig Den’s As HSBC, NatWest and RBS turn back small business accounts, challenger banks pick up, which delves into the rise of (mostly) mobile-only challenger banks: “The challenger banks are not wallet fracking at every turn. Instead, they are using their low-cost technology base to ensure that the cost of providing services is incredibly low, if not free.”
And, in Facing up to the need for regulation – Microsoft recognises Big Brother potential, Jerry analyzes the latest from arguably the most ethically diligent of the big tech companies. It’s almost enough to forgive Microsoft for the farcical OS “progress” known as Windows 10. As if we don’t have enough wake-up calls, check Jerry’s: 

Orwell missed the mark by only 40 years. Facial recognition technology, AI, and virtually unlimited computing power makes his nightmare vision of Big Brother not only possible but probably inevitable. That has thoughtful academics, policy and technology leaders concerned.
Yep, it’s on us to keep this in check, but – yikes.
Best of the rest
 Lead story – The User Experience Irony – by Jeff Lazarto 
myPOV: The UpperEdge team continues a strong 2018 blogging year. Lazarto cuts right to the chase:
Everyone is talking about the move to digital to create a compelling user experience as today’s customer is demanding a new level of interaction and engagement with whom they do business. Most of this narrative is being driven by software vendors.
Ironical:
The irony in all of this is that software vendors have not changed the user experience they provide to their own customers. Vendors like Oracle, SAP, Microsoft, Salesforce, and Workday for example, still deploy the same sales tactics and old licensing model rules when selling to their customers, even when it comes to cloud.
Call it UX or CX, doesn’t matter – contractual, sales, and consumption “experiences” – especially bad ones – relegates a spiffy UI to an afterthought. Now, I do think more vendors are figuring this out. It’s not completely fair to paint a broad brush across all the vendors Lazarto listed, when sales and licensing experiences can vary by product, pricing plan or even region. But UpperEdge does devote a great deal of blog time to breaking out the licensing and sales issues for each vendor Lazarto listed.
I find it refreshing to see SaaS vendors listed. Almost all enterprise software vendors, on-premise, purely SaaS, or any hosted/private cloud/multi-cloud/hyper-cloud/uni-cloud/turbo-cloud variations, have a lot of work to do on UX/CX. Claiming that these issues are beyond the scope of a narrow definition of UX is a self-serving misdirection.
A subscription model isn’t a legacy cure-all, nor is it necessarily the end state for consumption (see: serverless). This isn’t about demonizing vendors. It’s about opening up a conversation about what needs to happen next. I hope more vendors embrace that conversation in 2019.
Honorable mention

Clorox Successfully Implements a Program for Value Chain Segmentation – Lora Cecere with a terrific, unbleached supply chain use case (sorry, couldn’t resist).
Misinformation bots are smarter than we thought – Axios doesn’t mind depressing us about the (lack of) public discourse a little bit more: “Most Americans say they can’t distinguish bots from humans on social media, according to a recent Pew Research Center survey.” (wonder how many bots took the survey?)
Three Things to Take Away From re:Invent 2018 – RedMonk’s Stephen O’Grady pulls out the high points from a news-heavy press-release-heavy show.
Using Machine Learning To Find Employees Who Can Scale With Your Business – Louis Columbus parses data on the AI-hiring topic: “Artificial Intelligence (AI) and machine learning are proving adept at discovering candidates’ innate capabilities to unlearn, learn and reinvent themselves throughout their careers.” Interesting – I hope to hear from customers on this one in 2019.
Things that Aren’t Working in Deep Learning – Hold up – you say some things aren’t working in AI yet?

Whiffs
Resisting only-in-Florida jokes so as not to ruffle the feathers of Florida tourism director noted analyst Vinnie Mirchandani: Florida Man Stole Sneakers After Job Interview at Kohl’s: Police.
Den’s got a diginomica Breaking Bad, or Breaking Brown candidate here:

Definitely a @diginomica Breaking Bad candidate.  https://t.co/67JxShrEQw
— ⒹⒺⓃ•Ⓗ ㋡ (@dahowlett) December 12, 2018

Wondering if this loss will impact SAP’s next earnings report? (Yep, that’s “SAP customers product 79 percent of the world’s chocolate” snark.)
Oh, and Ericsson sucks (Ericsson software problem has been causing widespread cell phone outages). So does Google Plus, though not for much longer (Google will shut down Google+ four months early after second data leak). Just about Old Yeller time.
Husky sucks too, actually, they spill.

Husky 'deeply sorry' for oil spill last month off Newfoundland | CBC News https://t.co/aCaSK2r8C7
"The incident also raised questions about why Husky would have tried to restart production in bad weather " – ya think? Sluggish apology award contender.
— Jon Reed (@jonerp) December 11, 2018

Lest you think I am cynically throwing barbs at everyone but myself, I had a big ol’ whiff of my own this week, when I had the idiotic carelessness good sense to introduce a typo into my final draft of the Want a better project? piece. Den flagged it, but before I fixed it, I grabbed this screen shot:

 
 
Hey, sometimes you have to just work with your Adidas a little bit. Then you can advocate your retail issues to SAP. Yeah, I try to suck less every day, but I don’t always succeed. The bright side is tomorrow, always looming thank goodness. See you next time.
If you find an #ensw piece that qualifies for hits and misses – in a good or bad way – let me know in the comments as Clive (almost) always does.
Most Enterprise hits and misses articles are selected from my curated @jonerpnewsfeed. ‘myPOV’ is borrowed with reluctant permission from the ubiquitous Ray Wang.
Image credit - Cheerful Chubby Man © RA Studio, Happy Children © Anna Omelchenko, Waiter Suggesting Bottle © Minerva Studiom, Overworked Businessman © Bloomua, Snowboarder Crashing © dismagwi - Fotolia.com - all from Fotolia.com.Disclosure - SAP, Oracle, Workday and Salesforce are diginomica premier partners as of this writing.Read more on: HCM and the digital future of workHits and missesRetail e-commerce and the omni-channelUser experience 