
diginomica hit: Innovator’s dilemma: Coca-Cola is using its existing assets to co-create start-ups by Derek DuPreez
quotage: “One example of this is Wonolo. Coca-Cola is part-owner in the start-up, which solves its real-time stocking problems. For example, if a customer sees that he or she has taken the last of a can of drink from the shelf of a local store, he or she can alert Wonolo and the stock can be refilled within an hour. This is something that Coca-Cola would love to do, but doesn’t have the agility.”
myPOV: At Adobe’s Design Advantage event, Derek soaked in a presentation from Coca-Cola’s VP of Innovation, David Butler. The talk provoked thinking about how big companies with legacy processes can self-disrupt before they smack into the dreaded innovator’s dilemma.
In this case, it was all about seeding startups that are eager to gnaw at/re-invent aspects of Coca-Cola’s operations. Acquiring startups sounds like a way to inject fresh talent, but what if they are quickly swallowed up by sluggish processes? The co-creation model might offer a fresh way forward, another way of jolting the inertia.
diginomica seven: my completely subjective top seven stories on diginomica this week

Managing customer journeys and winning at digital commerce – If you’re not tracking our (somewhat) new contributor Barb Mosher Zinck, you’ll want to be checking her field-savvy takes on digital marketing and beyond. This week Barb served up a two-fer-one, starting with Manage customer journeys, not customer lifecycles. Then she posted Digital commerce is mobile and content-driven, a reality check for those (spammy) vendors who don’t grasp that e-commerce and digital commerce are not the same.
Soul-sucking performance management and automation for the people – Janine continues her fruitful forays into performance management with Performance management – the ”soul-sucking monster” of HR. The title is dire but the post is kinda feel-good, arguing that performance management shouldn’t be scrapped, but re-invented. Meanwhile, Phil scores most-intruiging-title with Automation, self-service, analytics – it works for cows, why not HR? (hey Phil – I didn’t know analytics worked for cows… fighting the urge to say I’m udderly thrown by this).
OpenStack delivers more flexibility for Lithium – Maxwell Cooter looks at how Lithium’s OpenStack forays have moved from developer sandboxes to business-critical.
A 5-piece framework to modernize IT and invest in your core – Phil revisits some important thinking from French office automation visionary Louis Naugès.
Riffing on a riff on sales forecasting – We like to riff at diginomica. Sometimes we riff on other people’s riffs. Worst case: we flog the flogged. Best case: we advance the conversation. Den flogs advances Vijay Vijaysankar’s riff on sales forecasting in Sales forecasting and effectiveness – slotting in the role of the CFO. Key point: The CFO can make weight in the sales forecasting game, but we need to do a much better job of documenting how that’s done – starting now.

Vendor analysis, diginomica style – Stuart attended the UK and Ireland SAP User Group (UKISUG) sessions in Birmingham last week, and came back with two crackling missives. This event is always timed with the release of a new UKISUG user survey. Stuart assessed the findings in Over-hyped and under-led – SAP users rebel over digital transformation. Then he looked at the S/4HANA implications in SAP users want to move to S/4HANA at their own pace – and not at any price.
The bad news speaks to the issues of digital overhype and S/4HANA migration questions; the good news is SAP’s users are, in the main, looking to partner with SAP on what’s next: they just want a more practical and business-focused conversation. That’s a message we’re going to hear a lot from enterprises in 2016: dear vendors, please put the brakes on the digital hype machine please. Speaking of which, Den examines an SAP HANA case study that points a way forward: How should SAP position HANA – Newcastle University shows how it’s done.
Elsewhere in vendorland, HP’s final single financial report adds up to double trouble, reports Stuart, who drops the “We’re going out with a whimper” line. Ouch! All change at Splunk, which enters new era with CEO shift, Finally, Martin bravely grapples with the fantasy ambition of human-centric IT in Fujitsu Forum – targeting what makes human-centricity tick,

Jon’s grab bag –  Phil got the IoT hype extinguisher ready in Seven factors that will hamper enterprise IoT adoption, Bandwidth constraints, insecure devices, privacy concerns – check. Derek’s latest on the elusive ethical workplace:  Zuckerberg’s paternity leave is a very good thing – but is it a kick in the teeth for women? I don’t know about a kick in the teeth, but Zuckerberg’s welcome openness might not change much.

Finally, if you fancy some navel gazing peeps inside our sausage factory, Den shares why The sad demise of Twitter counts means tough decisions for us (Twitter may get in the whiffs section for this shortly, we’ll see) Also, some diginomica makeovers are coming, many of them motivated by reader input. Den’s got updates in Changes to commenting, interim steps, 
Best of the rest
On Hadoop and the customer-centric supply chain – Lora Cecere had a good week, with two effortful supply chain posts to digest, starting with Seven Thoughts to Build a Customer-Centric Supply Chain Organization. We’re gonna have to do something about the over-use of the word centric/centricity, but the gist of Cecere’s post still stands: we’re not as far along in this journey as software companies might have us believe.
On their use of evaluative scorecards, Cecere says: “Despite two decades of retail scorecard sharing, we have only improved on-time delivery and shipment conformance. Companies still have a long way to go in resolving billing/deductions, providing excitement in assortment, and reducing costs.” Cecere takes a different tack in Three Reasons Why I Love Hadoop, and You Should Too!, When you say “big data is rubbish,” you had me at hello. Agreed: the velocity and variety of data are the most important factors if you want to talk about business value. Though to be fair that’s ultimately part of how most define big data. Buzzword semantics…
From data proliferation to “insight generation” – If I were in the tech predictions biz, I’d go out on a not-very-bold limb and say 2016 will be the year of prove-it-to-me analytics. Information – fine, kinda worthless. Insights my business can use – gobs better. The latest proof point? This post by Evangelos Simoudis, Exploring the Process of Insight Generation. This slots into Simoudis’ “insight as a service” meme he is diligently pursuing. What does that mean? Well, it turns out we use the term “insight” way too sloppily. It’s gotta be actionable, measurable, and reproducable, to pick three of Simoudis’ seven characteristics. Then he walks us through a sample “insight generation” process, before making the case for cloud-based insight as a service. Small problem: IaaS is kind of taken, so we’ll have to come up with something else aaSy. But I like where this is headed. We have third more days in 2015 to get this sorted and prepped for the 2016 trend alerts.
Radical Candor — The Surprising Secret to Being a Good Boss – OK, I was skeptical about this “radical candor” assertion, but then I read: “If you can’t offer radical candor, the second best thing you can do is be an asshole.” Yeah, you don’t read that every day. The message here ISN’T “be an asshole” – not exactly. But if you can’t challenge in a thoughtful way, you better challenge somehow: “When you challenge directly without caring personally, you fall into the quadrant that Scott calls obnoxious aggression. Which is bad, but better than not challenging directly.” Finally, a management argument worth having.
Honorable mention
Dell-EMC Deal Facing Issues On Multiple Fronts – Not so fast, tech pundits… VMWare is one sticky wicket eh?
The Fascinating Implications for Autonomous Vehicles – Some provocative questions for an industry that is changing awful fast.
6 IT Transformation Moves For A Successful Digital Transformation – Not quite “been there, done that” but “been there, doing that” is good enough for 2015.
5 ways user experience can be a beautiful thing for the enterprise – A decent summary post with links to two even better pieces…
How I Learned To Tune Out The DevOps Buzz – If you’re looking for an anti-devops post, this ain’t it.
Blind Runner Uses IBM Cloud To ‘See’ Mental Map Of The World – Now that’s what I call a nifty use case. Funny how when you do something kickass, press coverage gets a whole lot easier eh?
Whiffs
Pundits, I mean “CX ninjas” have tried to link innovation to better customer experiences. But the airline industry exposes all that bogus happy talk. Airlines are much more preoccupied with filling more sardine cans than doing an Uber make-our-lives-better kind of thing. Proof? An algo that boards planes faster by separating us from our family and friends.
Innovation
Then there’s Airbus’ latest in a series of airplane-centric (as opposed to human-centric) patented “innovations,” on the heels of their wacky standing cabins and “stacked passengers” ideas (actually the standing cabin was courtesy the visionaries at Ryan Air). Airbus’ latest? The “cabin module” that you board before the plane even arrives. Then you swap it out. Dunno about you, but there is no way I will EVER sit like an idiot in a faux cabin in the terminal waiting to be swapped into my plane based upon its hypothetical arrival. Move ’em in, move ’em out. If that counts for innovation sign me up for horseback riding…
So I mentioned Den’s piece about how Twitter has spanked a bunch of web sites like ours by withholding needed social sharing stats. These are the perils of free services – after many reamings by many vendors, we all get that. But I remain baffled by how few companies try monetizing services before shutting them down.
Maybe that’s where this one is headed. But if you do a google search on “Twitter closed APIs” you’ll see Twitter has been raising ire by gradually closing up their ecosystem since 2012. I still derive (modest) value from Twitter, but I don’t root for them anymore. It doesn’t help their communications are as bone deaf as they come (“We have removed the tweet count endpoint“) – all righty then, and fuck thank you very much…
The multiplicity
Oh well, at least I don’t feel used – you were never nice to begin with. Twitter is an endless buffet without financial direction or any semblance of a customer experience. Use and be used – awesome web we have. If this is the singularity I’ll take the multiplicity.
Officially off-topic
bros
So I am not a selfie fan as you probably know, but I’m fairly impressed with this one taken with a bald eagle these bros had just rescued from a trap.  And if you need a cubicle distraction, you could do worse than this fifteen minute compilation of the worst sports announcing bloopers of all time (and yes, the “bulging dick disk” gaffe makes its inevitable appearance, along with an epic Chris Berman meltdown). Rated PG-13 so use cubicle discretion….
So while listening to Foo Fighters scorching track Something for Nothing, it got me thinking about which bands have recording a truly kickass song more than 15 years after forming? I’ve having a Twitter convo about it now and hearing lots of suggestions of bands that have been making good music for a long time. To make this harder, I’m not thinking quality longevity but a literal cultural moment/surge to “re-relevance”. The list isn’t as long as you’d think. Rolling Stones “Start me Up” probably qualifies though not my fave tune (h/t Tammy Powlas). David Bowie’s “Let’s Dance” reasserted his greatness. Holger Mueller points out that Depeche Mode has done it more than once. Hmm – I’ll get back with you once the peeps are done chiming in. See you next time…
Which #ensw pieces of merit did I miss? Let us know in the comments.
Most Enterprise hits and misses articles are selected from my curated @jonerpnewsfeed. ‘myPOV’ is borrowed with reluctant permission from the ubiquitous Ray Wang.

Image credits: Cheerful Chubby Man © RA Studio, Happy Children © Anna Omelchenko, Waiter Suggesting Bottle © Minerva Studiom, Overworked Businessman © Bloomua, Businessman Choosing Success or Failure Road © Creativa – all from Fotolia.com.
Disclosure: SAP, Workday and Salesforce are diginomica premier partners as of this writing.

Read more on: Best of archivesHits and misses 