
Lead story – Resumes go in; not much comes out – where job boards and recruiting solutions fall short – a two part series by Brian Sommer
myPOV: Few things get Brian crankier than the data sinkhole of online recruiting solutions that grind job seekers’ dreams disappointment. In Job boards and recruiting solution gaps – part one, Brian lays out the problem. With the help of some acerbic graphics (yes, that is possible), he raises disconcerting questions such as:

Why don’t job boards, social media, etc. tell me who accessed my information, who is scrapping my information and how they are using it?
How can I ensure my information only goes to legitimate employers?
How can I stop my information going to no/low value-added players in the ecosystem?

It comes back to a lack of transparency, and job seekers losing control of their own data. In Job boards and recruiting solution gaps – Part Two, Brian skewers LinkedIn’s irrelevant helpful “you appeared in 9 searches this week” teasers with pungent questions that LinkedIn will never answer:

How can a candidate appear in more searches?
How can a jobseeker appear near the top of the search?
Is LinkedIn pleased with such little traction?

Brian shifts from job seeker spleen vent to prodding recruitment vendors:
If quality was a criterion for employers and job boards, then shouldn’t job boards have tools, reports, etc. that show recruiters:

How rapidly a person has moved up their career path (i.e., career velocity)
How much responsibility a person has gained/demonstrated in the last ten years

Brian concludes:
And, shouldn’t those tools move these quality candidates (not the keyword stuffers and fakers) to the top of the pile?
Will any vendors rise to Brian’s challenge?
Recruiting is heavily flawed process that needs some imaginative, daring leaders to change the space.
I’m not optimistic, but asking the right questions is a good start.
Diginomica picks – my top four stories on diginomica this week

5G represents the rise of open infrastructure – Kudos to Kurt for realistically assessing 5G without falling into the snark-laden mockery I would have indulged in, particularly in regards to AT&T’s 5G good ship lollipop braggadocio.
Is the supply chain fit for purpose in a 21st century world? Lora Cecere thinks not. – Den reflects on his podcast hobnob with Lora Cecere, one of the smartest supply chain thinkers on the planet.
Technology for social good – stopping the poachers and saving the planet with AI, drones and sensors – Using drones to stop poachers? Sign me up. Cath’s got the skinny.
How Bosch broke free from silos to reorganize as agile teams – Phil’s been preaching the vital role of cross-functional teamwork in the frictionless enterprise pursuit we bandy on about on diginomica. Now he’s got a fresh use case via the Unleash event to illustrate the change.

Vendor analysis, diginomica style. Here’s my three top choices from our vendor coverage:

An early assessment of the Ultimate acquisition – Brian got fed up with echo chamber pseudo-analysis the parroting of the Ultimate Software press release, so he sharpened the blade.
Retailers are not in the software upgrade business – Oracle weighs in on 2019 retail trends, from AI to cloud adoption – From my NRF sit-down.
Pin-board wizards at TCC Wireless tilt to ThoughtSpot for data analytics – Martin walks the “Endless Aisle” of mobile data innovation.

Jon’s grab bag – Stuart examines how to curb the new too-big-to-fail types in Carrot or stick – how best to tame the social media beasts? (Google is currently paying the EU more in fines than it does in tax, while Zuck says “no thanks” to appearances before lawmakers).
Barb asks What has the attention of marketers for 2019? Engagement vs. data privacy comes to mind. Neil poses a thornier question in How hard is it to solve the ethics in AI problem? No pithy answers to that one. But when an AI group withholds an AI text tool out of fears of misuse because of its power, I’d say the time for this debate is now. Meanwhile, I pulled some lessons from diginomica’s workplace diversity coverage.
Stuart divulges his personal workflow in What do I do with my Apple Watch? I tell the time, of course! But as he rightly argues, smart watches are set to do big business with new players elbowing in. For now, we get Stuart’s tepid Apple Watch endorsement: “I’ve kept it longer than I did my Fitbit, long since consigned to a desk drawer somewhere.”
Best of the rest
 My top enterprise picks this week: 

New AI fake text generator may be too dangerous to release, say creators – The interesting issue is not how “dangerous” this AI text generator is, but how it got to be that way. Answer: chomping huge data sets, and being more “general purpose” than prior text models. The samples included are pretty impressive – good enough for to be used for ill. Thus the delayed release.
Amazon cancels New York City HQ2 plan: Why many New Yorkers opposed it – An unexpected setback for a behemoth used to dictating terms. Here’s where the resistance came from.
Those at the Top of the Mountain Didn’t Fall There: The Top-Down Not-to-be-Denied Imperative of ‘Digital Transformation’ – Michael Doane brings some tough love to the unparalleled sales tool overwrought concept of digital transformation. Summing the ERP/CRM heyday: “Projects that should have been business-led were too often authored and steered and driven into the ditch by technocrats.” Ouch! Looking ahead: “This time around, CEOs, you must maintain a firm grip on the transformation wheel.”
When Are On-Premises Systems Justified? Always good to get a view on cloud versus on-premises actually supported by data and field views. Cue Frank Scavo.

Honorable mention 

What is a Shortlist Anymore? – Gartner’s Hank Barnes explains why the vendor shortlist mentality is way too linear for today’s buyers.
Let’s Take the Cult out of Silicon Valley Culture – Dave Kellogg makes a big distinction between (vibrant) culture and (insular/damaging) corporate cults.
Google and IBM still trying desperately to move cloud market-share needle – Ron Miller on two deep pockets that suddenly find themselves as cloud wannabes upstarts in the face of Amazon.
Six Requirements for Growing and Scaling Autonomous Mobility – Evangelos Simoudis unveils his latest thinking on the the impact of autonomous vehicles.

Whiffs
So some enterprising student(s) got their school labelled as “hell on earth” on Google Maps. No word yet on whether this school is officially considered another brick in the wall.
When I read Email Provider VFEmail Suffers ‘Catastrophic’ Hack, I wondered just what catastrophic means? Answer: “The firm’s founder says he now fears some 18 years’ worth of customer email may be gone forever.” Yeah, that’s pretty bad.
Meanwhile, LinkedIn expertly targeted my passion for Alaskan regional aviation:

LinkedIn always surfacing incredible targeted jobs that are a close match with my skills. Think I'm gonna pursue this one, hope my diginomica partners don't mind… pic.twitter.com/xhDjiBF1PA
— Jon Reed (@jonerp) February 14, 2019

I’m not the only one whose career qualifies for a LinkedIn turbo-boost:

…and I have a bright future in the field of medical insurance, apparently. pic.twitter.com/XxULU7xsI4
— Jelena Perfiljeva (@JelenaAtLarge) February 14, 2019

For Coffee meets Bagel app users, Valentine’s Day brought the promise of love, connection, and data exploitation:

Coffee Meets Bagel Dating App Announces Data Breach On Valentine's Day https://t.co/H3hIAODZEi 
"If you're still alone on Valentine's Day, don't worry: at least a hacker has your name and email."
— Jon Reed (@jonerp) February 14, 2019

But there’s no topping this PR masterwork:

Yeah, it's early, but I'm awarding the PR email headline of the year for 2019. Don't think this will be topped: 
"Tesla's farting unicorn to be immortalized on the blockchain"
— Jon Reed (@jonerp) February 15, 2019

See you next time.
If you find an #ensw piece that qualifies for hits and misses – in a good or bad way – let me know in the comments as Clive (almost) always does.
Most Enterprise hits and misses articles are selected from my curated @jonerpnewsfeed. ‘myPOV’ is borrowed with reluctant permission from the ubiquitous Ray Wang.

Image credit - Cheerful Chubby Man © RA Studio, Happy Children © Anna Omelchenko, Waiter Suggesting Bottle © Minerva Studiom, Overworked Businessman © Bloomua, King Checkmate © mystock88photo - all from Fotolia.comDisclosure - SAP, Oracle, Workday and Salesforce are diginomica premier partners as of this writing.Read more on: HCM and the digital future of workHits and missesMachine intelligence and AITalent management 