
Don’t let digital transformation be something that happens to your company, without asking the ‘big picture’ questions about what your customers need from that transformation. Too few companies recognise the importance of this and go full steam ahead because they fear being left behind as the world changes around them.
That’s the message from Stowe Boyd, managing director at Gigaom Research and keynote speaker at next week’s Enterprise Digital Summit in London. Boyd will be taking to the stage to ask whether or not companies really consider their customers’ needs prior to taking drastic action – such as restructuring and making redundancies – to digitally transform.
I got to speak to Boyd yesterday to get a preview of the speech that he will be delivering at the Enterprise Digital Summit. He said that he is noticing more and more that companies view the idea of ‘digital’ as one that allows them to get more for less, as opposed to something that could change the experience or make it better for workers and the customer. Boyd said:
For years I’ve been poking at new ways that people are trying to take a pry bar to the way we do work. And it’s interesting that the emergence of the set of ideas around digital transformation or digital centred business models and so on seem to give us another opportunity to rethink what’s going on and as a result could potentially be transformative.
Not just in the sense of the business model and changing the way the customer interacts with the brand or the company or potentially other people as well, through services and so on. But the fundamental question for me is, is this going to usher in a new way of people working and interacting with their business and other people in the workforce? I’m not so sure of that.
When you start to look at it it seems like it’s actually some sort of potential regression to the language, the thinking, the philosophy we saw at the beginning of this century. That is, another go at trying to speed up the machinery of the organisation, trying to get higher levels of productivity out of workers and employees and potentially a way to rethink work so that there will be less people doing more work with the help of new software.
 Boyd explained that before charging ahead with an ill thought through ‘transformation’, companies should first be asking themselves: what are the things that are of the highest priority for us to accomplish? What is it that we stand for? Companies should be examining the nature of the relationship between itself, the people working there and the customers it serves.
However, Boyd said that in his experience enterprises get caught up in the fear of needing to transform in order to keep up with the market and don’t think through the fundamental questions that speak tot he core of the business. He said:
My feeling is that a lot of people in essence take a giant step over a bunch of questions and just accept a large number of presuppositions and barrel ahead – let’s just make everything we are doing digitally focused, change how we market, change how we are connected to our customers and then everything behind us in the company will have to be reorganised and rethought a piece at a time in order to fit into that new operating model.
I have a feeling that sometimes that means that there is potentially a torrent of subordinate decisions that get made that aren’t really thought of in a coherent way. There winds up being a whole long list of unintended consequences that might be not be exactly what people would do if they had thought about it first.
So what should companies do? Boyd believes that they need to stop, reassess and focus on the customer need. Essentially, go back to the basics and ask yourself what the purpose of your organisation is. And then think about how digital can be used to enable that. He said:
What we don’t see a lot of, which I would like to see, is companies starting from a larger set of questions. If we are going to be moving into this world, what kind of world do we want it to be? Instead of saying that the world that is coming is inevitable and we just have to accept how it’s going to be and learn how to live in it.
How can we use these new technologies and means of connecting to customers to improve the customer situation? As opposed to just being able to hold on to them. Rather than just securing them and making it highly likely that they won’t leave you. The notion behind it is, how can you improve what it is that they’re trying to accomplish? How can you make their lives better?
diginomica supports:

Read more on: Future of work 