

diginomica hit: HR needs to get out of the office and stop hiding behind processes by Janine Milne
quotage: “Get out of your bloody office! Talent management must be led by the business, so you’ve got to be in the business.” – This blunt advice to the HR profession comes from Nick Holley, visiting professor at Henley Business School
myPOV: It’s a tale of HR highs and lows from Janine this week. The lows start with this blunt challenge: HR needs to get out more. Obsession with tech and process is a fog – the only way out is to brave the cubes of business users and learn about talent issues firsthand. With only 23 percent of companies happy with their talent initiatives, something has to change – and it’s not a new LinkedIn cross-posting feature.
On the visionary side, push from HR into digital transformation. Janine fleshes that out in Hitting the HR highs with digital transformation. But generic digital change won’t cut it. Janine details five aspects of transformation to reckon with, including analytics-based decision-making and “reskilling the HR function.” In other words: lots of work to do.
Janine closed out a strong week with an HR use case, DP DHL delivers on worldwide talent management plan. How does an organization with 500,000 employees in 220 countries and a “mismash of legacy systems” pull off a talent project? Answer: no big bang. Slice-by-slice, with a heavy dose of change management, e-learning, and communication on digital and non-digital channels. Keeper quote from DP DHL: “Talent management is not just about career steps, it’s about the need and the opportunity to develop yourself on a continuous basis and work on your own employability.”
diginomica four –  my top four stories on diginomica this week

NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory’s mission to take consumer tech into space via Alexa – Jess covered the AWS re:Invent show in Vegas and came back talking to Alexa at high altitudes. But this is really about the ability for NASA’s engineers to voice-enable just about any device. And it’s about consumer tech (Alexa) winning corporate adoption with ease of use. Damn – things are moving fast these days. For a broader look at Amazon vs Google vs Microsoft and the machine learning stakes, read Jess on AWS stays on 2016 trend with AI product push.
Slush 2016 – The importance of a designer’s role in the C-Suite – Derek pulled some nifty content from Slush, evidently one of the largest startup events in Europe. Check this: “Lead designer at Airbnb, Karri Saarinen, began by explaining that at the ever-popular home sharing platform that everything “starts with design”. He said that every new product or feature will begin with designers in the room, who will figure out the best way to execute, and then engineers will be brought into the discussion later.” Engineers brought into the discussion later? That’s just one twist when we move beyond hype and push design up to the C-level.
How IT leads disruptive innovation at banking giant ING – Agile is no cure-all, but when a giant bank advocates agile methods, the worm doth turn. Phil’s on the case: “Along the way, ING’s IT function adopted agile development, following a radical team collaboration model more usually associated with digital startups.”
US Rule 41 makes data sovereignty even more complicated for cloud buyers – Stuart on a tangled mess of cloud reguluations getting tanglier from the U.S. side. See his Workday earnings piece below for evidence that these fallouts are impacting buying.

Vendor analysis, diginomica style. Here’s my four top four choices from our vendor coverage:

SAP’s Mike Ettling on the cloud ‘haves’ and ‘have-nots’ – Phil was on the ground at SuccessConnect Vienna, talking cloud with Ettling: “There’s a divide opening up in the ecosystem of SuccessFactors consulting partners, Ettling warns. There’s a cohort who ‘get’ the cloud and what is required to achieve a successful implementation, he believes, while others are still mired in old ways of working that are no longer appropriate for cloud engagements.”
CEO jitters around Trump and Brexit slow down decisions for Workday – Stuart on a Workday earnings report with sobering news on multi-national project delays. Culprits include Brexit, the U.S. election, and pending G8 elections: “CEO Aneel Bhusri described the decision slippage in Q3 as something that the firm had suspected might happen and hoped would be short-lived.” We’d best hope so too!
The same, but more of it – Oracle CEO pitches continuity with growth to NetSuite customers – Stuart on an intriguing press conference where “who sat next to who?” was backchannel enterprise tabloid. Basically it’s “synergy” – Oracle and NetSuite will make each other better, all customers win. Bonus: a few more actual details were provided on how that will work. Stuart’s seen a rodeo or two; his expectation level is tempered: “Or in other words – nobody dropped the clicker.”
From legacy crash to hyper-convergence – lingerie firm Groupe Chantelle’s learnings – Martin files a cool Nutanix use case. Hey, lingerie manufacturers suffer critical system outages just like the rest of us.

Jon’s grab bag – Derek raises the cybersecurity threat level with Slush 2016 – Slush 2016- Cyber security experts warn “we are at war every day”. He wraps his Slush coverage with Universal Basic Income “has to happen”, another provocative piece on jobs/automation readers weighed in on. Stuart looks at the cause, and the cloud underneath it, in World AIDS Day – (RED), the cloud and the battle for an AIDS free generation (the prospect of an AIDS-free generation is a remarkable/worthy goal indeed).
We continue future of work ruminations in Den’s Talent marketplaces – workforce composition under a Trump presidency. We talk about automation a lot on diginomica. Talent marketplaces that provide, as Den puts it, real-time/right-time access to talent, are also going to have a profound impact. Speaking of automation, Denis continues his streak of meaty posts with Solving for the problem of work culture.
Finally, Denis challenges readers to bring forth their own in Bring me a rock – and join the future of jobs debate! Oh, and he called me out in the process. If you haven’t chimed in, please do so – I better get busy on my (late) promised reply!
Best of the rest
 AWS re:Invent analysis and use cases – by Larry Dignan and Holger Mueller
quotage: “It took 8 to 9 years of pain,” said Weis, referring to the software rewrite required to fully go public cloud. “The public cloud is an enabler. We made a big bet and it takes leadership and vision to not stop a transformation midstream.” – Larry Dignan, Going all-in with AWS cloud computing: Four takeaways from Matson CIO Peter Weis
myPOV: A couple things about re:Invent – despite the total dorkfest of an event name, when you have the likes of Dignan and Mueller writing on AWS, we know that AWS has enterprise gravitas. Dignan shared his interview with shipping company Matson, and how they moved their apps portfolio to AWS, including a bunch of custom apps. Dignan raises the potent issue of lock-in. Lock-in doesn’t exactly go away when you move to a cloud provider. Matson looked at those tradeoffs also, and made a judgment call.
Mueller, meanwhile, filed the re:Invent report in his lightning round style. Kudos to his refusal to properly punctuate re:Invent – who the F cares? As Mueller says, AWS is going gangbusters. From startups to enterprises, projects-a-plenty. And 10,000+ partners signed up in the last year (Workday just announced it too was choosing AWS as its preferred cloud workload provider).
Mueller’s biggest concern? Not enough enterprise customers on stage: “AWS was not able to deliver a major ‘All in’ customer to the two keynotes, admittedly GE is a tough act to follow, but I would have expected to see more public traction.”
Two top standouts:

AI decision making meets AI’s biggest threat: humans – Two different angles on AI this week from ZDNet. Inside the black box: Understanding AI decision-making looks at what goes into the algos inside the machines. In this (worthy) deep dive, Charles McClelland argues that the AI’s short term issue is not the superintelligent adversary, it’s poor use of existing tech: “The real danger of machine intelligence is that executives will make bad decisions about what machine intelligence capabilities to build.” Steve Ranger hits on similar themes in the more concise – but less rewarding – The biggest threat to artificial intelligence: Human stupidity.
Airbnb ends futile war against city regulations, learns to cut deals instead – Two stories proved Airbnb is finally maturing from glamorized-but-minimized “disruptor” to a real force. Start with Airbnb regulation deal with London and Amsterdam marks dramatic policy shift, where Airbnb takes responsibility for enforcing local rental limits. Similar deal in New York City, where Airbnb settles for a “one home, one host” rule over the naively ambitious goal of creating an underground hotel industry. Ironically, now that Airbnb has stepped back from scorched earth disruption, it’s far more disruptive. Hmm – I see an airport bestseller in my future.

Honorable mention

The Ecosystem/Platform War: How do Microsoft, Salesforce.com, and SAP Stack Up? – Detailed and useful, though Oracle and IBM might take issue with the way they are dismissed.
From Startup to Enterprise: SAP, Oracle Set to Go Toe to Toe – More better-than-average vendor wars fodder, this from the SAP user group perspective.
Carter’s: A Story of Supply Chain Leadership – A global supply chain use case with plenty o’ meat on the bone.
The Four Critical Practices of Effective Software Development – If you’re too tied up to click, the Cliff’s notes are: small stories, feature branching, automated testing and code review.
Buyer/Vendor Disconnects – Reasons for Immediate Rejection – If that article title doesn’t grab ya, then I can’t be of help. The buyer/vendor disconnect on peer reviews and marketing materials needs a hard look.
New Analysis – Google enables citizen developers and developers with Google App Maker – If I were a tech guru burned-out-hack page view [email protected] I’d be crafting my tech predictions column. If so, I’d definitely include a “low code is gonna be big in 2017” thingy.
Musings – 5 lessons enterprises CxOs can learn from the US Elections – Mueller had a good week ya’ll…
Whiffs
PR is the gift that keeps on (mis)giving these days:

Tip for PR folks – If you have to describe your client as a “market disruptor” then they are not a market disruptor
— Jon Reed (@jonerp) December 5, 2016
In The five biggest social media fails of 2016 – an enterprise review piece, I argued that a crappo “to those who were offended” apology is usually worse than the original offense. That’s what happened with DrupalCamp Munich 2016. Organizers were compelled to issue an apologia after some gender-studies-genius decided it would be a good idea to pack an issue of Playboy magazine in every DrupalCamp Munich welcome bag (the magazines were removed after a social media crudstorm).
But the apology might have been worse. Instead of going with the humble “we totally screwed up – we are changing our event process to ensure this will never happen again,” the organizers decided on:
“At the time, we thought it would be a good idea”
Me: In other words, this wasn’t a rogue mistake. The organizing team all thought would be a swell idea. Gives us loads of confidence.
“As playboy.de was one of the first major Drupal 8 websites ever released.”
Me: Oh, Drupal 8? You should have said that sooner! Since this involves the pinnacle of western civilization otherwise known as Drupal 8, all is forgiven.
“Upon reflection, this wasn’t the best idea”
Me: Why reflect on decisions beforehand when you can do it afterwards?
“We would like to use this experience as an opportunity to talk about inclusivity in person at the camp”
Me: Nice idea, probably useful, but it seems like the organizers need the inclusivity training the most, no?
Over to you, Clive.
Which #ensw pieces of merit did I miss? Let us know in the comments.
Most Enterprise hits and misses articles are selected from my curated @jonerpnewsfeed. ‘myPOV’ is borrowed with reluctant permission from the ubiquitous Ray Wang.
 
Image credit - Cheerful Chubby Man © RA Studio, Happy Children © Anna Omelchenko, Waiter Suggesting Bottle © Minerva Studiom, Overworked Businessman © Bloomua, King Checkmate © mystock88photoa - all from Fotolia.com.Disclosure - SAP, Oracle, Workday, NetSuite and Salesforce are diginomica premier partners as of this writing.Read more on: Future of workHCM and the digital future of workHits and missesIoT robotics and AITalent management 