

diginomica hit: Use cases for the social good – CSR revisited, and organ donation powered by the Azure cloud – by Cath and Jessica
quotage: “NHSBT also uses Azure to host its Organ Donation Registry and is looking to cloud-based software to replace legacy supply chain systems that ensure that blood and platelet stocks are delivered to the hospitals that need them before they reach their expiry dates.” – Jessica, NHSBT undergoes Azure-centric cloud transplant operation
myPOV: Each week we stock the use case library in diginomica with new proof points, or as we call it, digital enterprise in the real world. Two stories jumped out for their social import, one being Jessica’s above-quoted piece on NHSBT’s international blood drive efforts amidst dropoffs in blood donors. Behind the scenes, cloud shifts reduce the IT burden, with scale and user experience as two benefits. Important “big data” work will follow as cloud-based data is analyzed to tackle NHSBT’s “most pressing challenge”: the shortage of blood from young people, black and South Asian communities.
Not long ago, CSR and sustainability were considered sexy enough to get play on the keynote stage. Now we never hear about this missions; ignoring them is a mistake. Cath rectifies that in Successful CSR at Virgin Media – focusing on a small number of bold targets, Turns out pompous grandiose statements are less effective than what Virgin Media did, dividing projects into doable chunks and aligning them with corporate goals. Of the guiding principles, I liked “Nurture an engaged workforce which represents the diversity of our customer and communities.” Purpose matters – if employees claim it as their own.
diginomica five: my top five stories on diginomica this week:

Banking giants slow to transform internal operations – Phil reports that banks are investing in CX change – great. Phil reports that banks’ internal operations are legacy junk – not so great. If only there wasn’t a connection between the two! Or, as Phil scolds, donning his proper schoolteacher hat from days long past, digital transformation can never be skin deep.
Omni-channel retail – progress at last? Stuart doubles down on last week’s retail bonanza with a slew of notables that prove omni-channel is more alive than say, bigfoot. Omni-channel delivers $1 billion makeover for Estée Lauder caught my eye – $1 billion in total e-commerce/m-commerce sales is not shabby. DIY omni-channel building from Home Depot and Lowes adds context to supply chain and customer analytics investments, and even the notoriously clunky Best Buy is in on the action: BestBuy CEO – omni-channel retail isn’t a zero sum game. We’re a long way from frictionless, but I’ll begrudgingly admit the progress, without handing in my omni-channel grouch card.
UK government begins to push digital as global opportunity – Did you know the UK’s digital exports are worth over £30bn a year? I did not, but as Derek notes, these exports will take on importance as Brexit settles in.

Vendor analysis, diginomica style. Here’s my three top choices from our vendor coverage:

Workday Q2 FY2017 beat on revenue prefaces a strong outlook through to 2020 – Workday had a good Q2 FY2017, but with light guidance for Q3. But the thing that popped out from Den’s analysis was the midmarket quotage, which implies a pending head-to-head with NetSuite: “Workday now believes it has an opportunity to expand into mid-sized company deals whereas in the past it has tended to go for the upper end of the mid-market and large enterprise. We have never seen an enterprise vendor successfully achieve this in both parts of the ERP market with the same application. It has always meant a cut down version for the enterprise player.”
Intel’s new ARM – inevitable but potentially disruptive – Kurt parses an overlooked news item from the Intel Developers Forum: “With cloud builders focused on optimizing the balance of performance, cost and efficiency, and more willing to try alternative processor architectures for different workloads, it’s unrealistic to think Intel can maintain more than 95% of the data center market. Working with ARM won’t help Intel’s margins, but will provide manufacturing revenue to offset the inevitable competitive erosion.”
Lambda, APIs, microservices – AWS bets on serverless app dev – In his quixotic-but-admirable pursuit of the frictionless enterprise, Phil looks around a new corner: “I have always been predisposed to favor services over servers, so perhaps I’m biased. But It seems to me that the way this new concept of serverless computing is evolving is similar to how cloud computing first emerged.”

Jon’s grab bag – Derek returns to an all-too-common theme in our diversity coverage in Gender pay gap for educated women is the same as it was 20 years ago – the fresh data is not reassuring, though Derek has ideas on breaking the cycle. Phil ponders the AI underbelly (double lock-in) in  AI progress-versus hype in Deep learning’s double lock-in conundrum. Caution: “You may own the data, but who owns the learning?“

Phil decries a failure of imagination we can all relate to in EasyJet and the customer service #fail of carry-on bags. And if you thought Stuart’s BT rant last week was a doozy, wait till you get a load of Derek’s Buying from BT – woeful silos and terrible customer service. What is the opposite of CX? Whatever BT is serving up,  it seems. I just hope Stuart and Derek don’t wind up in padded rooms somewhere…
Best of the rest
 Compromised cars and urban surveillance – good times with privacy and security
quotage: “In the letter, the privacy groups argued that American’s don’t need a “Facebook On Wheels” in which DSRC licensees are free to partner with any “commercial data broker, advertiser or any other third party with virtually no notice to consumers and no need to obtain consumer permission – or even provide consumers with a means of opting out of these commercial arrangements.” – Robert Abel,   Advocacy groups urge FCC to address connected car technology threat.

myPOV: It was a watershed week for our diminishing hold on privacy and security, two archaic notions that may be on exhibit at the Smithsonian shortly. I’d like to think that consumers who happily click on Facebook’s terms of service would feel differently about their compromised connected cars, where safety, in theory, should take priority over a techno-money grab.  That’s what privacy groups are hoping, reports Robert Abel.
At issue: a pending technology called DSRC (Dedicated Short Range Communications), which the  auto industry is pimping pushing for vehicle-to-vehicle (V2V) and vehicle-to-infrastructure (V2I) communication, for use in both autonomous and standard vehicles. Abel says the DSRC standard is intended for broad use, from helping to avoid collisions,  as well as for commercial services such as: mobile payments, and, get ready to upchuck on your air bag, in-car advertising and “infotainment” systems.
The privacy groups warned the FCC that DSRC introduced even more vulnerabilities to already vulnerable connected vehicles, which they maintain “may not be secure for another three years if the technology is used for reasons outside of ensuring safety.” I’m not a fan of dwelling on FUD, but let’s hear some keynotes this year where vendors pushing connected cars acknowledge the problems – and what we’re going to do about them.  Oh, and if you drop by Baltimore, remember that law enforcement has a splendid view of your whereabouts (Secret Cameras Record Baltimore’s Every Move From Above).
Other standouts:


IBM and SAP consider partners and acquisitions – The Constellation team fanned out to get the low down on some summer shows, with Holger Mueller filing a report on IBM Alliances Insights, where the topic on deck was IBM’s partnerships with SAP, Microsoft and IBM. Granted, not the most scintillating topic. but Mueller made enterprise lemonade, sharing how Softlayer and Watson services will tie up with partners. Meantime, as per an unconfirmed Venturebeat report, SAP is supposedly buying Altiscale to beef up big data services. Doug Henschen filed analysis on this still unconfirmed acquisition that sheds light on SAP’s Hadoop/big data direction.
Elastic product teams and creator-driven cultures, long-form style – Firstround.com employs a content strategy more firms should try – one serious piece a week that gets all the promo. Plus they seem to have dropped the tedious exit pop-ups from the schmucks at Bounce Exchange. First, there’s The Rewards of Creator-Driven Cultures — And The Engineers That Can Deliver Them. Then, check The Power of the Elastic Product Team — Airbnb’s First PM on How to Build Your Own: “There’s no feeling of rank within each team and no room for prima donnas. ‘Everybody has the same ownership of impact across data, design, engineering, and product.'” Idealistic? Yes, but not in a bad way.

Honorable mention – the top four

S&OP: Five Steps to Get Started – A touch promotional at times, but still the best supply chain blog by a wide margin.
Is blockchain revolutionary, or just another infrastructure support technology? – The blockchain debate shouldn’t be framed in two absolutes, but a worthy debate nonetheless.
“Silicon Valley is hostile to diversity,” says Slack Director of Engineering Leslie Miley – The Silicon Valley diversity critique usually comes from women, but in this case, a black engineer has some piercing/disheartening comments.
Gartner: Separate Data Lakes Myths from Facts Before You Dive In – Finally, some useful distinctions on three kinds of hype swamps data lakes: “Sicular defines three types of data lake architecture—the inflow data lake, the outflow data lake, and the data science lab.”
Whiffs
So when WhatsApp did their shameless money grab strategic acquisition thing with Facebook, they made loads of assurances to users. Now they are pulling the ol’ we-got-paid-so-it’s-all-good bait and switch, including user privacy walkbacks (Relaxing Privacy Vow, WhatsApp Will Share Some Data With Facebook).
Nice milquetoast headline from the New York Times too… And: WhatsApp will be serving up ads shortly. Inevitable? Yessir, but we could have lived without the bloviated privacy assurances when the money grab happened.  Shifting gears: how do you get yourself fired for another radio DJ’s indiscretions? Get a load of this shock jock moron job seeker.
More executive crud floating downstream:

I’m sure their performance assessment tools are cutting edge as well – #yeahright cc: @womblinghttps://t.co/cWQzICoWA5
— Jon Reed (@jonerp) August 23, 2016
Finally, I was planning on ripping Upper Edge. Their blog does some good for buyers in contract negotiations, but lately, I find their posts slipping into promotion-land, as in this superficial assessment of Oracle’s Q4 2016 earnings, which jumps into a get-our-reports plug. The plug led me to a report request page. Some of the reports are a tad dated; I figured they were for paid subscribers. Anyhow, I signed up, and soon after received my free reports, and a nice personal email without an aggressive pitch. Room for improvement here, but I take back my whiff – not a bad deal at all.
Officially off-topic
While prepping for Vegas, I caught the final of HBO’s The Night Of – not a terrible mini-series and kinda stuck the landing. Falls short of brilliant but ahead of pre-season football. Liked this: 52 Years Later, Pair Of Elk Antlers Stolen By Hunter S. Thompson Is Finally Returned To Ernest Hemingway’s House. and this Czech dude who built a plane to shave five minutes off his commute. The documentary The Last Lions (full version on YouTube) is one of the finest nature documentaries I’ve ever seen, complete with a graceful narration from Jeremy Irons. See you next week… Over to you, Clive.
Which #ensw pieces of merit did I miss? Let us know in the comments.
Most Enterprise hits and misses articles are selected from my curated @jonerpnewsfeed. ‘myPOV’ is borrowed with reluctant permission from the ubiquitous Ray Wang.
Image credit - Cheerful Chubby Man © RA Studio, Happy Children © Anna Omelchenko, Waiter Suggesting Bottle © Minerva Studiom, Overworked Businessman © Bloomua, Loser and Winner © ispstock - all from Fotolia.com.Disclosure - SAP, Oracle, Workday, NetSuite and Salesforce are diginomica premier partners as of this writing.Read more on: Digital enterprise in the real worldHits and missesRetail e-commerce and the omni-channelSecurity 