

diginomica hit: Cloud buzzword fatigue and legacy tech talk, by Kurt and Martin
quotage: “One of the many undesirable side-effects of the universal use of the word ‘cloud’ is that such a vaguely-defined term is open to broad interpretation, misapplication (cloud-washing) and false comparisons. One interpretation might as well be ‘whatever you want it to be.’ Hardly helpful to the stressed out buyer.” – Kurt, Untangling the crazy world of cloud definitions

myPOV: A common thread from Kurt and Martin is how misused tech lingo and obsolete tech complexity does a disservice to today’s buyers – and the business they serve. Kurt gets the absurdity fun started with Untangling the crazy word of cloud definitions, using the occasion of Gartner’s latest IaaS (ahem) “Magic Quadrant” to illustrate how such ratings fall short as IaaS and PaaS blend upwards in the stack. This MQ, which elicited howls of protest from IBM, presents Kurt with a chance to undermine cloudwashing in all its tedious/obsfuscating forms, and he makes the most of it. He also sees threats up the “XaaS” stack to Amazon and Microsoft – though not from IBM.
Martin’s got a different angle in Tech talk – the taxonomy of yesterday, less about buzzword abuse and more about vendors’ propensity to fall into tech razzle-dazzle when businesses just want to install and use apps. Oh, and get a result. Drawing on the highs and lows of recent Tibco and Rackspace events, Martin lays it down: “layering more technological complexity on to an existing high level of technological complexity is no longer the right answer.”
He presses tech leaders with two key issues: who are the experts in any company who can make things better for the business, and how? Martin’s view that technobabble will recede within a year strikes me as hopelessly optimistic, given the “machine learning” buns in the marketing oven, but I hope for buyers’ sakes that he’s right.
diginomica four: my top four stories on diginomica this week:

Key digital takeaways from 2016 so far – Derek with an exceptional post worthy of top billing, wherein he pulls the key themes from the ridonkulous amount of shows and interviews he’s hit in 2016 so far. This is one post you should read end to end, but three standouts from my perusal: insourcing digital skills, data becoming operational (and personal), and companies finally getting fed up with their legacy systems (e.g. bi-modal don’t fly).
Macy’s store closure program highlights the digital shift in retail – Stuart’s on his digital retail beat with a bold story of store closure and Macy’s omni-channel bet (the bold part: Macy’s claims that the stores being closed are cash flow positive). And, as Stuart points out, Nordstrom’s is following suit. This transformation ain’t over: omni-channel triumph is not a done deal.
Silicon Valley’s dubious tactics when it comes to staff performance boosting – To grab a staffing edge, Silicon Valley is pursuing “unorthodox methods” to boost their staff’s cognitive performance. But as Cath warns, the “unhealthy pre-occupation with boosting performance at all costs” ends up creating more problems than it solves, such as diversity shortfalls and hostile workplaces.
Analytics and the elusive customer of one – Den unfurls one of his vintage think pieces, the “grab a coffee” kind that might cure your Monday workadays. I can’t sound bite this one, but if you’re tempted by “Bullshit and the spreadsheet,” and why business isn’t actually solving for the so-called “customer of one.” Den’s got your espresso.

Vendor analysis, diginomica style. Here’s my three top choices from our vendor coverage:

Plex acquires DemandCaster for cloud based supply chain – sets up Trojan Horse – Den on Plex’s first acquisition: “The long term promise of Plex/DemandCaster is that companies operating the supply chain capabilities will be able to reach BOTH suppliers and customers at almost zero cost.”
Zoho – the consummate bootstrapper – Brian breaks down Zoho in the wake of Zoho’s analyst event: “There’s a lot to admire in a company that’s already bootstrapped itself to the size and scale of Zoho. The product has certainly expanded well beyond its CRM roots.”
Oracle launches new digital practice in partnership with DigitasLBi – Derek gets the lowdown from Oracle’s digital chief: “I expect we will see more of these partnerships in the coming months. Customers, for whatever reason, are looking to smaller, more agile digital agencies for advice and strategy support. Aligning yourselves with these companies can only be a good thing.”

A couple more vendor picks, without the quips:
Rackspace profits rise as buyer rumors circulate and Brexit fears are aired – Stuart
CSC sees big business in US insurance market, but no Brexit downturn – Stuart
Jon’s grab bag – Did you know that Australia’s 2016 Census night was an “unmitigated disaster”? Neither did I, but Paul Wallbank’s got the anatomy of this failure sussed from down under, and it’s IBM’s turn in the 20/20 hotseat. Speaking of abject failure, consumer tech circles were pre-occupied with new pieces on Twitter’s wet noodle approach to online harassment. Phil’s got an enterprisey take on that and more in The new tech jobs that quietly shape our culture. Phil’s right: in the age of AI, ethical design will be a boiling topic.
“This is, after all, the People’s code.” Didn’t expect to see that from the U.S. government PR rolls, did ya? Derek’s filed his take in The US Federal government is institutionalizing code sharing. Finally, Jess wraps my diginomica picks with goHenry raids piggybank to fund pocket money revolution in the cloud, a nifty story of a company (goHenry) determined to help kids manage their allowances in a savvy manner, and how a Rackspace migration is easing that IT burden. Sidenote: I doubt goHenry could have stopped me from pumping every last quarter into Space Invaders and Defender…
Best of the rest
 The Growing Circle of Cloud ERP by Frank Scavo
quotage: “The strategy of offering an extended suite of enterprise applications is a well-worn playbook. But what about newer cloud ERP vendors? One of the criticisms often leveled against them, especially those focused on manufacturing industries, is that their functionality is not as rich as that of the traditional vendors… But this is beginning to change.” – Frank Scavo
myPOV: Strativa opens the cloud ERP research kimono to put a new context on the state of cloud manufacturing ERP in particular. Scavo sees a deepening of cloud ERP functionality, bringing “point solutions” inside the core “circle” of the vendors’ offerings. He cites examples such as NetSuite’s e-commerce (plus partner acquisitions in advanced manufacturing), FinancialForce’s HCM, and Plex’s DemandCaster acquisition.
This is mostly a good news situation for buyers, who in the past were forced into dilemmas between deeper on-premises/hosted functionality versus “next gen” cloud solutions. Though as Scavo points out, narrowing the functionality gap does not necessarily dictate a purchasing decision; it still comes down to best fit. Scavo’s last word:
In ERP, especially in the manufacturing industry, there often is still a trade-off between modern cloud architecture and the deepest and widest functionality of traditional ERP providers. But the gap is narrowing.
Standouts:

Where the Database Market Goes from Here – Could have lived without the braggadocio of the “we were the only ones who saw the NoSQL market coming” vibe, but otherwise, RedMonk’s Stephen O’Grady nails is with a definitive post on the state of the database market, with special attention paid to the rise of database-as-a-service and cloud solutions. O’Grady is right to point to a new consolidation in the database market as vendors seek to satisfy the “one throat to choke” principle buyers tend to prefer. But, as he cautions, that doesn’t let vendors off the hook for developer engagement/adoption.
How Frank Abagnale thinks like a con artist to improve security – Security articles tend to be reactive – twenty articles on the same iPhone breach. This one from Ron Miller is different, with angles I haven’t seen. Check this: “When [Abagnale] conducts a seminar, he often does a test where he drops some USB drives marked “confidential” in the parking lot where he’s speaking, and inevitably several people pick them up and stick them into their company laptops. They get a message that says, “This was a test and you failed.” He says he doesn’t do this to embarrass people, but to point out that one move like that could have cost the company billions of dollars.”

Honorable mention (strong collection this week, well done folks!):

Market Move – Randstad to acquire Monster Worldwide – Bridges a moat, now it has to work – an informed on a perplexing acquisition, though leaping to judgement is foolhardy. Execution will decide it.
HPE acquires SGI for $275 million in high performance computing play – HPE doing its best to keep things interesting.
The World Economic Forum’s bullish blockchain report is, naturally, quiet on bitcoin – it’s an issue. Blockchain for the enterprise WILL need a platform. See my Enterprise blockchains – trust, identity and the Ethereum hard fork for more.
Walmart and the multi-channel trap – the perils of the omni-channel; there’s no tapping out against the Amazon behemoth.
“A Honeypot For Assholes”: Inside Twitter’s 10-Year Failure To Stop Harassment – Plenty of hard lessons here for enterprise communities.
Forget Technical Debt — Here’s How to Build Technical Wealth – Nice article title and a meaty piece to justify it. Love the provocative phrase “cultural upgrade.” Quotage:
Your goal should always be to create an environment where art just happens, and that art is clean code, awesome customer service, happy developers, good product-market fit, profitability, etc. It’s all connected.
Whiffs
Long column – short whiffs. Boing Boing used to be a content innovator – yeah, you read that right. But this kind of SEO ripoff junk, stealing “quoting” a Buzzfeed original just to lift a bit of their traffic, well, that’s the old fungus feeding on the pondscum routine (h/t Julia Roberts). Really nice copy/paste effort Mark Frauenfelder, look out for the robots, I hear they are pretty good at that.
Speaking of pondscum, a study in mediocrity and PR cowpies at the Rio Olympics’ infamous green pools, eh? (Though we got “Chemistry is not an exact science,” a pantheon-level PR yank). The Chicago Cubs stepped in a PR cowpie also, and now a prankster is out of a job. Alas, job security for pranksters is at an all-time low… Over to you, Clive. I’m sure you’ll be commenting forthwith…
Which #ensw pieces of merit did I miss? Let us know in the comments.
Image credit - Cheerful Chubby Man © RA Studio, Happy Children © Anna Omelchenko, Waiter Suggesting Bottle © Minerva Studiom, Overworked Businessman © Bloomua, Beach vacation © lily - all from Fotolia.com.Disclosure - SAP, Oracle, Plex, Workday, NetSuite, FinancialForce and Salesforce are diginomica premier partners as of this writing.Read more on: Analytics planning and data analysisCloud ERP financials and supply chainHits and misses 