
diginomica hit: Yahoo sells low, IBM raises the Watson AI stakes – by Stuart and Chris
quotage: “Once upon a time, Yahoo! was worth $125 billion. Today, its core assets were sold off for a paltry $4.83 billion. (To put that in context, back in 2008, it turned down a $44 billion offer from Microsoft.).” – Stuart,
Yahoo! RIP as Verizon picks up the assets for $4.83 billion (updated)
myPOV: A tale of two different companies. A consumer tech powerhouse survivor straggler taps out of a struggle for post-Facebook/Google relevance. And an enterprise brand (IBM) continues its difficult-but-interesting transformation with more poker chips from the Watson pile.
Kick it off with Yahoo and its shotgun wedding with Verizon, via Stuart, who’s been on Yahoo’s case for a long while. For some reason, Yahoo’s misadventures bring out the satirical poetry in Stuart, check this: “As with any terminally-ill patient, there’s a mixed emotion of relief that the suffering is over, tinged with a sense of regret that it came to this.”
Is there enterprise relevance here? Yes – Yahoo’s lukewarm acquisitions and failed attempts at digital re-invention make for an instructive post-mortem. Mayer’s grandiose views on her own tenure make me want to place her in the whiffs column – and I may do just that – but I suspect Stuart is in the right: “I’ve noted before that while many of Mayer’s decisions have been hugely questionable, I don’t actually think that anyone could have rescued the firm. The damage was done way back in the mid-noughties and it was too long a road to travel back.”
On the IBM re-invention side, Chris opined on Being human – Watson boots up a new future for IBM in cloud robotics. Timeline: in 2011, IBM Watson beats humans in Jeopardy. 2015: IBM launches Watson as a cloud service. Now, as Chris reports, IBM is announcing “new and speculative” ventures for Watson, which “blur the lines between classical computing, AI, and machine learning, and may point towards a networked future for humanoid robots.”
This venture includes a partnership with Aldebaran, making Watson available in the cloud as a business service to humanoid robots and their owners. Where this leads IBM from a monetization standpoint isn’t near clarity, but Chris believes that at the least, we have a new and different IBM to assess
diginomica two: my top two on diginomica this week:

The Right Stuff – airline analytics, part 3 – empathy – In Brian’s three part diginomica series, he makes an admirable attempt to save the airlines from themselves. Even Brian concedes the airlines aren’t likely to take his advisory to heart, as he admitted during a live podcast taping on finance and analytics with yours truly, but hey, at least they can’t claim Brian didn’t lay out a solution. The gist? Airlines have the data to personalize your experience and even demonstrate empathy, but for now, like Brian, I’ll settle for “Seating that does not trigger a trip to a chiropractor upon landing.”
Brexit – time for cool heads in the UK cloud industry – Some of you have Brexit burnout but this piece from Phil is worth a scroll of your politics-weary eyes. As chair of EuroCloud UK, Phil presided over a fierce debate showing that passions on both sides still run high. That’s not the ideal state; we need cool heads, or as Phil says, “falling into despondency won’t help embrace the opportunities that may yet arise.”

Vendor analysis, diginomica style. Here’s my top choices from our vendor coverage, where a slew of breaking stories hit:

Workday adds Platfora’s big data technology to its analytics stack – Den weighs in on an acquisition some of my analyst pals are confused by.
IaaS or in-house? Mixed signals as Salesforce buys Coolan – Phil parses another tricky acquisition: is this a bolstering of internal data center services, or a nod towards further AWS-style platform ambitions?
SAP earnings analysis, and an S/4HANA gut check – Den’s got the SAP trifecta, with an earnings analysis (SAP does it again – blows past estimates for Q2 FY2016), a follow-up on S/4HANA customer numbers, (SAP Q2 FY2016, an S/4 HANA take), and an S/4HANA use case: Newcastle University starts the road to S/4 HANA.

A few more vendor picks, without my notables:
Softbank shows that ARM’s future will remain mobile centric – Kurt
Making users love Windows and other challenges for Microsoft’s Nadella – Stuart
Apttus CEO Kirk Krappe on selling outcomes not products – Phil
The ‘whose-ass-to-kick?’ identifier – SIAM in action from ServiceNow – Martin
Infor cloud chief explains how she is ridding Infor of its on-premise image – Derek
Sidenote: don’t these vendors know we’re supposed to be in the summer doldrums, where news is slow and blog posts are easy?
Jon’s grab bag – Jess is on her game again, with a dandy two-fer, Team Rubicon UK gets a helping hack from developers to boost disaster relief work and British Gas turns up the heat on its Women in Technology network. Stuart, who usually champions Starbucks as a digital star, calls BS in this case: How Starbucks spilled coffee on its digital strategy with loyalty changes. MyPOV: a short-term bump perhaps, if they ever fix the damn top-up feature on my phone, all is forgiven.
We wrap our selections with Barb’s Video marketing – misunderstood and under-utilized by B2B companies, a timely post as brands scramble to sort Facebook Live from schlocky, over-produced, budget-devouring vendor propaganda.
Best of the rest
What is The Key to Maximizing IT Labor Cost Optimization Efforts? – by Yohann Jouin-Sellez
quotage: “Renegotiating your rate cards based upon the findings of the resource rate market assessment is a common approach to reducing costs. Renegotiations with incumbent suppliers can be very complex. The level of success in realizing the market validated rates is directly linked to the effectiveness of your supplier conditioning and negotiation strategy.”
myPOV: I keep an eye on the Upper Edge blog as it has the most incisive public content on the all-important topic of vendor license negotiation and management, often with a practical bent. However in the past year I have found the posts a bit too promotional. This one is more subtle.
This IT labor cost approach is building out rate benchmarks, and revising rates based on those assessments. That can mean some difficult political conversations, so having good data on prevailing rates and skills demand is essential.
Other standouts

Global HR Matters – How to get there – Part 1 – Why global is challenging, but critically important – Constellation’s Holger Mueller starts a promising new series ripped directly from airline seat pondering, where he rests his noggin during long international jaunts. What better topic to launch than Global HR, from his latest vantage point in India? What does it take to be a player in Global HR? “The vendor needs to understand the local content, the legislation and best practices that govern each of the countries the vendors wants to support.” Easier said than done, my enterprisey friends.
We’re Not Buddies: Thoughts on Managers Too Preoccupied with Being Liked – On a semi-regular basis, Host Analytics CEO Dave Kellogg visits under-nourished management topics with a refreshing absence of stone tablet best practices. Railing against “buddy managers,” Kellogg rips: “Don’t have protégés. Don’t have favorites. Don’t be buddies with your employees. I once went so far as to suggest that managers should view employees as AWUs (asexual worker units) which was a bit over the top. But the spirit wasn’t entirely wrong. We’re here to do a job and my role is leader If you want a friend, as they say in Washington, get a dog.”
Cloudy with a chance of SAP expertise – SAP Mentor Jelena Perfiljeva doesn’t blog often – she has a day job, you see, as an SAP expert working for a customer. But when she does post, it’s always a doozy, laden with unsparing views. In this case, the focal point of her ireful inquiry is a new approach to SAP consulting on demand, the ERPfixers. If you have interest in on-demand skills marketplaces, check this one, whether you’re SAPpy or not.

Honorable mention
The New ‘Must Haves’ for Mobile Apps to Succeed Today – Meaty design insights from an industry pro who understands mobile is not just a different data/device platform, but a “deeply personal” one that that, which in turn forces a user experience culture change.
Workday Deal For Platfora Leaves Questions – More color on the Workday deal, this one from a big data/analytics bent, along with advisory for Platfora customers, e.g. changes ahead!
SAP S/4HANA Q&A with Janet Salmon – FAQs answered by a master.
Don’t Replace People. Augment Them. – Robotics ruminations from a skeptical optimist, from Tim O’ Reilly’s endless – and usually useful – future of work series.
Dollar Shave Club and The Disruption of Everything – A creative take on a foamy purchase.
Whiffs
Yes, I was going to avoid any Pokemon mentions this week, but perhaps a brief moment of silence is in order for the reporter caught playing Pokemon Go during a U.S. State Department ISIS briefing.
And as for Mayer and Yahoo, well, I’m not going to say she whiffed on the Verizon sale. Gawker commenter pungently noted, “You can’t Frankenstein a company together/back together and expect some kind of cool factor to naturally emanate.”
But we could extend the whiffs column ad nauseum going through Mayer’s off-putting, whiff-drenched letter to employees. See a few zingers with my real-world translations:
It’s because of that hard work and resilience, that Yahoo will realize amazing opportunities in its next chapter.
Could you elaborate on “amazing” when the smoke clears?
This sale is not only an important step in our plan to unlock shareholder value for Yahoo
Translation: yes, this deal wasn’t about you, but then, you probably knew that.
As one of the largest wireless and cable companies in the world, Verizon
I think we already know who these idiots are, but thanks
have built Yahoo into one of the most iconic, and universally well-liked companies in the world
Eh? Kinda like… Blackberry? Or mySpace?
The strategic process has created a lot of uncertainty
Your jobs aren’t safe, but then you probably knew that too
Now, it is up to us to make Yahoo’s final quarters as an independent company count.
Translation: don’t get caught playing Pokemon on my watch. This will work out great for you, I’m just not able to explain why.
A simple “$5 billion this year is better than $100 million in three years, ain’t it?” would have been far better than these semantical gymnastics.
Officially off-topic
To end on a higher note, I passed the majestic desolation of Greenland’s mountain range on the way back from the UK. Which led me to this cool feature with amazing pics of life on Greenland today. I was also gobsmacked by this man who has spent the last fifty years building a cathedral by himself in Madrid.
Which #ensw pieces of merit did I miss? Let us know in the comments.
Most Enterprise hits and misses articles are selected from my curated @jonerpnewsfeed. ‘myPOV’ is borrowed with reluctant permission from the ubiquitous Ray Wang.
Image credit - Cheerful Chubby Man © RA Studio, Happy Children © Anna Omelchenko, Waiter Suggesting Bottle © Minerva Studiom, Overworked Businessman © Bloomua, Loser and Winner © ispstock   - all from Fotolia.com.Disclosure - SAP, Oracle, Workday, Infor and Salesforce are diginomica premier partners as of this writing.Read more on: Hits and misses 