
diginomica five: my completely subjective “top five” stories on diginomica this week

Plan NOW to make IT relevant again in a digital world – Brian’s got some bad news for CIOs trying to stretch tight budgets – it’s time for a strategic rethink of the whole kahuna. With zingers like “The hardware and software vendors that got you to where you are today may not be the ones who will take you and your organization forward,” there’s a lot to ponder and not much time. On the happier side, Brian has seen results from strategic planning, and he’s got a number of practical tips for moving ahead.
GDS’s Tony Singleton on fixing the digital services framework – The intrepid Derek du Preez got the necessary follow up to the recent digital governance controversies in the UK, by nabbing an interview with G-Cloud director Tony Singleton himself. Check out the two-parter, Exclusive! GDS’s Tony Singleton – fixing the Digital Services Framework and working with CCS (1/2), and part two.
RichRelevance crafts recipe for ingesting big data – Kenny’s back with a meaty case-study-within-a-case study, sharing the story of how RichRelevance found a way to power its retail recommendation engine with a Hadoop-style ETL tool (Pentaho).
HR hits a rich seam of data at Tullow Oil – Janine posted a neat use case ot Tullow Oil’s attempt to use HR analytics to better align HR and FI. One terrific feature of this use case: it’s not all handshakes and smiles, rather it’s a window into organizational change in progress.
General Electric pursues the outcome of Internet of Things – Martin delves into the views of Bill Ruh, GE Global Software VP, and why he is focused on ‘Industrial Outcomes Management’. Yes, the phrase is a mouthful, but the focus on IoT outcomes-over-tech-for-its-own-sake is refreshing.

Vendor analysis, diginomica style – Phil’s been tracking Zuora’s IPO push, in Zuora raises $115m to smooth its path to IPO, he looks at how this “standard bearer” for the subscription economy is faring, with a quarter billion funding mark as a recent milestone. If the Box earning news made you scratch your noggin, you’re not alone. Den dons his accountant threads and walks us through the brouhaha in the appropriately-titled Box misses estimates, no it didn’t.
Lately Microsoft has been making noise on its cloud push against Amazon and Google. Stu wades deeper in Microsoft, Azure and the PaaS push against Amazon, assessing recent comments from Microsoft GM Mike Schutz. Meantime, pardon the tepid pun but Jessica Twentyman met her Tinder match in Tinder swipes right for database-as-a-service from Rackspace, where the MongoDB engine behind Tinder’s hipster love train is revealed. Finally, Brian Sommer is picking out his ties and polishing his leadership mantras in time for the HR conference busy season – get a peek at the HR shows ahead in The two seasons of HR technology.
Jon’s grab bag – Yeah, your favorite lifestyle rag has your Apple Watch coverage, it’s unapologetic Apple fanboy Stuart in a lukewarm state: The Watch – it’s a ‘meh’ from this unreformed Apple addict. Den scored this week with a trifecta of quality reads, Crowdsourced end user software assessments – value or illusion?, A life without careers – what might Betty say? and, last but definitely not least, a view on GigaOm’s demise from the diginomica vantage point, The importance of the GigaOm crash.
Best of the rest
Making sense of GigaOm’s sudden demise – by just about everyone in media
quotage: “One of the biggest disappointments of the Internet Age is that we still do not have a  value-recovery mechanism  for good quality media content. A click is a click is a click – but it’s not — some media content is much better than others. But we have no rewards mechanism to support the creation of more great media content.” – Tom Foremski
myPOV: The collapse of GigaOm spawned a tsunami of posts and fierce backchannel debates on a curtain call that struck a bit too close to home. After a while, the articles started to feel like vultures; the price of pulling scraps of insight is losing the plot, which is how even trail blazing ventures can reach the end of the line. Doesn’t mean those still standing could have done it any better.
Caveat aside, there were reams of copy to sort, but here’s your “JR’s Cliff Notes” essentials: The quoted Tom Foremski piece above hit home, he’s been agonizing over tech media biz models for a long time, and his raw first reactions stuck with me. (New Media Disrupted: GigaOm Web Sites Suddenly Stop Publishing). Danny Sullivan speaks to much of what I’ve staked my own career to, in terms of building from within (After GigaOm, The Non-VC “SimCity” Approach To Growing A Media Business).
Columbia Journalism Review’s exit interview with GigaOm Senior Writer Matthew Ingram captured the internal shock and roller coaster of hope and disappointment. Finally, perhaps the most detailed view from an insider: Gigaom: The Life and Death of a Venture Funded Media Startup. Plenty to ponder and no easy answers. Except: claim the adventures while you can.
Other standouts

Getting scrummy about agile (and agile about scrum) – This rant against Scrum was a bit choppy, but it sparked a debate on agile at scale and the problem of forming true multi-disciplinary teams. On the feel-good side of Agile, Steve Denning argues that “fast fashion” is remaking the fashion industry (How Agile and Zara Are Transforming The US Fashion Industry)
Watson’s creating jobs and Spark’s taking hold – Don’t think I’ve ever featured a slide show piece in hits and misses (except on the “miss” side), and may never again, but Doug Henschen’s slides on 10 new Watson-inspired jobs in cognitive computing is slick enough to click. Onto Spark, an emerging player in the “Berkeley Data Analytics Stack”. To better guage adoption levels, RedMonk’s Donnie Berkholz crunched and graphed some numbers.

Honorable mention – six more #ensw pieces of note
Advantage SaaS: Game, Set, Match – Continuing a worthy debate on how much SaaS software improves TCO and implementation complexity.
ASUG Member Survey Uncovers Challenges, Opportunities for Today’s Finance Departments – ASUGnews has been amping up its member survey reporting, to useful effect.
NetSuite CEO Nelson Talks the ‘End of the Beginning’ of Cloud Software Era – The always-quotable Nelson ponders the evolution of cloud ERP, spiked with zingers as per usual, including an SAP diss.
Cloud Software and Business Modernization: Part One – A new article series which shifts away from the well-trodden buzzpath of digital transformation, towards a broader modernization theme.
Can the mobile Web win back developers from iOS, Android? – Thorough/timely piece with app development at a bit of a crossroads.
smart +/- watches – Another smart watch take but one of the best, citing numerous wearables pitfalls (e.g. notification overload and voice recognition fails), based on prior experience with the Moto360.
Whiffs
It’s a perfect storm of voyeuristic delight for me as I learned that Tinder Users at SXSW are Falling for a Sexy Woman – Who is an Adbot. Huge whiff for horny hipsters, but is it a marketing whiff, juxtaposing emotional backlash versus exposure? Hmm…
Then Wired did its best to sensationalize “nothing to see here” with the latest proclamation that
NO, REALLY, THE PC IS DYING AND IT’S NOT COMING BACK (their emphasis not mine). Commenters had a field day with this linktripe linktrite; I liked “OH BOY!!!! I can’t wait for the future where I do pro photography editing on an iphone!” and “Next up: Trucks, semis and tractors are a dying market, since more electric mini-cars are being sold.”
Finally, I think I need to have a permanent section in hits/misses for “Articles whose social shares far exceed their material value”, or, perhaps, “Social Object-ions” for short. Well, we can start with this nonsensical post about eliminating notifications, which obscures one of the most vital facts of the notification age: it absolutely IS possible to create the right filters and notification settings to be aware of the outside world and still get vital shit done. It takes hella work, but it’s far better to get started on proper filtering than to throw our hands in the air and compulsively delete our apps, much less bother people with a useless blog post about it.
Officially off-topic
I had super-high hopes for this post, given the awesome title My Roommate, The Darknet Drug Lord. The actual post fell a bit short, but was an apt reminder of how easy it is to assemble a double life now.
Another regular feature should be “pieces that discouraged me/sapped my will to live”, or maybe “willsappers.” This week’s pick is a tough call between How Hollywood Actors’ Twitter Followings Have Become as Important as Talent and After Conquering Reality TV, Kim Kardashian Is Taking the Mobile World by Storm. I did like THE REMARKABLE STORY OF A TECH INCUBATOR INSIDE A PRISON though. Get busy doin’, eh?
Last week I sent out a flare for some TV recommends, checked out a few new shows. Sum:
Better Call Saul – Yet to figure out its drama/comedic balance, but like how intentionally different it is from ‘Breaking Bad’.
Black Sails – Walked the plank on the Starz’ pirate drama after the rudderless season 1, but was genuinely impressed by the improvement in emotional context in season 2.
Vikings – History Channel’s not-so-historical epic, now on season 3. Great visuals and standout moments but characters turn on each other with the frequency/randomness you’d expect from Melrose Place. The search for good TV goes on…
Which #ensw pieces of merit did I miss? Let us know in the comments.
Most Enterprise hits and misses articles are selected from my curated @jonerpnewsfeed. ìmyPOVî is borrowed with reluctant permission from the ubiquitous Ray Wang.

Image credits: Cheerful Chubby Man © RA Studio, Happy Children © Anna Omelchenko, Waiter Suggesting Bottle © Minerva Studiom, Overworked Businessman © Bloomua, Businessman Choosing Success or Failure Road © Creativa – all from Fotolia.com.
Disclosure: SAP and NetSuite are diginomica premier partners as of this writing.

Read more on: Best of archivesHits and misses 