
Lead story – Deloitte hacked, a brown trousers moment? by Den Howlett

MyPOV: Another week, another breach, this one hitting home at the enterprise level with a Deloitte hack that boggles the mind, given that Deloitte has its own enterprise security practice. But when access to sensitive client emails on key accounts can be hacked with an admin password (no two factor identification, etc), your enterprise security practice starts to look, well, like wishful thinking problematic. Den on Deloitte’s tepid communication since the hack:
I would not expect Deloitte to offer chapter and verse on what happened but the bigger problem is that however the firm parses its own story, it ends up compromising part of its positioning. And it is one story that ain’t going away any time soon.
There is more to this story that will unfold, and much we don’t know. But we know enough for Den to offer advice to Deloitte clients, including:
Expect Deloitte competitors to knock on your door any time about now.
Ow.
Diginomica picks – my top three stories on diginomica this week:

Memo to Musk – here’s how to build a benevolent bot – Chris continues a terrific series on jobs, robotics and you, this time asking: “How can we make way for a more benevolent machine?” Then this challenge to the tech sector: “The first thing the tech sector must do is shift its focus from the apocalyptic to the mundane.” B-b-but  Chris, how will we get our clicky-click (page views) with such sensible advice? A new 80 page report on automation informs his thinking, including a three point industry to-do list. Also see: Derek’s AI and the public sector – the key emerging themes.
Bed, Bath & Beyond – investing in tech for a personalised retail experience – How do you know a retailer is serious about omni-channel improvements? When they spend 40 percent of their capex on it (40% of $17 million smackers). Stuart reports on the progress, which includes personalization of customer experience via rewards programs. Here at Shop.org, I’m hearing plenty of personalization talk – but also how it can fall apart with sloppy/siloed back ends. Sounds like that’s what Bed Bath & Beyond is taking on here.
Solving for the nightmare of pick, pack and ship at The Gravity Cartel with VersAccounts – Den with a spiffy SMB use case, where budgets are tighter and processes are more complex than we think.

Vendor analysis, diginomica style. Here’s my three top choices from our vendor coverage:

Microsoft Ignite – use case citations support the product pitches – Stuart with the day one keynote review: “While there was the inevitable product pitching – it’s a tech vendor conference, after all – it was refreshing to have real-world use cases used to back up the high level messaging. As we always argue at diginomica, there’s no better proof point than your customers – although letting them talk for themselves is preferable.”
Couchbase CEO – ‘Ignore the engagement economy and you will lose’ – NoSQL darling Couchbase has been quiet for a while, but judging from my inbox, that’s changing again. Derek scored the London sit down with new CEO Matt Cain. Sidenote: always interesting to see database vendors talking in terms of engagement, but then, if you hunker down in the back end, you will lose.
Oracle eases path to cloud with license reuse, universal credits – In advance of OpenWorld, Oracle spiffed up the news cycle with two new programs to spur cloud/IaaS adoption. Phil’s on the case: “This is a pivotal moment for Oracle, the point at which it truly begins to leverage all the economies of scale of the cloud model.” Den adds vinegar color with 5 big questions for Oracle following its autonomous database announcement.

A couple more vendor picks, without the quotage:

These Atlassian customers are adapting to change with team innovation – Phil
VMware goes polyglota – Martin

Jon’s grab bag –  Stuart’s got Pandora CEO’s on what works and what we need to fix.
I’ll add to the fixes: less crappy “live” versions of once decent songs. Cath’s Technology for Good series rolls on with UNICEF skills up refugee kids for a tech future. And last but not least, certainly for Londoners, Stuart weighs in on London’s Uber ban – turning the city’s back on innovation and the ‘gig economy?’
Stuart reports that our own Derek du Preez is “devastated” by the news, but worry not, Derek, I predict Uber will return to London. This is not an Uberexit, just an Uber traffic citation, a boot on the car tire. And hey, it couldn’t have happened to a lovelier bunch.
Best of the rest
 Lead story – Source: Deloitte Breach Affected All Company Email, Admin Accounts by Brian Krebs

myPOV: Krebs provides fresh details on the Deloitte breach, including this doozy:

Indeed, it appears that Deloitte has known something was not right for some time. According to this source, the company sent out a “mandatory password reset” email on Oct. 13, 2016 to all Deloitte employees in the United States. The notice stated that employee passwords and personal identification numbers (PINs) needed to be changed by Oct. 17, 2016, and that employees who failed to do so would be unable to access email or other Deloitte applications. The message also included advice on how to pick complex passwords.
Details like this could prove costly for Deloitte depending on what legal recourse those clients impacted by the breach choose to take. Krebs falls short of offering advice to Deloitte clients here – this is simply an even-handed context of how we got to where we are now, with a note that Krebs will update as he digs out more info.
No posts blew me away this week (get busy blogging people!). But a few warrant the honorable mention:
Honorable mention

News Analysis- Oracle Unveils New Programs that Transform how Customers Buy and Consume Cloud – Gloves Off – Wait, Oracle had its gloves on before? Holger Mueller does the blow-by-blow on Oracle’s latest. Money quote: “That Oracle is under pressure to show cloud growth (like all major enterprise vendors) is no surprise, and the last earnings call has not lowered pressure, despite good results.”
SAP buys customer identity management firm Gigya for $350M – SAP did a bit of pre-TechEd shopping, eh? This one looks to plug into SAP’s Hybris e-commerce play, as in: “This will allow us to take leadership of the emerging customer identity and access management market.”
Letting Your Customers Tell Your Story – Not sure why this slam dunk advice is so elusive for so many. Has anyone written a business bestseller called “Get out of your own way”? As in: “For a vendor, saying “we pride ourselves on our customer service,” is very different than having several customers talk about their service experience.”
Companies need to stop AI-washing their products – Perhaps an obvious point, but judging from the AI miracle cures in my inbox, it bears repeating.
‘Hey, Walmart, please use my API instead of your EDI’ – Not a phrase most Walmart suppliers would dare utter, but that’s not the point. Brace yourself for the iPaaS buzzword (Integration Platform as a Service).
Facebook Will Give Congress The More Than 3,000 Ads Purchased By A Russian Troll Farm – Even Facebook’s chickens come home to roost sometimes. Bonus: we rarely see the words “Facebook” and “transparency” in the same sentence.
Power Ledger blockchain in trial with energy retailer Origin – Bring on the blockchain pilots. “The Power Ledger platform is a trustless, transparent and interoperable energy trading platform...”  Somewhere, a PR rep is smiling.

Whiffs
You don’t have to be Deloitte to soil your skivvies. Heck, you can just post your boarding pass on Facebook and let the whiffing begin. Oh, and:

AI could put a stop to electricity theft and meter misreadings https://t.co/jP2zBtAuU9 -> gee whiz AI can fix everything but Equifax
— Jon Reed (@jonerp) September 23, 2017
So The Guardian reports a hospital forced/tricked employees into singing “We can do this!” amidst budget crunching morale problems. Kinda reminds me of the corporate fights songs I used to have a go at back in the day.
I’ll have to pull those out for you sometime, my fave was a song that included the phrase “thirsty technology wave.”  Come to think of it, Deloitte has a song – not sure if this abomination was sanctioned though. Not sure this Deloitte rap was either, but it sure is a treat:

Can I get a lolz? “Buildin’ slides with my peeps all day!” Plus he flashes a boarding pass! Whiffs converge. Now he could add: “I did more freeballin’ than firewallin‘! Too soon? Sorry…
 If you find an #ensw piece that qualifies for hits and misses – in a good or bad way – let me know in the comments as Clive (almost) always does.
Most Enterprise hits and misses articles are selected from my curated @jonerpnewsfeed. ‘myPOV’ is borrowed with reluctant permission from the ubiquitous Ray Wang.
Image credit - Cheerful Chubby Man © RA Studio, Happy Children © Anna Omelchenko, Waiter Suggesting Bottle © Minerva Studiom, Overworked Businessman © Bloomua, King Checkmate © mystock88photo - all from Fotolia.com.Disclosure - SAP, Oracle, Workday and Salesforce are diginomica premier partners as of this writing.Read more on: Hits and missesIoT robotics and AI 