
This is a “top five” version of hits and misses, with Jon still wading through post-Barcelona minutia.

diginomica hit: Mobile World Congress – the enterprisey view – by the diginomica team (Derek, Martin, myself)
quotage: “As for companies out there today that want to take advantage of IoT? Good luck. Whilst I’m sure many will create efficiencies and perhaps build out some new services to stay ahead, history tells us, and my instinct says, that many are going to be knocked by new innovative business models that spring up around them.” – Derek
myPOV: The Mobile World Congress is a nutty/massive show sprinkled with enterprise bits – but you have to sift through a lot of happy smartphone talk to find ’em. Derek and I were on the case in Barcelona, with Martin filing on his views as well. Derek’s investigative focus was the real impact of the Internet of Things, which resulted in this excellent piece, The Internet-of-Things isn’t ‘up for grabs’, it is a diverse new phase of the web, which boldly wades through interviews with the likes of SAP, Accenture, ARM, and Jasper.
Martin Banks took a big picture view in Mobile World Congress – mobile industry breathes deeply and prepares. Banks raises questions about mobile scaleability and infrastructure with a slew of wearables on the horizon. Based on his vendor review, there should be big mobile tech advancements this year that put market share in play.
More bonus coverage: I’m filing a series of pieces on upstart vendors/apps that stood out from the pack. The first two are up:  Can data-driven video fix the content relevance problem? and Augmented reality for business – present and future use cases from Metaio.  I’ve also posted a live podcast with Derek du Preez, Mobile World Congress 2015 – the Enterprisey and IoT Wrap.

rest of the “diginomica five”: continuing my completely subjective top five stories on diginomica this week

Target’s digital re-invention, from all sides – Well, from two sides anyway, via Stuart’s  Target invests in digital to restore brand values – the CEO perspective. and the follow-on, Target invests in digital to restore brand values – the Chief Strategy Officer perspective. Stuart kicks off part one with a frank admission from the CEO on losing ‘brand balance,’ and then details how Target intends to make it back, but with a digital focus.  

When will Silicon Valley #makeithappen for women in IT? – Jessica poses the question, and gets a strong take from MetricStream CEO Shellye Archambeau on tackling the Valley’s gender diversity gap. Sidenote: liked that Archambeau is not enthused about quotas, but makes the case that businesses lacking diversity suffer from a competitive disadvantage. Bonus: Jessica also turned in a nifty use case from the Salesforce ecosystem, Cloudy Sky Italia aims to deliver a better customer experience.
How do we tackle the enterprise security skills crisis? Contributor Cath Everett hit on this issue in two installments, Tackling the enterprise digital security skills crisis (part one) and part two. One possible solution for the lack of on-the-ground experience? Graduate-level and degree-earning apprenticeships. With a decade of projected security skills shortages ahead, it’s going to take some creative solutions.

Vendor analysis, diginomica style – Phil was on top of cloud vendor movements this week, starting with Coupa scales up its spend management reach, wherein he shares his latest convo with CEO Rob Bernshteyn. Bottom line – Coupa is booking bigger deals and building out functionality, while doing its darndest to focus on outcomes, not techy talk.
The Phil moved on to Ceridian primes customers to embrace cloud HCM, Closing it out, UX rears its pesky head again in Janine Milne’s User experience key to Altimetrik’s HR choice. When it comes to UX, Altimetrik’s tech savvy workforce is a demanding lot, expecting the cloud/mobile/analytics/social bells and whistles, so yeah, I’d count this as a coup for the Oracle HCM Cloud.
Best of the rest
Big data market moves and the future of data – by several sharpies
quotage: “With last month’s launch of the Open Data Platform initiative, the time is fast approaching when larger vendors involved in Hadoop will have to pick an alliance – because the option of going it alone is too risky, according to Hortonworks president Herb Cunitz.“ – Toby Wolpe
myPOV: It’s been a busy period for big data vendor maneuvering, as per Wolpe’s
Hortonworks chief: Why it’s time for some tough Hadoop decisions, wherein Hortonworks President Herb Cunitz makes some decisive (if self-serving) statements. This all stems back to the soapy dramatics of the Pivotal-driven Hadoop Open Data Platform, where certain vendors have signed on and others (Cloudera in particular) are noticeable by their absence.
I’ll spare you the run down of which vendors are on Hortonworks’ good list and which are in detention, but for customers, as vendors forge into alliances, decisions should benefit the coherence of more complete solutions. As Doug Henschen reports in Cisco Bets Big On Selling Hadoop, Cisco is thinking the same thing, aligning itself with all three leading Hadoop vendors.
Finally, if you’re weary of “As-Hadoop-Turns,” change the channel for another fun think piece from Esteban Kolsky, The Future of Data – A Brief Summary. Kolskly kindly boils down the essence of a longer report into a bite size post even short-form addicts can consume.  Thankfully there is someone out there who can put the brakes on the “experience” mantra to point out this burdensome fact: “Most organizations are not prepared to deliver those outcomes (in the form of experiences) because they don’t have access to the right information.” Exactement! (But, I hear the marketers saying, “Let’s offer generic experiences at scale, and enough will bite.”) Greeeat! (“Thank you for calling Comcast…”)
SAP answers crucial S/4 HANA questions, has up and down week – Most everyone had a ton of questions after SAP’s flashy-but-light-on-specifics S/4 HANA announcement (Brian Sommer posted ours on diginomica). Credit to SAP then, with Sven Denecken posting three useful S/4 HANA FAQ blog posts which add specifics to chew on. Over at ASUGnews, Chris Kanaracus has started to sort the new info with SAP S/4 HANA FAQ – Pricing and Licensing Implications.
It wasn’t all handshakes and smiles, however, with Bloomberg reporting SAP to Reduce More Than 2,000 Jobs in McDermott’s Second Cut. Frankly this does not surprise me as SAP’s transition to new revenue models requires a leaner outfit. This story was a useful balance to the upbeat takes we heard from SAP execs in Barcelona. Change isn’t easy and there’s no need to spin that. At least not for hits and misses…
Honorable mention – five for the road

Zombie Projects: How to Find Them and Kill Them – Solid advice on salvaging troubled projects (and/or avoiding them), though I’d change “Involve outsiders” to “Seek out independent experts.”
Implementing Enterprise SaaS: If it’s Easy, it’s Because You’re Not Trying – “If you’re doing enterprise SaaS because you want your IT life to be more simple, think again. The game is rigged against simplicity, and always has been.” – Blaspheme! And worth a read…
Killer app or shelfware? It depends on the user experience delivered – “Enlightened companies will take responsibility for the entire experience” – yup.
Career Development:  What It Really Means to be a Manager, Director, or VP – Any post that takes potshots at performance reviews and “leveling” gets a pimp push from me.
The 2015 Progressive F&A BPO Blueprint – Research of note for outsourcing buffs enthusiasts stakeholders.
Whiffs
I was initially seduced by the title Digital is destroying all creativity, But by the end of the post, I found myself wondering if the author was including himself amongst the victims. I know he’s capable of better, but then I saw that this tiny tirade garnered more than 1,000 social shares, which leads me to wonder if people are so horny for social links that they will pretty much tweet anything. And yes, the dress is white and gold.
Moving on, I enjoyed Tom Foremski’s gentle lampooning of this Silicon Valley Green Energy panel, until I got to the not-so-gentle punchline, “The panelists spent a lot of time patting each other on the back.” Well, something green came out of that panel after all, Mr. Foremski, because I’m gonna recycle that verbiage. Event sure sounds like a whiff though…
Meanwhile, officials from the state of Florida have come up with a whiff-worthy approach to dealing with the threat of climate change that could impact up to 30 percent of the Florida coastline: simply ban the use of the phrase “climate change” or “global warming” (in any official communications, including emails). Good luck with that one Florida, thanks again for your courageous leadership, and let’s check back on your progress in 10 or 20 years.
Officially off-topic
Speaking of the end times, did you know that Kim Kardashian (allegedly) spends $100,000 a year to employ a ‘professional selfie retoucher’? And on a broader scale, this spicy critique of the sharing economy took the problem from celebrities to our own communities, with the classic line, “It’s not about meeting your neighbors anymore, it’s about putting them to work.”
For the upbeat view, you can check this video of a paralyzed woman pick up a cup with her mind, or check out these neato culinary use cases for 3D printing (Delicious and Nutritious 3D-Printed Food Represents a New Way of Eating).
Leonard Nimoy’s passing provoked some memorable tributes, none better than Alan Sepinwall’s. Meanwhile, things are a bit dire from a TV standpoint here, so I’ve begun rewatching HBO’s landmark/problematic prison series ‘Oz.’. I’m open to suggestions at this point…see you next week.
Which #ensw pieces of merit did I miss? Let us know in the comments.
Most Enterprise hits and misses articles are selected from my curated @jonerpnewsfeed. ìmyPOVî is borrowed with reluctant permission from the ubiquitous Ray Wang.

Image credits: Cheerful Chubby Man © RA Studio, Happy Children © Anna Omelchenko, Waiter Suggesting Bottle © Minerva Studiom, Overworked Businessman © Bloomua, Businessmen with business trophy. Cheerful young businessman © BlueSkyImages – Fotolia.com, Snowboarder Crashing © dismagwi – Fotolia.com, Snowboarder Crashing © dismagwi – Fotolia.com, Loser and Winner © ispstock – all from Fotolia.com
Disclosure: SAP, Oracle and Salesforce are diginomica premier partners as of this writing.

Read more on: Best of archivesHits and misses 