
diginomica hit: Open source fisticuffs and big data use cases, live from the Hadoop Summit by Jessica Twentyman
quotage: “At the heart of this ugly squabble lie fundamental differences in Cloudera’s and Hortonworks’ respective approach to the Hadoop market, laced with personal and political rivalries that data back to the technology’s invention in the software labs at search giant Yahoo! almost a decade ago.”
myPOV: At the Hadoop Summit in Brussels, Jessica got a first hand look at the elbow-swinging a.k.a “market positioning” that has emerged around the open source ODP (Open Data Platform) initiative, which Hortonworks, IBM, and Pivotal have thrown their weight behind (Hadoop ODP squabble rumbles on as first compliant products come to market). The impossible quest for one standard is yawn-inducing, at least for me, but Jessica sheds light on the important Hadoop business model differences that lie behind these PR skirmishes.
Bonus: Jessica also filed a Hadoop use case, Hadoop is the right track for Spotify, a Hortonworks data lake scenario (by coincidence I was checking out Spotify’s recommendation engine while writing this – giving the nod to Pandora for now).
diginomica four: my completely subjective “top four” stories on diginomica this week:

To go digital at speed, you must rip and replace – Phil dismantles conventional enterprise bromides with efficiency. In this case, the tired mantra “never rip and replace.” Phil argues that with the pace of disruption companies face today, and the (relative) ease of new cloud deployments, a whole new mindset is needed.
It’s not about Bitcoin, it’s the blockchain stupid – Confessional: aside from a questionable fascination with Silk Road and the Deep Web, I never paid attention to Bitcoin, writing it off as corruption wrapped up in smarmy techno-idealism. But smart peeps have warned me to pay attention to the blockchain behind the bitcoin. Den’s got his pelts from finance as a BS detector, so if he’s paying attention to the blockchain, we should too.
Predictive security, meet Big Data analytics – Martin’s been waiting for predictive to wake up to security-related use cases. Here’s his report on one company (Cloudmarks) that is on the case, moving security from reactive mode. But as he points out, it’s not about big data, it’s about solving a known industry problem.
The new rules of recruitment – Janine keeps her HR groove going with a piece on how recruiting is changing/must change. Bonus point for dismantling the myth of the “talent shortage.”

Vendor analysis, diginomica style – We get a bit of an ASUG/Sapphire Now preview in Phil’s Concur and Ariba firm up SAP business networks (Phil likes the business network story, but raises questions about how the business networks message jives with the big data/HANA message – we’ll find out in two weeks). Den looks at the implications of Workday’s latest payroll announce in Workday payroll arrives for the UK – why it matters.
Balancing investor returns and social responsibility isn’t a cakewalk – Derek assesses Etsy’s chances in Etsy IPO – can it balance social responsibility with new profit pressures? (Derek explains that Etsy is one of over 1,000 US companies that has gained B-corp certification, which must adhere to strict social and environmental guidelines). Investors will weigh in shortly. Workday and Salesforce integrator Appirio always keeps things interesting, this time with a move of topcoder to AWS (and a fresh executive hire). Phil’s on the case in Appirio hires Mechanical Turk creator to automate IT services. Stuart rounds out this week’s vendor picks with InsideSales accelerates into Europe with backing from Salesforce and Microsoft.
Jon’s grab bag – after all the redundant/fussy “I like the Apple Watch/I hate the Apple Watch” reviews, it was nice to see Stuart’s enterprisey use case,  IBM prescribes digital healthcare alliance with Apple Watch wearers. 2,000 IBM “Watson Health” consultants on the way. Meantime, Den’s been making a weekly habit of either skewering bad surveys or skewering the bad analysis of said surveys – he’s at it again in Millennials prefer email for financial services – duh?. Lest we assume that Den is just a cranky old axe on a grinding mission, he’s also got a (smart) marketing feel-good story in How to win and maintain loyalty – Nespresso style.
Best of the rest
 Big data upheavals and algos-versus-humans, by several “enterprising” reporters
quotage: “Despite the headlines and hype, Spark is far from enterprise ready, Gartner Research Director Nick Heudecker said. Heudecker is among those who suspect everyone’s watching Spark because no one wants to miss the next Hadoop.” – Loraine Lawson
myPOV:  Seems data pushed to the fore this week. As in: Loraine Lawson asking if Apache Spark is enterprise ready. Based on her latest research/interviews, seems the appeal of Spark’s Hadoop processing speed (including in-memory option) is tempered by its (relative) immaturity. Spark alternatives are also noted. Lawson also looked at the keys to data executive skills in What Makes a Good Chief Data Officer Candidate? (my short answer: lots of biz and data experience, but the real sizzle is strategic, re: convince executives that this expensive data festival will produce an actual result). 

As for algo-versus-humans, I was intrigued to learn of an Algorithm that ‘identifies future trolls from just five posts’ (as per researchers at Cornell and Stanford). The catch? It’s right about 80 percent of the time, which make sense – trolls do tend to exhibit certain predictable behaviors, but a few will modify and adapt, just like the blue algae from which they evolved.  Larry Dignan had a piping fresh take on Google’s pending search changes in Google’s mobile friendly algorithm change on deck: The case for blowback.
Me: there WILL be blowback, all depends on who gets punished and to what extent. But Google has to do this, before Facebook finishes eating their mobile lunch. And: maybe we can turn these algos to the advantage of actual human beings – or so argues designer Jarno Koponen in We Need Algorithmic Angels (nice piece!)
Other standouts

Accenture and IBM’s “cloud” forays, Workday’s payroll adventures, SAP’s UX bar-raising: A platter of vendor stories – UpperEdge won the day with the use of my favorite Donald Rumsfeld quote (the “known unknowns”) in Accenture’s Deal to Move $45B Rio Tinto to the Cloud – The Risk of the “Unknown Unknowns.”, which in this case, also serves as a risk assessment for “cloud ERP”. Meantime, Vinnie Mirchandani served up one of the more balanced Workday pieces i’ve seen in the public domain in Workday – time for a fork? ASUG News wraps my vendor coverage picks with reportage on a member survey which revealed UX attitude changes (ASUG Member Survey Finds UX a Growing Priority, Fiori at Forefront). Me: maybe it’s time to dust off that old “enjoy SAP” marketing warhorse?
Recruitment does not have to suck, and neither does influencer relations – Two nifty pieces, the first, Vijay Vijayasankar’s Recruitment does not have to suck, is a trove of valuable advice. Once upon an age I “ran a desk,” and this stuff from Vijayasankar passes the ol’ BS filter, with keepers such as: talk about money early (yes!) and stop it with the “gotcha” questions. On influencer relations, Gartner’s Hank Barnes has fresh tips from his latest influencer research (In Weakness There is Strength, Particularly with Influencers). Loved “Consider exposing weaknesses” and “Let your customers tell your story.”

Honorable mention
GetSatisfaction: the controversy cannot hide the facts – an informative rant following GetSatisfaction’s acquisition by Sprinklr (and no, we still don’t get enterprise communities – instead of “freely-moldable,” we mostly have “moldy” ones.
IT’s cloud security concerns do not correlate to actual failures – as concise a destruction of cloud-security-phobia as you’re going to find.
Meet the lawyer taking on Uber and the rest of the on-demand economy – the “sharing economy” is an accurate phrase for the way these companies are happy to “share” the expenses of being an employee with their so-called  “independent” contractors. One lawyer is trying to do the obvious: force these companies to treat employees like (legal) employees.
Ev Williams’ Rules for Quality Content in the Clickbait Age – a tad surprised by how much I liked this piece, terrific stuff on Medium’s lessons for avoiding the drive-by comment cesspool.
The 15 Diseases of Leadership, According to Pope Francis – Taylor Swift made “hits and misses” before the Pope did – says more about me than the Pope, who seems to have some spot-on leadership advice.
Moore’s Law Hits 50, but It May Not See 60 – Lots of pieces on Moore’s Law this week, to be honest wasn’t real fond of any of them, and each take was different, but here’s one flavor.
Whiffs
Whiffs are stuffed into this pinata – start with a couple of what Frank Scavo and I call “bonehead alerts.” (yes, you can track bonehead alerts on Twitter). Starting with this genius chessmaster, who was nabbed for cheating on his iPhone in a bathroom stall (the clincher: he hadn’t logged out of social media, thus losing deniability). Scavo surfaced this dude, a baggage handler who fell asleep in the luggage hold of an Alaska Airlines flight (and wasn’t fired, his employer has a generous napping policy).
I shouldn’t leave out this JC Penney executive who accidentally emailed confidential sales figures to a securities analyst, thereby crudding the stock price. Oh, and Burger King Russia posted a “Tittygram.”
Shifting to blog whiffery, I was intrigued to read Wired’s financial case for Spotify Is Worth $8 Billion? It’s Not as Crazy as It Sounds (I’m a happy Spotify customer but wildly underconfident in their biz model). In the article, the case for Spotify is made via this extensive analysis, and I quote, “Someone has to win at streaming music.” Trenchant stuff. The other reason they are worth $8 billion? Maybe someone will acquire them someday. Really makes you think…
I’m also not a fan of the ol’ bait-and-switcher post I call the “agnostic preacher.” Posts like The Messaging Shockwave lure with ideas on how we can move beyond the “document era”.  But halfway through an interesting (if evangelical) piece on moving beyond stale silos, we find ourselves in a drop-your-drawers product pitch for this dude’s startup. Hey, before we cop a feel, how about a cup of coffee at least?
Officially off-topic
For more honesty in communications, this Honest Trailer: The Hobbit (Battle of the 5 Armies) is a shish-kebobing of a truly bloated project. The New Yorker’s Honest LinkedIn Recommendations also refreshed, even if they were fictional(ized).
Several neato innovation stories: Hunting Down Asteroids with Machine Learning and a World of Programmers, This Is Big: A Robo-Car Just Drove Across the Country, and OREGON HAS GIVEN THE OK TO MAKE BEER FROM SEWAGE WATER (ordinarily I retype all-caps-headlines, but what the heck).  See you next time….
Which #ensw pieces of merit did I miss? Let us know in the comments.
Most Enterprise hits and misses articles are selected from my curated @jonerpnewsfeed. ìmyPOVî is borrowed with reluctant permission from the ubiquitous Ray Wang.

Image credits: Cheerful Chubby Man © RA Studio, Happy Children © Anna Omelchenko, Waiter Suggesting Bottle © Minerva Studiom, Overworked Businessman © Bloomua, King Checkmate © mystock88photo – all from Fotolia.com
Disclosure: SAP, Workday and Salesforce are diginomica premier partners as of this writing.

Read more on: Best of archivesHits and misses 