

diginomica hit: Azure vs AWS – cloud wars move to the app building layer by Phil
quotage: “This serverless approach to app development is still at a very early adopter phase, but then so was the notion of pay-as-you-go cloud computing a decade ago. Chatting to RedMonk analyst James Governor as he and I emerged from the auditorium, we agreed that this was one of those AWS innovations that has the potential to become bigger than anyone expects in years to come.”
myPOV: Just when we wrap our heads around the cloud rivals, Phil flips the script on us. Fresh from a recent Amazon event, Phil sees a big new storyline: “Something interesting is happening as AWS moves into its second decade. The battle to win the cloud platform wars is moving into the application layer.” Which, in turn, invokes a new round of competition between Microsoft and Salesforce, as Microsoft amps up its own AppSource platform. It’s high stakes stuff, with the “serverless apps” twist Phil cited above adding to the thickening plot.
I’m only mildly interested in vendor faceoffs, but the cool part is customers winning out through a cloud stack that is much more viable for digital business than what we had even five years ago. Phil added another dimension to this story with Mondo builds first cloud-native bank on AWS, giving the fledgling venture his coveted “frictionless enterprise” benediction stamp of approval. Stuart tops off a good news week for Microsoft – and data privacy buffs – with Irish eyes are smiling for Microsoft as Justice Dept loses data access appeal, though this one ain’t over yet.
diginomica four: my top four stories on diginomica this week:

More digital can be digitally-tragic, not digitally-transformed – Martin breaks down some fresh data on digital transformation from Progress, warning “Saying that digital transformation is the next major goal is easy, even saying it publicly, but achieving it can be eye-wateringly complex.”
Lack of skills impacts HR analytics uptake – Janine weighs data from Society for Human Resource Management (SHRM) Foundation report, which found that HR analytics growth is hampered by cultural and logistical issues. Kicker question: what happens when the data conflicts with your gut?
Brexit and the tech sector – glass half full or half empty? – Fancy a bit more Brexit? If so, this two-part glass half empty/full series from Stuart is your fix. If you’re in a dour mood you may want to go with glass half-empty: Brexit and the tech sector – a glass half empty. But fear not, optimists, as there is a sunny side: Brexit and the tech sector – Keep Calm and Carry On. I’m not sure where I land yet; visiting the UK the mood is more “business as usual” than I expected, but I have had a couple apoplectic reactions also. Fortunately, the Americans won’t botch up our election… Err…

Vendor analysis, diginomica style. Here’s my three top choices from our vendor coverage:

Inforum 2016 – customer use cases and analysis – Derek and I hit the big apple and did our diginomica darndest to take Infor’s user conference by storm, focusing on Infor’s cloudy/digital push. Use cases include: TAL Apparel set to upgrade ageing ERP platform to Infor CloudSuite, Travis Perkins and Bank of America buy into Infor strategy, and Mastering the HR Cloud – Pilot Flying J on their Infor CloudSuite HCM migration.
News/analysis included: Infor refines its cloud strategy – focus on services, the network and IoT and, Derek’s feature on the biggest news story of the show, Infor begins to sell Hook & Loop’s digital services – here’s why. I looked at the cloudy predicaments ERP services firms face in Briefing review – can Infor’s partner strategy keep pace with its digital pursuits?
Local authority collaboration offers growth opportunity for S/4 HANA – Martin on a different kind of S/4HANA use case, and ultimately, as Martin points out, a “greying of the traditional dividing lines between customer and supplier.“

A few more vendor picks, without my running asides:

Infosys Q1 FY2017 – headwinds and Brexit – Den
Rimini Street accelerates growth in Q2 FY2016 – Den

Best of the rest
 Spreecast Enabled Listening to the Edges– a solution obituary and howl for better webinar tools – by Mark Finnern
quotage: “To my big surprise and dismay Spreecast didn’t get enough traction in the market and has shut down their service yesterday July 14th 2016.”
myPOV: The maestro of the interactive webinar Mark Finnern bids adieu to his favorite webinar platform. It’s a sad goodbye indeed because all of the existing webinar options pretty much suck – or they have serious limitations. Full disclosure – Finnern is a close friend but he gets airtime here because he’s kicked all the community platform tires. In addition to a howl into the dead product wind, Finnern places the call out for more better webinar tools. He’s right about Google Hangouts being the closest, but they lack some crucial webinar features, sticking us with some canned tools to deliver stinted, stuffy corporate programming – not the community interactions that glue us into something of value.
If you’ve got something better, let him – and me – know. Bonus: the piece begins with a tangentially-related anecdote about the birth of SAP R/3 that is surprisingly interesting.
Two three standouts:
Mueller on Microsoft – sounds like a nice column title eh? Though I’m guessing that Constellation’s Holger Mueller wouldn’t want to cover only Microsoft, what would he do with his suitcase full of travel miles? At any rate, he’s on Microsoft watch this week, with his blow-by-blow News Analysis – GE and Microsoft partner to bring Predix to Azure – Multi-Cloud becomes tangible for IoT. Gist: “GE and Microsoft are partnering for something bigger and bringing Predix to Azure was only one part of the partnership.”
HfS dukes it out for best post title of the week – HfS Research clogged the finalist lane with two of the standout post titles of the week, OneOffice or DumbOffice? Service providers are bifurcating again, by Phil Fersht, and The services industry hokey pokey continues as inertia takes hold of many, by Jamie Snowdon. Oh, and the pieces are worth reading too, with different takes on the services firms in the fast lane and the ones in the slow. Vintage Fersht: “Technology is moving at warp speed, while talent is not – that is the great digital quagmire enterprise clients need to solve, if they are to be successful down the road.”
Honorable mention

Why SAP is Quietly Playing Test-and-See With Blockchain – Not surprising that SAP is hedging its blockchain bets for now (most vendors are), but interesting to see their pursuits are (reportedly!) motivated by, as Coindesk posits, a “rising tide of client interest.”
Too much big data running through my brain – nice rant, and one example that an abundance of data doesn’t always help us, tragically, is threat detection.
Musings – The Privacy Shield is real – what are the CxO repercussions? – how’s this for a heavy duty takeaway: “If an enterprise does not have data centers on both sides of the Atlantic – it’s time to get them in place, or long term write off the business on the other continent.”
A technical glitch – an erudite deconstruction of Facebook’s condescending/ridiculous excuse for their (temporary) Live video takedown last week, and, yeah, the future of news.
Face computers slowly find their place in business – A very solid piece on virtual reality, with plenty of quotage from the field.
Whiffs
It would be impossible to write a whiffs column this week without the tomfoolery invoked by Pokémon Go. To be fair it’s not the game’s fault, and the creators are obviously geniuses of the highest marketing order. I also like that the game forces folks to shake off our sedentary couch dust and forage in the (semi) real world.
Yeah, all the whiffs here are on the human contestants, and most are either dangerous or sad. This one is more head-scratching/remarkable/wait-and-see: Pokémon Go: man quits job to become full-time Pokémon hunter. Yup, he’ll be on the hunt for the little ones throughout New Zealand:
Each morning he fills a flask with coffee, packs a rain jacket and cut lunch in his backpack and heads into the wilderness to hunt Pokémon – come rain, hail, or snow.
But hold up – maybe this is no whiff after all. I read on:
There were about 100 people there hunting. And some of these people would usually be shut up at home and really reclusive. Hunting for Pokémon is bringing them into the real world. It was such a buzzy atmosphere, when someone spotted a rare Pokémon they would shout out to alert the crowd
I’m feeling less and less confident that this is actually a whiff. Feels more and more like one of those rare unscripted moments where barriers are broken. Grrr. Okay, well this is definitely a Pokémon whiff. And this is a Twitter whiff, of the “let’s hijack a popular hashtag and… uh oh” variety.
Ordinarily I have more whiffery for ya, but tomorrow the far-flung diginomica core team shuts itself in a room as we do twice a year, and try not to kill each other figure out how we can really rock this thing. We’d have no ability to do that if it wasn’t for your readership and loyalty, so thank you – seriously. Oh, and if you don’t see any content from us starting Wednesday, you’ll know we didn’t work it out this time. But somehow I think we will – improbably, this motley crue crew unlikely upstart endeavor always seems to. And that’s thanks in no small part to you.
Which #ensw pieces of merit did I miss? Let us know in the comments.
Image credit - Cheerful Chubby Man © RA Studio, Happy Children © Anna Omelchenko, Waiter Suggesting Bottle © Minerva Studiom, Overworked Businessman © Bloomua, Man © Dudarev Mikhail - all from Fotolia.com.Disclosure - SAP, Oracle, Infor, and Rimini Street are diginomica premier partners as of this writing.Read more on: Cloud platforms - infrastructure and architectureHits and misses 