

Lead story – Don’t fear GDPR, embrace it – but how? Stories by Den Howlett, Derek du Preez and Chris Middleton

myPOV: It might not take a village to solve GDPR, but it does take the full brunt of the diginomica team. This week, Den ran his own GDPR personal spank tunnel. On the one hand, he had a useful/surprising GDPR convo with an Episever lawyer at Ascend London 2018 (Don’t fear GDPR compliance, embrace it says a lawyer).
On the other, he had a truly godawful exercise in sleep deprivation enlightening experience trying to put diginomica’s GDPR plans into action with our chosen email provider MailChimp, a company that has a special way of combining a compliance mindset with confusing and inflexible tools (3 crucial reasons why MailChimp may not be your best choice under the GDPR compliance regime).
Den’s Episerver interview reinforces why GDPR is imposing the right discipline on marketers. Good advice to frame GDPR is user friendly language, rather than cover-your-behind gobbledegook. And yeah, as attorney Peter Yeung tells Den,  “Ultimately, [GDPR] is going to make your marketing so much better than it is today.”
For those companies still coming to terms with GDPR, the views Derek shares in Salesforce, Hive and Aston Martin downplay GDPR angst – ‘it’s the bare minimum, not the gold standard’ might prove a bit daunting:
It was encouraging to hear a number of global brands speaking at the opening of Salesforce’s new Innovation Centre in London this week, claiming that GDPR should not be seen as the end goal – but rather the bare minimum.
Chris Middleton adds another twist, examining the U.S. follow-on effect in The U.S. will have to follow Europe on GDPR, says SugarCRM CEO, but it won’t be easy. I hope Chris is right, though U.S. consumers will need to find their conviction on data privacy for that to happen.
Meanwhile, on the MailChimp side, here’s hoping Den’s lessons will be helpful to others walking this path, whether with MailChimp or another provider. We’re not on the other side of our actions yet, but we’ve taken the route of blogging our own GDPR moves. We believe you deserve that visibility with the discerning attention you grant us.
Den’s most recent MailChimp piece will catch you up, with links to the backstory. I get the feeling there will be another fun sequel next week.
Diginomica picks – my top two stories on diginomica this week

Time to get your digital mojo together – right? How? – Den slices and dices an HfS Research/Cognizant digital transformation report, unveiling his digital transformation BS detector; call it the butterfly test. Sidenote: I applied views from an HfS show on the talent issue in The digital skills imperative – RPA and services leaders weigh in.
Behind the scenes of State Street’s ‘Fearless Girl’ campaign – ordinarily I would not give a viral campaign story the time of day, but this one from Jess is different indeed.

Vendor analysis, diginomica style. Here’s my three top choices from another vigorous week of vendor events:

Rimini Street inks landmark partnership deal with Salesforce – a conversation with Seth Ravin – Den with an inside look on Rimini Street’s new premium support options for Salesforce Sales and Service Cloud customers. Den hits the ‘ol nail with this point: “Ravin is right to note the difference in attitude of the on-premise provider and the complex SaaS offering. Despite the fact that Salesforce provides a service, it is not in the service support business but in growing the footprint of its offerings inside the enterprise. Viewing Rimini Street as complementary is refreshing.”
Nutanix partners with Google as it tries to make the clouds all disappear – Don’t led the clever headline mislead; Nutanix isn’t trying to make cloud go away. As Martin reports, it’s about giving customer the tools to manage their multi-cloud headache nirvana panacea landscape. Martin calls it the “cloud of clouds” – Nutanix went with monicker “Xi,” a Nutanix SaaS service.
MuleSoft CTO and Sir Tim Berners-Lee want to open up API silos – Phil on two very different players who want (sort of) the same thing: “APIs have emerged as a fundamental building block of the digital world. But so far, they’ve emerged in a haphazard way. The proposals from MuleSoft and from Berners-Lee’s Solid initiative each provide an opportunity to bring more order to the API ecosystem.”

A few more vendor picks, without the quotables

Competition heats up for AI workloads: GPUs aka NVIDIA no longer the only option – Kurt
How BD Digital Health built a smart diabetes app on their own platform with Couchbase – Jon
How TD Bank avoided data swamps and built their digital engine with Talend – Jon

Jon’s grab bag – Can Disney mount a significant online challenge to Netflix? If content is king, then perhaps yes. Stuart parses the drama in Disney CEO can’t wait to go Solo with digital disruption. I found a GDPR angle of my own in my loving tribute to one of my favorite social services in Klout throws in the towel on whatever they were trying to accomplish – long live GDPR! Please send flowers.
Stuart saves some of his sharpest spleen for Facebook, because, well, they deserve it. In Zuck to the UK Government – I’m still not coming to see you! he updates on Zuckerberg’s refusal to play the regulatory dance across the pond (though he has agreed to appear before the EU, though not in a formal hearing). Leaving Stuart to crack:

I said previously that I couldn’t imagine a way in which Facebook could have more badly handled this ongoing crisis. I shouldn’t have underestimated them.

Best of the rest
 Lead story – Ten red flags signaling your analytics program will fail – by McKinsey & Company
myPOV:  McKinsey won the “analytics buzzkill” prize his week with the obvious/worrying observation that companies are starting to realize their neato analytics projects don’t scale. The data: a recent McKinsey survey found that only 8 percent of 1,000 respondents with analytics initiatives engaged in effective scaling practices. 

So McKinsey came up with ten reasons your analytics project will crud out. I thought this would be one of those click-regret slide shows, but it’s a substantial offering you’ll want to dig into. Just keep in mind these are “advanced analytics” projects here, meaning AI-enabled/predictive type stuff. If I have to pick one from the ten, it’s failure to identify business value before diving into early use cases:
[A large conglomerate] identified a handful of use cases and began to put analytics resources against them. But the company did not precisely assess the feasibility or calculate the business value that these use cases could generate, and, lo and behold, the ones it chose produced little value.
All too familiar… And no way to build momentum from that wet noodle.
Other standouts:

Open-source vulnerabilities plague enterprise codebase systems – Instead of an open source feel-good story, I picked a feel-queasy story by Charlie Osborne. She cites this lovely bit from a Black Duck Software report: “A third of enterprise codebases have still not patched the same vulnerability which caused Equifax such heartache.”
Microsoft Build gets reviewed, Office 365 sales tactics get scrutiny – One of our most over-traveled ubiquitous enterprise analysts (Constellation’s Holger Mueller) was on site for Microsoft’s big developer show. See his rundown in Event Report – Microsoft Build 2018 – AI, IoT and bringing it together. Meanwhile, because enterprise vendors are masters of the fine print, UpperEdge provides Microsoft 365 advisory in Microsoft 365: Look before you leap.
AI in action, with the future of work in the spotlight – As usual, we had reams of AI posts this week. I choose the practical, starting with Where Bank of America uses AI, and where its worries lie (kudos for acknowledging the bias issues, though not sure the fix is that easy). Also see this AI and the future of work ditty with a very long title. On ZDNet, Joe McKendrick wants to see inside the black box (good luck with that): Time to break open AI’s black box, and keep it open.

Honorable mention

Five Reasons Why Machine Learning Needs To Make Resumes Obsolete – Louis Columbus of IQMS with fresh data on ML and recruitment. Money quote:  “It’s time the hiring process gets smarter, more infused with contextual intelligence, insight, evaluating candidates on their mastery of needed skills rather than judging candidates on resumes that reflect what they’ve achieved in the past.”
Aptos Engage 2018—“Retail Differently” for Retailer Survival – TEC’s PJ Jakovljevic on one vendor’s quest for omni-channel excellence.
Why Serverless Requires Rethinking the IT Department – “Serverless” is a fancy way of saying, “pay for hardware/data centers only when you need them.” But a new approach requires new skills – yep, there’s always a gotcha for any IT cure-all.
Deep learning with synthetic data will democratize the tech industry – Grandiose headline? Yes – but a cool concept nonetheless.

Whiffs
Lots of goobers competing for the Darwin awards this week, including a number of fraidy cat/lost-the-plot white people who called the police on black people for whatever reason, such sleeping in their own dorm at Harvard, barbequing, or not waving and smiling at them (WTF).
Pardon my victory lap, but there’s another kind of fool to acknowledge this week, those who lightened wallets down the wrong rabbit hole:

“Exclusive: Lithium Technologies to Acquire Klout” http://t.co/eGffVfDa4A -> flabbergasted by $100m price tag. Not a bargain at any price
— Jon Reed (@jonerp) February 11, 2014
Guru chasing is expensive, eh? I ding the airlines a lot in hits/misses, but I can’t really trash American Airlines for drawing the line at emotional support hedgehogs and guinea pigs:

American Airlines bans emotional support hedgehogs? This is an outrage! -> https://t.co/o0gJyrb9P9
— Jon Reed (@jonerp) May 15, 2018
Good news for me: you can still bring your miniature horse – if they are certified. And speaking of investors dashing their dreams on the cruel rocks of common sense:

This Smart Luggage Company Is Going Out Of Business https://t.co/urCdoRkB74 -> turns out Lithium battery powered bags weren’t such a great gamble.
— Jon Reed (@jonerp) May 17, 2018
On the AIs-in-disguise front, this professor seemed to get a lot of kudos for using an AI bot as a teaching assistant. Call me old-fashioned but disclosing you are interacting with a bot is the right thing to do. Manipulating students in some kind of social experiment and not getting called out for it because you are techno-cool isn’t well, cool. Anyhow, I’m calling you out. Next time do your science projects with permission forms (though there’s no need for future disclosures now).
Which brings us to Google. With the exception of Facebook, is there anyone better at tripping on their own techno-arrogance?

What Google isn’t telling us about its AI demo https://t.co/pPrSQfwV4w -> this one went from euphoric PR to the usual Google cloak and dagger rather quickly
— Jon Reed (@jonerp) May 17, 2018
Look, Google’s Duplex was one of the most convincing AI phone conversations I’ve ever heard. But when they won’t even disclose whether the calls were edited, that’s a bad look (see Axios’ sharp deconstruction). Now, Google has said that in the wild, “Duplex” will disclose they are a bot when they call. My question is: how will that go? How many restaurant workers will simply hang up the phone at that point?
Verbal bot disclosure is not a footnote – it’s the toughest design element of all. Oh well, at least Google got its techno-fan worship news cycle before the aftertaste of informed questions finally kicked in.
As for me, I’ll settle for Google figuring out how to do hands-free directions in my car. I still have to touch the screen for directions once my idiotic pseudo-companion who can rarely understand me over normal road noise “OK Google” pulls up a map. If that’s a “smart” assistant, I’ll take a dumb one. See you next time…
If you find an #ensw piece that qualifies for hits and misses – in a good or bad way – let me know in the comments as Clive (almost) always does.
Most Enterprise hits and misses articles are selected from my curated @jonerpnewsfeed. ‘myPOV’ is borrowed with reluctant permission from the ubiquitous Ray Wang.
 
Image credit - Cheerful Chubby Man © RA Studio, Happy Children © Anna Omelchenko, Waiter Suggesting Bottle © Minerva Studiom, Overworked Businessman © Bloomua, Loser and Winner © ispstock - all from Fotolia.com.Disclosure - SAP, Oracle, Rimini Street, Workday and Salesforce are diginomica premier partners as of this writing.Read more on: Analytics planning and data analysisHits and missesIoT robotics and AIMachine intelligence and AI 