
Diginomica picks – my top three stories on diginomica this week

Jet-powering Walmart to go on the offensive – e-commerce chief Marc Lore has battleplans – In the third of his three-part update on the state of retail at Walmart, Stuart hones in on Walmart’s storefront strategy, its pursuit of millennials online, and the role of Jet.com. The online mass retail market will get too crowded to be much of a differentiator without in-store integration. Walmart has stores close to 90 percent of the U.S. population. They haven’t conquered delivery but in-store pickup is getting better. “Upscale” and targeted online efforts like Jet.com bear watching. I wouldn’t shop there, but that’s probably a good sign for Jet’s prospects.
The robots are coming to serve you – just not in the way you think – Chris returns to his AI futures wheelhouse by crunching a new survey from the International Federation of Robotics. It’s a complicated picture, with robots enhancing smart homes and augmenting information worker roles. But: industrial robots replacing manual labor has big employment implications.
‘GDPR-US’ is needed, says Apple’s Tim Cook as he blasts “data industrial complex” – I’m always wary of Apple taking the data ethics high ground as Apple has its own corporate quandries, but – good to see executives calling BS on (free) data exploitation. Jerry’s got the story.

Oracle OpenWorld, diginomica style. Derek, Jessica and Madeline hit every session imaginable. Den provided analysis via his pre-briefs. Kurt added context. You can see the extensive news analysis and use case stories in our complete Oracle OpenWorld collection. I’ll pick just one per team member here:

Ellison makes convincing pitch on automation and security for Oracle Cloud 2.0…but can’t resist trashing AWS – Derek
Oracle OpenWorld 2018 – The intelligent apps equation – Den
Oracle OpenWorld 2018 – Noble Plastics uses IoT to keep a close eye on plant-floor assets – Jessica
Oracle OpenWorld 2018 – Be selfish, be a role model and take affirmative action: How to be an inclusive leader – Madeline
Oracle OpenWorld 2018 – making the cloud friendly for enterprises that distrust cloud – Kurt

Oh, and I’m not letting this “buzzworthy” piece by Derek get away without a wretched pun on my part: Oracle OpenWorld 2018 – Oracle and the World Bee Project create a buzz using smart hives to conserve declining bee populations.
Meanwhile, Den was delving into SAP TechEd Barcelona and surfacing ABAP cloud debates:

SAP TechEd 2018 Barcelona – Björn Goerke, SAP’s CTO – There is no future with ABAP alone, and there is no future in SAP without ABAP.

Watch for his TechEd wrap on Monday with embedded podcasts. Phil wrapped his fruitful Twilio expedition with:

Twilio proclaims a communications renaissance for frictionless enterprise

That leaves me and my aimless wanderings brilliant forays cross-coastal midadventures across events of all sizes, documented in stories like:

How Nationwide Insurance uses Tableau to drive its data-driven ambitions
Zoom CEO on the new wave of collaboration – customers want best-of-breed, with no weak links
Sage Intacct Advantage 2018 – customers speak to the results of financial transformation

I also did the podcast wrap with diginomica contributor Brian Sommer, The Sage Intacct Advantage Review – CFOs, finance transformation and the Gaylord hotel experience, wherein I gave Brian 30 seconds to air out his unequivocal endorsement deep appreciation undying love for the Nashville Gaylord Opryland Hotel.
Best of the rest
My top five picks from the enterprise blogosphere this week

Train Your Internal Team to Maximize the Value of Consultants – 6 Best Practices – UpperEdge is on a content tear; check the UpperEdge blog for more on contract negotiations, AI bias, and several worthwhile SAP pieces, including impact of Teradata lawsuit and cloudy earnings analysis. Pull quote from this piece:

Just because it is Accenture, IBM, Deloitte or another top-tier firm does not ensure value. The responsibility for value extraction lies with the client.
Can I get an amen? Now if I can just talk UpperEdge into swapping out the web site stock photos for pictures of their team in action…
The Internet of Things Needs an Infusion of Web Technologies – this New Stack ditty dates to October 11. The analysis just scratches the surface but important issues on lack of IoT standardization are raised. On my enterprise conversations Facebook page, IoT smarty and startup wizard Mrinal Wadhwa reacted:
Agree that we’re stuck in a PoC hell. However, this view of “Let’s fall back to the old internet protocols because the broad acceptance of newer more efficient protocols hasn’t succeeded so far” is not a good plan. Efficiency in these protocols is often the difference that makes a product viable or not. Often the people who invent these new protocols are trying to make a device viable in extreme conditions… very low power, limited connectivity etc.
Three more top picks:

Developer Talent is Now the Biggest Challenge to Companies – Another New Stack ditty, riffing on an illuminating survey: “Access to developer talent is now more important to companies than access to capital! About 61 percent of executives consider this a potential threat to their business.” Not sure that flies as a universal, but it’s an important debate.
The Current State Of Cybersecurity Shows Now Is The Time For Zero Trust – Louis “trust no one” Columbus schools us with more data on why “Zero Trust” security is non-negotiable for ethical companies – make that all companies – going forward.
Email Is Dead. NOT. – Alan Lepofsky of Constellation Research picks up the email/productivity debate. I get caught in the middle of this one as I continue to believe email is a massive corporate productivity drain. But I argue for ring fencing email not attempting to kill it. Email would be harder to kill than spreadsheets.

Whiffs
Always tough to pick four whiffs but that’s my job this week. Nice to know someone else needs to push away from their desk:

Jon — just checking in … I saw you wrote about “personalization” and “AI,” maybe we can set up a “quick call” to discuss your apprehension to drink said Kool-Aid?
— thomas wailgum (@twailgum) October 26, 2018
Sidenote: thanks to Wailgum for lookin’ out. Meanwhile, I had another setback in my quest to become an AI art collector:

Portrait by AI program sells for $432,000 https://t.co/Yg7GEKWl49 -> I drew a hard line at $300,000 and dropped out of the bidding
— Jon Reed (@jonerp) October 25, 2018
Remember that your-kettle-is-as-black-as-my-pot warning I issued to Apple for calling out Google on ethics? Well, here’s some turnabout for ya: Google warns Apple: Missing bugs in your security bulletins are ‘disincentive to patch’. But hey, as long as Apple fixes the bugs, why should they bother with the transparency they demand of other tech companies? Don’t know about you, but I find that high horses bring saddle burns.
Finally, will some please just return the $4,000 inflatable colon used for education stolen in Kansas? Talk about zero trust security – if you can’t trust the people with a massive inflatable colon what is the world coming to?
See you next time… If you find an #ensw piece that qualifies for hits and misses – in a good or bad way – let me know in the comments as Clive (almost) always does.
Most Enterprise hits and misses articles are selected from my curated @jonerpnewsfeed. ‘myPOV’ is borrowed with reluctant permission from the ubiquitous Ray Wang.
Image credit - Cheerful Chubby Man © RA Studio, Happy Children © Anna Omelchenko, Waiter Suggesting Bottle © Minerva Studiom, Overworked Businessman © Bloomua, King Checkmate © mystock88photo - all from Fotolia.com.Disclosure - SAP, Oracle, Workday and Salesforce are diginomica premier partners as of this writing.Read more on: Hits and missesProfessional servicesRetail e-commerce and the omni-channelThe new professional and IT as a service 