
diginomica hit: VMworld 2015 – hybrid clouds, storage disruptions, and… Gorbachev? by Den Howlett
quotage:“As VMware acknowledges, legacy applications that sit in ‘old’ data centers are complex yet stable and compliant. Moving them off to a public cloud represents a risk for certain classes of core business application. Even if you can do that, why would any enterprise contemplate such a move unless the cost business case is so compelling as to be a no-brainer?”

myPOV: There was a lot at stake at this year’s VMworld. Hybrid cloud debate is reaching a fever pitch, with customers trying to make sense of the smartest approach for combining on-prem and cloud landscapes. Cloud storage hasn’t been solved at scale. And in the background, chatter about EMC and VMware spinning off/reverse-acquiring. Den was on the ground to take it all in. He issued several feisty/thoughtful views on what worked and what didn’t, starting with VMWorld 2015 day 1 – it’s all about hybrid cloud and developers.
Den balked at kool-aid overload on day one, but on day two, he analyzed a less branded keynote (VMWorld 2015 day 2 – CEO Pat Gelsinger’s public job interview). The hybrid cloud dilemmas deserve a full reading of Den’s pieces. Den seems on board with Gelsinger’s IT futures, but unconvinced about VMware’s role. Den surfaced a compelling story in The future of enterprise storage – Formation Data Systems, including a live podcast.
Formation Data Systems believes the Amazons of the world haven’t solved the enterprise cloud storage issue. Their solution could be disruptive to VMware parent company EMC. But what’s an enterprise event without some frenemies tension? As for Gorbachev? That’s a Den Howlett special, relating to VMware’s Airwatch mobile play. This leads us back into “enterprise frenemies” territory by hitching a wagon to Windows 10 (VMWorld 2015 day 2 – VMWare and Microsoft equals Gorbachev and Reagan).
diginomica four: my completely subjective top four stories on diginomica this week:

Targeting markets – the key to ‘selling’ cloud – Martin builds on some of diginomica’s “industry cloud” themes, arguing that cloud service providers are (mostly) overlooking the chance to target specific markets with relevant services.
Breast milk shipping and frozen eggs – tackling female tech talent shortages or vendor selfishness? – I wasn’t expecting to see this blog title in diginomica this week, but Cath delivered with an interesting take on female tech “perks.” She raises dilemmas I wouldn’t have thought of. In a related post, Derek takes the hyperactive tech media behind the proverbial woodshed in STOP THE PRESSES! Silicon Valley woman announces she’s having twins.
u-blox unblocks processes with integrated HCM – Ditching Microsoft Word for cloud HCM? Sounds like a winner to me – but there’s more to the story. In this use case, Janine shares how u-blox is simplifying processes as it moves to cloud HCM.

Vendor analysis, diginomica style – It was a veritable smorgasboard this week, starting with the customer lessons in 5 practical tips from the Workday customer coalface. I had to look up coalface – thanks Phil for the vocabulary expansion. (Sidenote: this was one of my fave pieces of the week and a must-read for SaaS customers.) Contributor Dick Hirsch assessed new SAP announcements in New business services come to SAP HCP, weakening the IaaS/PaaS distinctions, and readers liked. Bonus: interesting comment thread.
I wasn’t expecting Oracle to do an agile smackdown, but pigs fly now and again. Phil’s got the story in Who do you think you’re kidding, says Oracle. Oracle conducted a Cloud Agility study that found customers falling behind. Phil: “According to Oracle, many business people have not realized how far their organization’s IT infrastructure and application development capabilities have fallen behind what’s possible with today’s cloud technologies.”
But as Phil is quick to point out: “Of course Oracle has a clear vested interest in pushing this message.” The findings are still worthy of discussion. Phil also got the context in the Blackberry-Good acquisition, talking to CEO Christy Wyatt. Phil shows his own vendor agility in Salesforce Health Cloud bets on healthcare transformation. He added a partner-related piece, Salesforce partner Apttus becomes latest B2B unicorn. Jessica rounds it out with a nifty cloud ERP use case, NetSuite helps Scoot manage a swift takeoff and ascent.

Jon’s grab bag – Den puts Uber head to head against his local taxi service in Uber – a re-assessment from the user’s perspective. Uber fares pretty darn well, pun intended. Derek wraps my picks with Want high achieving STEM-focused kids? Take away screens and think about their toys. A Cambridge University Study found that the more hours students spend in front of a screen has a detrimental impact on their school results. That’s the “take away screens” part. The “think about their toys” part is how gender-specific toys can impact future aptitudes. Derek’s given parents plenty to noodle on…

Best of the rest
 Holger Mueller on VMworld, SAP clouds, and IBM IoT by Holger “I got this” Mueller
quotage: “It is good when vendors stay the course, as software is like wine, it takes time to become good. So no disappointment by this analyst that VMware showed execution along the same strategy. The gambit for VMware is, if it can grow new products fast enough as on-premises compute virtualization dripples away to the cloud.” – Holger Mueller
myPOV: Ladies/gents, today we shine a spotlight on the ever-present Holger Mueller, who has become one of most reliable voices on the jetlaggy enterprise event circuit. And when he doesn’t make an event, Mueller bravely wades into even more treacherous territory: the press announcement. This week, Mueller was at VMworld, and filed an upbeat piece that acknowledges the problem of timing customers’ move to the cloud.
Then Mueller took on two press releases. First he dove into SAP’s HCP cloud services and Hadoop innovation two-for-one announcement. I hit on HCP in Hirsch’s piece. As for Hadoop, SAP announced SAP HANA Vora software, which Mueller terms “a new in-memory computing innovation for Hadoop.” Mueller comments on what Vora brings to Spark. For the first iteration, it’s about hierarchies: “an important concept for enterprise applications, traditionally missing on the Hadoop side.”
Bonus points to Mueller problematizing SAP’s data democratization verbiage: “enterprises are not run as democracies, so data access is not democratic either.” These are pretty big announcements from SAP that we’ll shed more light on during TechEd season. Finally, Mueller posted a news analysis of IBM and ARM’s IoT partnership. Gist? Mueller likes the big data (IBM)/little data (ARM) potential here. As always, the announcement is easier than the execution.
Other standouts

Networks, transaction costs, and threats to the modern firm? – Tim O’Reilly’s been pondering the future of work in a fruitful article series. His latest: Networks and the Nature of the Firm. O’Reilly’s view? The Uber/Airbnb discussion is too narrow and jobs-focused. He sees a bigger economic shift fueled by “software and connectedness.” Welcome to the party, Mr. O’Reilly; the robot will take your jacket. We’ve had that bigger discussion for a while now on the enterprise side (doesn’t mean we have the answers though). The latest? Alan Patrick of Agile Elephant took the matter up in Transaction Costs in the New Economy – WTF? (WTF stands for Work – The Future, O’Reilly’s unfortunate faux-viral monicker he’s assigned to his series). Patrick takes a harder look at the so-called disruptive nature of minimizing transaction costs via networks, pointing out that other externalities such as labor cost avoidance also factor into the “new economy equation.” Ergo, there may be hope for “the firm” after all. Patrick thinks so – IF “the firm” can close the innovation gap. And: if the Ubers can duck traditional taxes and regulations. Ben Thompson digs further into the Uber side of this in Uber 2.0: Human self-driving cars.
Is Learning To Code Becoming Business-Critical? – Mark Boyd published a provocative piece on The New Stack that Den has already riffed on. Boyd uses the example of Dave Gledhill of DBS Bank, who says he has become a better executive”By learning to code, accessing Apple’s developer kit, understanding how to use iBeacons for internal GPS, and seeing what goes into user interfaces first hand,” MyPOV: This position has merit. We’ve made too much of techies needing to understand the business context, without enough attention to the need for business leaders to become more tech-savvy. I’d stop short of insisting executives should learn to code, but maybe it’s time for execs to hit a couple of tech deep dives at their next event. Software has to meet business executives halfway, making it easier for them to model and assemble apps based on consumable services. But the tech-biz future means we meet somewhere in the middle.

Honorable mention
How Robotic Process Automation has become a right dog’s breakfast – HfS reveals that “In a recent survey of 178 enterprise buyers, only 11% of respondents said that they have extensive or even some real-life hands-on experience with RPA to-date.” This has led to a “misrepresentation of the possible”, or in British vernacular, a “right dog’s breakfast.”
6 Observations From A New Survey On The State Of Big Data Analytics – Gist: big data as a concept has traction, even as the hype festival has moved on (sorta). “59% of the executives surveyed consider big data and analytics either a top five issue or the single most important way to achieve a competitive advantage.” Decisions still aren’t made by data, however – no surprise there.
Facebook Launches M, Its Bold Answer to Siri and Cortana – only a few hundred Facebook messenger users are using this currently. But worry not, soon you will have access to all this wonderfulness.
7 Significant ERP Trends – OK, that’s the blandest blog title we’ve seen in a while, but the content is useful and concise.
The SAP HANA Vora FAQ – A new FAQ from a FAQmaestro…
Should Millennials Follow Their Passion? – Views on milennial career success, written by a millenial. Nice willingness-to-rethink tone.
Whiffs
Some satisfying whiffs this week for those who like their karma evenly distributed. The Burning Man founder managed to get his (bare) feet firmly in mouth for his commentary on racial diversity. Twitter perils: a fugitive drug boss’s son reveals his dad’s location on Twitter (and after he took so much time super-imposing facial images too).
I enjoyed McDonald’s getting a smackdown on marketing their “artisan” sandwiches in Ireland. “The term artisan only applies if the product is made in limited quantities by skilled craftspeople, the processing method isn’t totally mechanized...” Alas, there will be a continued onslaught of shitty artisan sandwiches in the U.S. Oh, and a dude lost his (future) job after he accidentally texted an explicit image to the female HR manager of his new employer. Oh man! As Nigel Tufnel immortalized in Spinal Tap, “What’s wrong with bein’ sexy?”
Hey – on the enterprise blogging front, can we make a rule that your bio shouldn’t be a third as long as your blog post? We’ve all done stuff, man.
Officially off-topic
Article title of the week:  Homeopathy conference ends in chaos after delegates take hallucinogenic drug. (The story isn’t so funny though, the psychedelic drug may have been planted unknowingly).
This piece is from 2012, but it’s new to me: did you know that science has already proven that today’s pop music is inferior (e.g. more tonally homogenous). But that won’t stop ttens from jamming iPhones into cassette decks, in search of a better sound.
In the good robot/bad robot narrative, we lean towards “good robot” this week with this ecologically-minded bot that’s about to be set loose to kill destructive starfish. And yeah, Mr. Robot (the TV show) was a fairly pleasant surprise also. Though – and I can’t believe I’m saying this – I found it a bit too dark.
But Mr. Robot’s uncanny ability to predict the next hack/tech controversy was downright uncanny. If you’ve watched the whole season, this interview with the show’s creator gives the Mr. Robot skinny, but there are spoilers-a-plenty from season 1. OK, I’m off to video class – I’ll see you next week.
Which #ensw pieces of merit did I miss? Let us know in the comments.
Most Enterprise hits and misses articles are selected from my curated @jonerpnewsfeed. ‘myPOV’ is borrowed with reluctant permission from the ubiquitous Ray Wang.

Image credits: Cheerful Chubby Man © RA Studio, Happy Children © Anna Omelchenko, Waiter Suggesting Bottle © Minerva Studiom, Overworked Businessman © Bloomua, Businessman Choosing Success or Failure Road © Creativa – all from Fotolia.com
Disclosure: SAP, Workday, and Salesforce are diginomica premier partners as of this writing.

Read more on: Best of archivesHits and misses 