

diginomica hit: Next:Economy – what is the research saying about the future of work?  by Den Howlett
quotage: “Unlike some of my colleagues, I am of the belief that the speed at which technology is not just providing new toys to wonder at but also impacting the nature of work at a very basic level has enormous implications for the shape of the future workforce. It’s not a topic I hear too much about from the major technology providers. Neither do I hear much said by companies who are reviewing or implementing new HR systems.”
myPOV: Den braved the utopians, ideologues and technocrats (plus various future-minded smarties) at Next:Economy. He came back with fresh thinking on necessary future of work debates. Why should the enterprise care? Glad you asked – prior to the show, Den addressed that in  Next: Economy – grasping the political nettle. My view: for all the companies evaluating and building on their cloud HR solutions, how can you possibly justify those investments without a clear view of the fluid career paths and flexible employment that lies ahead?
That’s what Den was angling for here, which certainly tiptoes to the edge of ideological feuding, which we can see in the vigorous comment thread to his Book Review: Raising the Floor – making the case for UBI. In his Next:Economy coverage, Den addressed the enterprise angle in two parts: the downside of labor chaos (need for risk assessment), and the forward thinking (need for skills development initiatives).
Will diginomica become a hotbed for divisive political beefs on labor? Not our plan. But I’d like to think our future of work coverage can help foster creative thinking on pressing talent/work problems. We’ll see.
diginomica four –  my top four stories on diginomica this week

Louis Vuitton’s e-commerce antipathy – an unsustainable mindset in a world of Amazon retail? – Stuart shifts retail gears to examine the omni-channel dilemmas of high end luxury retail – in this case, Louis Vutton. Me: when Amazon ponies big dollars on a fashion-from-Amazon ad campaign, it’s time to get off the brick-and-mortar couch.
HMRC’s digital transformation – DevOps in a world after Aspire – from outsourcing to devops, or, as Chris delicately put it: “Now that carcass is being slowly heaved overboard.” Granted, not all problems are in the rearview; small/decentralized teams invoke governance problems.
AI and robotics – seeking a government view that reaches beyond Shatner and Schwarzenegger – Stuart formally challenges the UK government to think beyond Terminator and Star Trek. Now where’s the AI fun in that. Hal?
 Medical software’s search for a prescription to cure the ailing beast – As per Denis: “Since the 1960’s healthcare systems have been built in a technology completely different from what’s used in business software.” How ironically perfect that this legacy tech is called “Mumps.” Only in this case there is no vaccination, just siloed data and bloated operating costs.

Vendor analysis, diginomica style. Here’s my three top choices from our vendor coverage:

NetSuite hits London – couldn’t talk about Oracle, so it let the customers do the talking – Derek on a SuiteConnect event with tricky timing, but loads of customer stories. Martin filed Lessons from SuiteConnect – don’t wait for your business to be disrupted, hybridise it:”This is a good example of how the ‘T’ of IT is now no longer the issue – and with SaaS delivery models is genuinely irrelevant to users and solely the concern of companies like NetSuite. Now it is all about the ‘I’ and the imagination and wit of users to exploit the hell out of it. “

Salesforce tackles Stem shortages with UK schools partnerships – Madeline, a former London schoolteacher herself, on a nifty initiative: “The best approach here is to get a few like-minded teachers on-side, as is happening with Salesforce and School 21, and rely on those working in education to go out and spread the word. Other teachers highlighting tried and tested ways that curriculum tweaks have been carried out, and the positive results achieved, will go down much better than government-led diktats.”
Replacing multiple systems saves Ensono $1 million a year – Den continues his Workday use case binge with two more, starting with Ensono: “While software as a service is often characterized as ‘vanilla,’ deep configuration options allows different customers the opportunity to achieve what they want for their users in much the same way that legacy software did but without the costly customizations. Crucially, no customer reports having to sacrifice functionality. Rather, they talk about improved processes.” Also see: At Point Loma a collaboration mindset makes for an easy Workday.

A few more vendor picks, without the quotage:

Coupa’s winning hand could be its treasure trove of data – Derek
Out with HR, in with people, says Fairsail CEO – Phil
Infosys beats expectations on Q2 FY2017, cuts full year outlook – Den

Jon’s grab bag – Den continues his series on analytical Uber-and-friends take downs in The ride sharing gig economy might not be all its cracked up to be  – turns out there’s a difference between vacant keynote fodder job creation bullshit surge labor and futuristic careers. Stuart bravely ventures into the U.S. healthcare morass in  A digital diagnosis for the US healthcare system – stop acting like a communist government! And: cool profile piece from Chris on a 22 year old CEO, if you don’t mind feeling like a slacker: The boy who built the future – and a multi-million dollar supply chain company.
Den’s got some bots we can all get behind: DoNotPay – putting the lawyers out of work with bots (automating paperwork and more, to aid the underserved and the plain-old-ticked-off!) Derek wraps my picks with a review of 451’s latest, which has some conclusions that may surprise: Research – Private cloud is cheaper than public cloud…if you can scale it.
Best of the rest
 The Intelligent OneOffice – the endgame for the new generation enterprise  – by Phil Fersht
quotage: “The issue facing many traditional business today is the fact that while the consumer is increasingly digitally sophisticated, many enterprises are still beholden to legacy technologies and processes that are fast sinking into obsolescence.  In addition, many have employees in the “back office” who are so steeped in the legacy way of doing things, they are facing a double-edged issue: how do they drag their operations kicking and screaming out of the dark ages to support their digital customers?”
myPOV: Fersht’s quotage above lays out the problem. So what’s the (digital) solution? Yes, “OneOffice.” No, OneOffice is not a sub-Microsoftian productivity app. It’s a trademarked concept from HfS Research, a digital end game if you will, where the walls between the front office and back office are obliterated, digital business happens in real-time, and the constraints of legacy technology and crusty old ERP systems are, at the least, minimized.
There’s a lot more to this OneOffice concept – everything from immersing college grads in a bureaucracy-free culture, “open feedback loops”, and moving from reactive to predictive data.  I’d add: an iterative approach to differentiating apps/creative output, utilizing those open feedback loops early and often. A tad dreamy? Perhaps, but we can use boldly articulated visions for where this can all lead. Otherwise, the most likely jolt from inertia will be the Uberized power-spanking of a company and/or industry, and by then, it’s too late. Better to chase big ideas into the light.
Other standouts:

Barclays doing Digital differently – The Agile Elephant’s David Terrar with an digital story on Barclays with some unexpected twists: turns out Barclays are re-using under-utilized branch offices to create a network of “business incubators and fully equipped maker spaces called Eagle Labs.”  For once, I’ve got nothing snarky to say – that’s cool.  My local banks still think free checking qualifies as innovation.
How Cloud Architects Could Save the IT Department from Disappearing – The New Stack’s Brian Wheeler with a provocative piece which asks whether IT departments could blend away into a decentralized collection of services managed by lines of business. I still see the CIO with a lifespan – companies need “one throat to choke” on security and data integration woes. But for the IT department to be more than a second-class chokee, the business will need to see a different type of mindset – which is what this article is getting at. Hey, it beats the heck out of outsourcing IT altogether.

Honorable mention

Why (and how) Microsoft is circling its hybrid-cloud wagons – One of the staunchest vendors in the hybrid cloud camp makes its case.
Salesforce Einstein: Dream Versus Reality  – A breakdown of (arguably) the biggest announcement at Dreamforce, with a useful eye on what’s real and what’s “marchitechture.”
VMware embraces AWS as its public cloud IaaS – winners get marketshare, losers get “partnerships.”
What Every Developer Should Know about Machine Learning – more of a primer than a how-to, but a starting point.
Google’s AI can now learn from its own memory independently – cool to the point of creepy. Google better not feed this thing my personal data.
Three Mistakes Teams Need to Avoid in Selecting Supply Chain Planning – all three mistakes are instructive – such as underplaying the need for industry-specific functionality.
HP Inc to axe up to 4,000 jobs over next three years – another feel-good story from HP Inc. Interesting sidenote to watch: HP Inc’s “big bet” on 3D printing.
Whiffs
So the Samsung Note 7 fiasco is now the tech whiff of the year right? I just stepped off a Southwest flight where the Note 7 was the highlight of the flight safety instructions. “Wanna get away”? Yes, but not from my phone.
The same week as Android phones received a toxically-cruddy lobotomy “upgrade”, I read this fawning UX tribute, Google’s data-driven approach to superior user experience, revisited. “What can the company that mastered the art and science of UX all the way to the top of the global business world“? Huh? Didn’t Google just keep things simple with tiny classified ads next to search results, and fail to honor that principle in any other context? When I read a statement like that, I vacillate between irritation and jealousy, as in “pass the pipe – I’m evidently not smoking the good stuff.”
I’m a droid guy and rely on Google tech, but what they serve up is hardly UX love. It’s data-driven in the way that leaves users with no input except for their tiny drop of data doo. I would love to know how a major phone OS upgrade can get away with resetting virtually ALL app permissions, without notifying users, without automating the steps to turn those permissions back on? UX? No, that SUX.
More UX “superiority” – I had to go through the bowels of discussion forums to figure this out: in a recent OS upgrade, these supposed UX geniuses force-fit on all phones the logo of your provider. That means when the phone is locked, you can no longer see the notification icons on the top left. Now I see a scrolling Verizon logo on screenlock, an utterly f%$king useless/redundant branding exercise that cannot be altered in the settings. The only way is to accept the logo’s presence, and change my notification settings to show full notifications on screen lock, thereby exposing my personal data. It’s either that, or neutered notifications I can’t decipher. If that’s data-driven, I want the steering wheel back!
Oh, and when it comes to conquering the business world and re-inventing, Apple and Amazon are the standard-bearers. Apple’s fall and rise is the stuff of legend; Amazon built a cloud business that may someday eclipse its e-commerce chokehold. Google are a (mostly) one-trick revenue pony with a laudable passion for pushing big picture issues via Alphabet. Fine – but they don’t get to wear the UX crown. Not on my watch anyhow.
Over to you, Clive.
Which #ensw pieces of merit did I miss? Let us know in the comments.
Most Enterprise hits and misses articles are selected from my curated @jonerpnewsfeed. ‘myPOV’ is borrowed with reluctant permission from the ubiquitous Ray Wang.
 
Image credit - Cheerful Chubby Man © RA Studio, Happy Children © Anna Omelchenko, Waiter Suggesting Bottle © Minerva Studiom, Overworked Businessman © Bloomua, Loser and winner - Loser and Winner © ispstock - Fotolia - all from Fotolia.com.Disclosure - SAP, Oracle, Workday, Infosys and Salesforce are diginomica premier partners as of this writing. Coupa is a diginomica partner.Read more on: Digital skills and trainingHCM and the digital future of workHits and missesThe new professional and IT as a service 