

Lead story – the week Facebook finally paid the price and Twitter tried to clean up its act – by Stuart and Den

Even at the height of the post-Cambridge Analytica revelations, Facebook’s share price didn’t really show any long-term signs of taking a dive. Wall Street can cope with questionable data privacy practices, it seems. At the same time, CEO Mark Zuckerberg has got his ‘I’m sorry, we won’t do it again’ routine off pat.
But this week it all changed with the biggest single day collapse in Wall Street history as Facebook users abandoned ship.  As Stuart noted previously in The high price of privacy – Facebook sees $150 billion wiped from its market cap:
Facebook has taken a long-overdue pasting where it hurts – on the bottom line. It had to happen. Zuckerberg has breezed through the ‘show trials’ in the US and in Europe, emerging essentially unscathed after parroting well-rehearsed pleas of mea culpa en route. Now Wall Street is spooked, it’s going to take more than ‘I’m sorry’ to restore balance.
And there was more to come as the British Government laid into Facebook and its culture in a no-holds barred report into Fake News, pulling no punches in its condemnation of the firm. Some choice quotes from a damning report via Stuart again in UK legislators to Facebook – you’re obstructive, neglect your responsibilities and shouldn’t mark your own homework! :
Facebook has hampered our efforts to get information about their company throughout this inquiry. It is as if it thinks that the problem will go away if it does not share information about the problem, and reacts only when it is pressed…
…In evidence Facebook did not accept their responsibilities to identify or prevent illegal election campaign activity from overseas jurisdictions. In the context of outside interference in elections, this position is unsustainable…
…Facebook consistently responded to questions by giving the minimal amount of information possible, and routinely failed to offer information relevant to the inquiry, unless it had been expressly asked for. It provided witnesses who have been unwilling or unable to give full answers to the Committee’s questions…
…Time and again, Facebook chose to avoid answering our written and oral questions, to the point of obfuscation.
Ouch!
Meanwhile over at Twitter, there’s at least a more convincing attempt to demonstrate that ‘cleaning house’ is a genuine priority, even if Wall Street’s more interested in panicking over lost users, as Den notes in Quality beats quantity at Twitter as it cleans house. Pity the market doesn’t get it: 
Twitter has always been controversial but the fact its earnings call devoted so much time to ‘health’ issues is a strong signal that it fully understands the impact that toxic accounts have on the wider population of users. This has to be a net good. Despite the market giving Twitter an 18% valuation haircut in today’s trading, I feel good about [CEO Jack] Dorsey’s commitment.
Stuart’s also willing to give Twitter a thumbs-up, but isn’t so convinced by the sickly sweet marketing bollocks  ‘mom and apple pie’ pitch from Dorsey in Twitter’s pursuit of “health” in a Fake News world would bring a tear to a glass eye:
Twitter provokes conversation. When Serena Williams tweeted [that] she took her first steps, I was training and missed it. I cried. It prompted an outpouring of support and started a dialog about the challenges working mothers face…We see these types of moments every day that bring us together when we agree and all too often divide us when we don’t, but they inspire us to do better and they provide the context for the actions we’re taking to prioritize the long term health of Twitter over near term metrics.
No, you’re the one with something in your eye!
Still on the subject of data privacy, check out the worthy moves by India to put its own house in order – India’s passage to data protection has a big local bump in the road. 
Diginomica picks
Jessica had the chance to meet and chat with Megan Smith, former CTO to the Obama administration, who had some choice advice on the need to expands tech industry recruitment thinking in Obama CTO Megan Smith lobbies for no-barrier tech recruitment to benefit all. Among the choicer points:
All around the world, people are feeling nervous about the future, they’re feeling un-included in the future. We’re not using our resources across our governments and our communities to include everyone and make everyone part of the future. We need to figure out where are the populations we could pull in to a different experience? We need to bring more people to the table and inspire them with creative confidence. Only then can we solve some of our biggest problems.
Stuart’s retail focus continued with a look at an interesting move by Dunkin’ Donuts to take more control of its mobile platform in  Dunkin’ ups the digital sprinkles by taking more control of its mobile destiny 
Vendor analysis, diginomica style. Some highlights:

Kurt picked up on Google Next with Google Cloud Platform sets the scene to remove barriers between IT and business:

Google rightly understands that the days of surreptitious cloud proliferation in the enterprise are over and that it needs a frontal assault to win enterprise business.

Demob happy Jon takes a look the implications of the latest move by Plex in Plex bears down on the industrial IoT data problem with its DATTUS acquisition.
Also from Jon, Cloud ERP is a non-starter without the right partners – inside FinancialForce’s partner strategy.

The grab bag – Credit where it’s due. Following Den’s snark at IBM over its GDPR shortcomings, Big Blue moved quickly to address the issues, as reported in Sunday Salute – IBM fixes a GDPR SNAFU, delivers problem resolution masterclass. Den approves:
IBM did the right thing, providing a masterclass in problem resolution. It openly acknowledged the mistake and ate an appropriate amount of humble pie without groveling unnecessarily. It also explained what happened at the supplier end and got it fixed before calling me up. IBM also acknowledged the difficulty in ensuring that everyone fully understands their responsibilities in managing a piece of compliance that is early in the ‘adoption phase.’ In short, lessons were learned and will continue to be learned. All good.
And as for:
As an endnote, I felt bad for the poor person who got the unenviable task of calling me up.
Oh, we’ve all been there…
No Best of Rest or Whiffs this week – normal service will be resumed when Jon returns from his well-earned vacation. 
If you find an #ensw piece that qualifies for hits and misses – in a good or bad way – let Jon know in the comments as Clive (almost) always does.
Most Enterprise hits and misses articles are selected from my curated @jonerpnewsfeed. ‘myPOV’ is borrowed with reluctant permission from the ubiquitous Ray Wang.
 
Image credit - Cheerful Chubby Man © RA Studio, Happy Children © Anna Omelchenko, Waiter Suggesting Bottle © Minerva Studiom, Overworked Businessman © Bloomua, at the seaside © olly - all from Fotolia.com.Read more on: Cloud ERP financials and supply chainCloud platforms - infrastructure and architectureDigital enterprise in the real worldDiversityGoverning identity privacy and securityHCM and the digital future of workTalent management 