
Diginomica picks – my top three stories on diginomica this week

The Black Friday gotchas you don’t know about yet – Yeah, we’ve got to get past Halloween and into some nastier weather, but Black Friday isn’t too far away. Gary’s got field tips for retailer who need to get crackin’. One keeper: cross-check those SLAs! “Many SLAs have limits and checks on your capacity that could kick in and derail your dreams of cyber fortune-making.”
Web founder Berners-Lee rallies Solid rebellion against digital empires – Berners-Lee’s Internet is not the tacky online fiefdom disguised as personalized experiences web we have today. Phil examines his plan to change our collective course by taking our data back.
Brian’s The Month in Brief – Brian shares the high points from his enterprise month, and all the vendors that were ecstatic apoplectic happy to field another round of Sommerian-style “pesky questions that matter.”

Vendor analysis, diginomica style – silly season selections
We’re at the height of fall event nuttiness. But amidst the toasty tarmacs and breathless blockchains came some fleeting moments of actual clarity, and even inspiration. Here’s my best-of picks, starting with Den on Workday Rising:

The rise of the prediction machines and a skills ontology – Workday Rising 2018
Workday People Analytics – an early look at ML augmented analytics

Meantime, I was back in Vegas making sense of “SAPspeak” while documenting use cases:

SAP TechEd day one, burning questions edition – beaming up serverless ERP and the ABAP PaaS
SAP TechEd 2018 – How Kaeser Kompressoren is selling compressed air as a service with the help of SAP Data Hub

Dreamforce might be over, but there’s still a few diginomica specials coming through:

Salesforce’s Chief Equality Officer asks – “Which side of history do you want to be on?” – Derek
Barclays CRM team designs banking experiences at scale with Salesforce – Stuart

Finally, find out why Den says this New Relic show was one of the top gigs this year: FutureStack18 London – focusing on customer success.
Jon’s grab bag – Net neutrality appears headed to the Supreme Court (eventually) as U.S. Justice Department to sue California on net neutrality law (Jerry’s on the case). Phil puts his travel exploits to productive use in Journeys in big data and AI across the transport networks of London & Paris.
Finally, if you want to provoke me, tell me there’s not enough qualified data science talent. That led me to this: Overcoming the AI, ML and data science skills gap – hashing it out with Vijay Vijayasankar of IBM. 

Best of the rest
My top four picks from the enterprise blogosphere this week:

Adobe buys Marketo: Who wins, who to watch – I’m not the biggest fan of the “who wins” format after an acquisition (this isn’t a tennis match), but Chris Fletcher also gets into the nitty gritty of how this move impacts everyone from Salesforce to SAP to the various customer bases.
Microsoft Steps Up Data Platform and AI Ambitions – Constellation’s Doug Henschen went to Orlando so you don’t have to. Key point from his Microsoft Ignite analysis: “AWS, Microsoft and Google have all delivered vision, speech, language and translation services and the ability to do custom training, but I’d say Google has performance advantages on many of these core services.”
These 7 Negotiation Tactics are Futile in Cloud Renewals – UpperEdge is on a roll. Might be time for a new web site photo but we can white board that for now… Here’s one surprising/useful warning to heed: “When it comes to your cloud agreements and renewals, price is only one variable. Lasering in on price and cleaning up other factors later will never lead to an optimal result .”
Blockchain explained: What it is and isn’t, and why it matters – not sure if the hubris to define blockchain in a single podcast is a good thing, but McKinsey gives it a go. Full transcript included. Bonus points for not claiming blockchain is immutable: “It is only as immutable and tamper-proof as the implementation itself.”

Whiffs
Before I get to three whiffs of the week, how’z about three stranger-than-fiction headlines?

Houston officials temporarily prevent robot brothel from opening – hopefully only a temporary setback…
Goats addicted to human urine airlifted out of national park  – w-w-what?
Professor accidentally plays hardcore porn for packed lecture hall – maybe it was a psychology experiment?

Facebook had a crapbook kind of week, so it’s tough to pick one whiff for them. I guess I’ll go with:

yuckerberg https://t.co/vlv1rPOuch
— Jon Reed (@jonerp) September 28, 2018
I’ve snapped a few funny blue screens while in transit, but via Den Howlett, I can’t top this monster meltdown from DJ Adams:

“Appropriate software” pic.twitter.com/yZteizhMgm
— DJ Adams (@qmacro) September 29, 2018
Finally, most vendors have helpful/intrusive chatbots on their web sites these days. They are bummed out by our anonymity and eager to attach a name and an existential reason for your existence lead gen score. While blogging at Inforum, I did some diligence on Infor’s web pages. I lingered for a bit too long, and, you guessed it, the bot came for me. I decided to test its street cred:

Apparently, colleague @jonerp is having trouble with @Infor 10x chatbot… pic.twitter.com/kURQPYFouQ
— Brian Sommer (@BrianSSommer) September 25, 2018
The bot wisely escalated my tomfoolery to human intervention. The human that stepped in had a pic and a name and took it all in good humor. Well played, Infor. See you next time.
If you find an #ensw piece that qualifies for hits and misses – in a good or bad way – let me know in the comments as Clive (almost) always does.  I’m sure I missed a few during my travels.

Most Enterprise hits and misses articles are selected from my curated @jonerpnewsfeed. ‘myPOV’ is borrowed with reluctant permission from the ubiquitous Ray Wang.
Image credit - Cheerful Chubby Man © RA Studio, Happy Children © Anna Omelchenko, Waiter Suggesting Bottle © Minerva Studiom, Overworked Businessman © Bloomua, Loser and Winner © ispstock - all from Fotolia.com.Disclosure - SAP, Oracle, Workday and Salesforce are diginomica premier partners as of this writing.Read more on: Hits and misses 