

diginomica hit: Marketing tech and AI – what’s next? by Barb Mosher Zinck
quotage: “Data continues to be a primary challenge for marketing intelligence and proper attribution. It’s about quality data, but also the collection of all the right data across all the touchpoints and technology in the marketing toolkit. But if we’re waiting for that to be perfect, we’re likely going to wait a very long time.”
myPOV: I count on Barb to put marketing tech through the field view grinder. When it comes to AI and marketing, we’ve heard lots of happy talk – but where are we? Reviewing her chat with Conversion Logic’s Brian Baumgart, Barb sees some immediate relevance for machine intelligence: advancing the problem of attribution. Attribution is a beast. We need better answers on which of our social media and content balloons are working – and which are hot air quickly dispersed.
How can machine learning help with attribution today? By analyzing reams of historical data a poor desk jockey sod human could never get through. But Barb sees something beyond attribution: she sees an “integrated intelligence layer” on the horizon.
That matters because as per the above quotage, slathering machine learning on top of the “martech” stack is a limited approach. She leaves us with a caution: “We can’t wait for the full, perfect package of intelligence to arrive. We have to take the time to get it right because it is so important to the best customer experience.”
diginomica three –  my top three stories on diginomica this week

Is Slack a product or a feature? The pros, cons and competition – No collaboration darlings allowed in Kurt’s deconstruction. My answer: more than a feature, less than an enterprise disruptor.
Britain’s got to have talent to avoid post-Brexit skills crisis – Cath parses conflicting views, as our all-you-can-eat Brexit coverage continues. Her bottom line: “Employers are going to have to be a lot more imaginative than they have been in the past in order to fill the pre- and post-Brexit skills gap.” Over on diginomica/gov, Derek posted Broadband Stakeholder Group warns against ‘Brexit cliff edge’ for digital sector.
Digital advertising and the counter-revolution – The dominos-be-fallin’ as brands wise up to the farce known as “personalized impressions”… Stuart asks: “JPMorgan Chase, Procter & Gamble and Taco Bell are scaling back on digital advertising. Is this a counter-revolution underway?” My answer: yes, though brands don’t necessarily know how to retrench. And the new game is ad-hostile.

Vendor analysis, diginomica style. Here’s my three top choices from our vendor coverage:

Infosys Q4 FY2017 results disappoint amid management distractions and execution challenges – Den on a difficult crossroads for an outsourcing bellweather, including public spats between co-founder and board (yikes!): “Sikka’s emphasis on ‘new and renew’ is working as well as anyone can expect. When you look at the detail behind the company’s results, it is clear the current management are exercising rigorous control over cost. All that’s good. But right now, Infosys needs to make bold moves.”
Anaplan grows into a platform play – is that enough? – Brian updates an ambitious analytics foray: Brian updates on an ambitious CPM/EPM vendor (enterprise performance management if you don’t have your acronyms-are-fun cheat sheet with ya): “While I get the power of the platform story, I was left wanting. I wanted to hear more examples of firms using the Anaplan tools to pull in monstrous piles of sensor, unstructured and other big data sets to make better decisions and achieve better business outcomes.”
CERN – where science and enterprise asset management collide – Infor claims it can do Enterprise Asset Management (EAM) at scale, so Chris puts them to the ultimate (CERN) test: “So would it be possible to run something as massive and complex as CERN without an EAM system? Widegren says: ‘No, you could not! We could not run the place without an asset management platform. And these days, of course, everyone is mobile and expects to have all this information at their fingertips, when they intervene.'” Also see my recent Infor foray in D.C, Infor Federal Forum exclusive – the government’s recruitment and talent problems take center stage.


Jon’s grab bag –  For a media pro like Stuart, United’s self-inflicted buffoonery astonishing corporate arrogance bog pit is a PR mutton chop, one that can be repeatedly gnawed for juicy morsels, such as Sorry’s not such a hard word when your share price is in freefall – more comms lessons for United.
Stuart’s verdict comes in the follow-on which hits on Delta as well: “Delta’s Bastian showed considerable restraint in not exploiting United’s disaster, but then people, glasshouses, stones etc.” (Damn I wish I had written that). Then: “[This will] go down in the annals of digital marketing/PR and customer management as a seminal example of how not to handle a crisis.”
Two fine/forward-thinking pieces I didn’t get to: The next evolution of the call center – network judgment techniques for problem solving (Denis) and Creating a DevOps culture at Tickmaster to become truly cloud native (Derek). We wrap my diginomica picks with Den’s Culture begats creativity – a gapingvoid perspective, a critique of why creativity is a corporate problem – as is idealizing it as a solution.
Best of the rest
 Inside the Hotel Industry’s Plan to Combat Airbnb – by Katie Benner
quotage: “The main prongs of the association’s plan to constrain Airbnb include lobbying politicians and state attorneys general to reduce the number of Airbnb hosts, funding studies to show Airbnb is filled with people who are quietly running hotels out of residential buildings and highlighting how Airbnb hosts do not collect hotel taxes and are not subject to the same safety and security regulations that hotel operators must follow.”
myPOV: This article title made me think I’d be reading about all the clever and creative ways hotels plan on making their operations more accessible and mobile-friendly – or perhaps re-inventing lobbies into appealing common spaces like citizenM has done. Nope. It’s all about scavenging crusty laws and PR schmoes-for-hire to try to inject bedbugs flotsam FUD  corporate-bed-lust into the brains of Airbnb consumers.
These hotel operators come off like some of the embittered tax drivers I’ve had (long) rides with. I’m not a big Airbnb buff, but reading about this vacant, lobbying-heavy plan made me want to crash on a stranger’s couch like never before.
Other standouts


Automation will destroy, then save outsourcing: The industry has spoken – A tad melodratic? Yes, but give me outsourcing drama over BPM slide decks anyday. And no one paints a narrative of disruption-versus-status-quo like Phil Fersht of HfS Research. Fresh off an HfS event with outsourcing buyers, Fersht has some grim findings (“Buyers are backed into a corner with broken delusions of automation grandeur as their CoEs fail“), but also some silver linings for those who can find the fortitude/humility to “fix one broken process at a time” and “get stakeholders onside by demonstrating meaningful, impactful outcomes.” Caveat: “Without major resource investments.” Hmm – I think I’ll keep my day job.
Software developers: We’re on board with low-code (or even no-code) tools – Well, I’m not sure the developers on my Twitter feed are on board. Most of them seem to think “low code” is comical for enterprise-grade development projects (but could be fine for a quick app). Joe McKendrick mulls data indicating these tools be efficient and inclusive – without stopping a code maestro from doing the needful (ideally, such tools will also ease the mundane for the maestros). Also see: IBM Brings Low-Code App Development to Bluemix. Insular sidenote: finally met McKendrick last week after years of circling similar wagons.

Honorable mention


Hadoop FAQs – April Webinar Q&A – wish more analysts would follow this lead. Less pontificating behind firewalls, more helpful Q/A.
Reps For Google, Facebook, And Netflix Back Net Neutrality As A New Battle Looms – feels weird to root for Facebook and Google, but I can do this.
Princeton’s Ad-Blocking Superweapon May Put an End to the Ad-Blocking Arms Race – dreamy title, but interesting tech. Can they handle Burger King though? (more on that in a sec)
Mercedes-Benz Will Offer Self-Driving Taxis in Just Three Years – I”ll take that bet. Yeah, you might have a car ready in three years but it won’t be operating in a city of note. Still, things are movin’ fast.
Can Artificial Intelligence Fix the Monopoly Board Game? – No. Why not give AI a culturally-beneficial challenge, like making Kenny G’s back catalogue listenable?

Whiffs
Gobs and gobs of whiffery this week. A non-inclusive list of the carnage:

Why one Republican voted to kill privacy rules: “Nobody has to use the Internet” – Nobody has to use the Internet? We keep lowering the bar on how dumb our politicians are. What does that say about us? And who cares if it’s a Republican anyhow? Privacy should transcend media pettiness.
Miffed with Snapchat CEO Spiegel, Indian hackers leak data of 1.7 million app users – Things are going well for Snapchat, eh?
Delta Suffered “Failure Of Crew Tracking Systems” During Canceled Flight Fiasco – Hey, at least Delta passengers could wait in comfort in their leggings while their flights were canned.
Burger King Defeated Google’s Block And Successfully Hijacked People’s Speakers – Clive Boulton sent this dandy along. If only Burger King put as much into their food as they do into penetrating our tech bubble.

Back on the enterprise beat: The Bay of Pigs: Mitigating ERP Project Risk. I guess Upper Edge has figured out that ERP decision makers are military history buffs… Oh, and I don’t have time to skewer this tribute to private clouds yet, but maybe a reader would like to split the logical fallacies with me?
Meanwhile, dear readers, I’ve been grappling. Ever since last week when I mocked the impotence of social media to put a dent in a company like United Airlines, lo and behold, its stock price takes a decent hit, and for a hot desperate minute, it seemed like their CEO might have walk the plank.
To the best of my knowledge, United remains in a four point stock dive (other airlines had fallen but not nearly as much, last time I checked). And: both United and Delta increased their discretionary budget for getting passengers off planes to about $10,000 – including some policy rewrites for United. However, we get to the crux of the matter on Marketwatch, where we learn, that as of now, United has not suffered a decrease in ticket sales – yet.
Whether that’s a reflection of cost-is-everything consumers, or, as I prefer to see it, the limited airline choices in many hubs, if United doesn’t take a sales hit, their stock price is sure to recover. So, despite how it might please the throngs, I can’t hoist myself on the whiff petard just yet.
But I did get to thinking: what gave this incident so much power? Citizen cams. The jugular video of the abused passenger put the outrage over the top. This post by Kahuna’s Sameer Patel is titled The Consumer Revolution is Being Televised – exactly right. The question is: what kind of change do we want? And how would we forge vented spleen into hammers into policy? Because right now the social media spank tunnel feels more like a cul de sac.
For now, I’ll call it a half-whiff. Halfway up the petard will have to do.
Not a whiff
And before I leave ya, something that’s most definitely NOT a whiff:

awesome. https://t.co/V3pOdX6q0r
— Jon Reed (@jonerp) April 17, 2017

From 1967 to 2017, Kathrine Switzer has completed the #BostonMarathon, 50 years after becoming the 1st woman to officially run the race. ???? pic.twitter.com/3lS5A0lEiV
— Only In Boston (@OnlyInBOS) April 17, 2017
Which #ensw pieces of merit did I miss? Let us know in the comments.
Most Enterprise hits and misses articles are selected from my curated @jonerpnewsfeed. ‘myPOV’ is borrowed with reluctant permission from the ubiquitous Ray Wang.
Image credit - Cheerful Chubby Man © RA Studio, Happy Children © Anna Omelchenko, Waiter Suggesting Bottle © Minerva Studiom, Overworked Businessman © Bloomua, King Checkmate © mystock88photo - all from Fotolia.com.Disclosure - SAP, Oracle, Workday and Salesforce are diginomica premier partners as of this writing.Read more on: Hits and missesMachine intelligence and AI 