

Lead story – CIOs making the digital plunge – use cases by Phil Wainewright and Mark Chillingworth
MyPOV: Today’s CIOs must do more with less budget – and also somehow drive change. Phil profiles two CIOs who are shaking things up in How to get more out of the IT budget – learnings from Amadeus and JLT. One tactic that works for Amadeus? Cost transparency. Phil writes:
Transparency into costs is helping the business work with IT to accommodate goals for growth out of savings that can be made elsewhere in the IT budget, as Cuadrado of Amadeus explains:
I believe we should be talking about business metrics, not about IT metrics … then we can talk with the business about expectations of more funding. If certain people insist on growing at 34%, we would say, OK, we cannot afford this growth, we cannot absorb it — let’s talk about how we can fund these extra services.
Mark hits on similar themes in Addison Lee Group CIO – Focus on experience, not buzzwords. Talking to the team at Addison Lee, Mark reminds that a technology focus will not serve the modern CIO well. It’s got to be about the end customer. Mark writes:
On how Addison Lee Group uses development methods to improve the business, not just deliver a technology change, Cohen says:
I hate the dogma behind modern methodologies. Of course we use Agile but we also use Waterfall. We are “experience led and product centric” with rapid feature iteration, but we also run traditional projects. The question is always, are we improving the customer (passenger and driver) experience and can we do it better and faster? And, by the way, Agile is not always about fast.
Phil wraps his piece with a reminder: cost transparency and innovation go hand in hand.
As the experiences above show, it’s hard work to get a proper handle on costs in a way that makes sense for planning an IT budget in the context of business goals. But the example of Amadeus shows the potential rewards — real growth in innovation to drive the business, without paying a huge penalty in mushrooming IT running costs.
Diginomica picks – my top three stories on diginomica this week

International Women’s Day – why we need to reach girls before negative perceptions of a tech career take root – I botched the timing on this last week, but catch this fine work from Madeline. Key: balance impact of tech (talent science, new metrics) and culture change/overcoming bias.
Brian Sommer’s Month in Brief – February 2019 – Brian’s wild enterprise February includes a run-in with blockchain PR fairy tales blocksplaining: “Thanks again to Wired for “Blocksplaining”. It’s what happens when some cryptocurrency jock lectures us on how blockchain technologies work. “
Four retailers and reality – a progress report on fashionable omni-channel transformation – Stuart puts four fashion and apparel retailers through his omni-report card.

Vendor analysis, diginomica style. Here’s my four top choices from our vendor coverage:

Ready for Everything-as-a-Service? 5 things you need to know – Phil on his podcast sit down with the CEO of Financial Force: “Think of this podcast as a high-level primer on what XaaS means for both product and services companies.”
Exclusive – how JAAS Systems built a manufacturing vertical on Acumatica’s cloud ERP platform – From yours truly: “Some pundits are skeptical about partners building cloud ERP verticals. JAAS Systems could care less – these days, they’re the official manufacturing edition for Acumatica cloud ERP.“
Accenture and the art of going post-digital – I know what’s you’re asking: “What the heck is post-digital? Is Accenture finally sick of selling digital hot cakes services?” Martin’s got your answer: It’s the point where “we all stop pondering the wonders of the technology and how it works, and just get on with using it for our own specific purposes.”
Coupa stacks up new customers as subscription revenue growth hits 42% – Stuart on the keys to Coupa’s 39% total revenue growth year-on-year.

Jon’s grab bag –  Before squandering bucks on video, check Barb’s Do video marketing right – the pros and cons of YouTube and more. Meanwhile, I got back into it with my fave enterprise foil in Is digital transformation sticking to the wall, or losing its meaning? Debating digital data with Brian Solis.
Cath looks into a missing link in the talent gap with Tech apprenticeship schemes – should they be hired or fired? . Finally, Jerry explores a worthwhile blockchain use case in Is this the party to whom I am speaking? Digital identity meets blockchain, though I don’t put as much stock in Gartner’s ridiculous extravagant blockchain revenue predictions as Jerry does. 

Best of the rest
 Reframing the Digital Transformation conversation in 5 steps by David Terrar
MyPOV: After my debate with Brian Solis on digital transformation, where we were able to make some distinctions between digital transformation and change management, it was good to see David Terrar of The Agile Elephant dig into DT (no pun intended) from his recent cloudy talks in London. After defining digital transformation, Terrar warns against getting techno-obsessed:
The crucial point is that emerging technologies and innovation are driving it, but the true transformation is all about business, mindset and leadership change.
Terrar advocates an open management style and a holistic approach. But – there must be compatibility with legacy systems. He thinks an agile method can bridge that gap:
Your plan should draw on agile thinking while still satisfying the financial demands of the C-suite. Think in terms of short time scales and multiple iterations. Don’t fear experimentation or failure.
Terrar addresses the issue of buy-in. Transformation might sound sexy, but corporate change is freaking hard. If we’re going to grab an oar and row, we better have a good “why”:
To get employees, customers, and investors on board, leadership needs to communicate the big idea – the “why” of what you are trying to achieve by reinventing your business.
We could have a longer debate with Terrar on how companies are getting stuck, and what to do about that. Example: Solis’ latest data from Altimeter shows that digital transformation is still perceived as a cost center (28%), and data to prove ROI is hard to come by (29%). Cultural issues also pose notable difficulty, with entrenched viewpoints, resistance to change (26%), and legal and compliance concerns (26%) stymieing progress.
Those percentages aren’t incredibly high for any one factor, but they do add up. They give context for why Terrar is arguing for a business context for DT, rather than a tech-project-approach, the latter of which won’t be able to overcome most of those obstacles.
Other standouts


The Cloud and Open Source Powder Keg – a complex-but-important story from Stephen O’Grady. Open source licensing stakes rise as Amazon throws its weight around: “Companies have gone from regarding cloud providers like Amazon, Google or Microsoft as not even worth mentioning as competition to dreadful, existential threat.”
The Case for Transparency in End-User License Agreements (EULAs) – Lysa Myers makes her case: “As we’re seeing with the many recent privacy gaffes by global mega corporations, EULAs written only to be read or understood by lawyers are causing massive consumer distrust.”

Honorable mention

The State of Recruiting Technology in 2019 — A Year of Consolidation, Growth & Innovation – Jason Corsello previews his latest recruiting market research. “When you combine a consolidating market with lethargic incumbents, new ideas and companies begin to emerge.“
The platform play: How to operate like a tech company – McKinsey reveals platform secrets, and the business logic behind them.
A Tale of Two SAPs – A potent contrast between SAP’s week of controversial layoffs and the forward-thinking events at the Qualtrics user conference.
Visibility: If Only I Could See – for modern supply chains, visibility is everything. But now it’s about network visibility beyond enterprise walls. Lora Cecere’s on the case.

Whiffs
Another week, another privacy mishap (Dozens of companies leaked sensitive data thanks to misconfigured Box accounts). This one’s on users, but Box’s confusing sharing settings aren’t going to win any industry UX awards either.
Sometimes an acerbic headline can really twist the screws. Cue Zack Whittaker: Facebook won’t store data in countries with human rights violations — except Singapore (Facebook’s pretzel-twist justification is just about ready for a stand-up routine at the local open mic 2019 hypocrisy award. Speaking of hypocrisy awards, here’s some pretty rich cake:

The WhatsApp Cofounder Who Sold To Facebook For $19 Billion Tells Students To Delete Facebook https://t.co/JsvXoC2avZ
-> hypocrisy award contender
— Jon Reed (@jonerp) March 14, 2019

Then we get to blocksplaining the blockchain:

much gratitude to @BrianSSommer for immediately thinking of me when he received redhot PR on "building a network of interoperable blockchains"
— Jon Reed (@jonerp) March 14, 2019

I’m all for a sober exploration of blockchain. However, I’m not sure the PR folks who issued this release were entirely sober by the time they hit send. Hey, they’re in good company. See you next time…
If you find an #ensw piece that qualifies for hits and misses – in a good or bad way – let me know in the comments as Clive (almost) always does.
Most Enterprise hits and misses articles are selected from my curated @jonerpnewsfeed. ‘myPOV’ is borrowed with reluctant permission from the ubiquitous Ray Wang.
Image credit - Cheerful Chubby Man © RA Studio, Happy Children © Anna Omelchenko, Waiter Suggesting Bottle © Minerva Studiom, Overworked Businessman © Bloomua, Businessman Choosing Success or Failure Road © Creativa - all from Fotolia.com.Disclosure - SAP, Oracle, Workday, Acumatica, Coupa, FinancialForce and Salesforce are diginomica premier partners as of this writing.Read more on: Digital enterprise in the real worldDigital transformation - frictionless enterpriseFrictionless enterpriseHits and misses 