
diginomica hit: Radical evolution in the ERP/MRP space – by Brian Sommer and Den Howlett
quotage: “When parts have virtually zero labor costs included, virtually no scrap or rework, what is left for cost accountants to quantify or do? There may only be two costs that matters and that’s the raw material for the printer and electricity. The opportunity to be more efficient than a competitor may be lost. So, how will manufacturers compete in the future: cost (no), quality (no), service (possibly)?” – Brian
myPOV: Brian kicked it off with the post above, then Den added a riff. It’s easy to forget that “ERP” really has it roots in MRP which is a manufacturing discipline. Drawing from a panel he pontificated appeared on at SuiteWorld, Sommer raises serious questions on the future of manufacturing, with the impact of 3D printing and the Internet of Things on traditional ERP, and yes, Den’s bailiwick, cost accounting.
It’s more about posing questions than providing definitive answers at this point, but this is a topic worth convening on, and perhaps tying into the Industry 4.0 initiatives. My only warning for Sommer: “The time for talking about in-memory, IoT and analytics is over.” Have fun with that one Mr. Sommer, I don’t think #ensw marketing teams have received that memo yet…
diginomica five: my completely subjective “top five” stories on diginomica this week

Salesforce World Tour hits London, diginomica on the case – The Salesforce World Tour is a chance to do the vendor fisticuffs thing (Salesforce snipes at SAP as run rate passes $6 billion mark), but also find out what lies beneath. In a two part exclusive with Salesforce President Keith Block, Stuart parsed Block’s views on Salesforce’s EMEA agenda and the pace of digital change (part 1), and then, in part two, Stuart wraps the one day event with Block’s views on moving larger enterprises from legacy, and Stuart’s own view on Block as Benioff’s Larry Page, if you follow me. Bonus: Janine Milne filed a use case on one of Salesforce for HR’s early adopters (St. Joseph Health prescribes enhanced collaboration with Salesforce).
MercadoLibre trades up on database clustering, Enphase energises customer service – Jessica Twentyman does her use case thing, two times over. The first with MercadoLibre, the largest online trading side in Latin America, which has navigated is share of regional economic fluctuations, while figuring out how to scale its MySQL database infrastructure. Jessica then tells the tale of Enphase, and how ServiceMax has allowed them to change customer service from fielding reactive complaints to pro-actively resolving equipment issues (I hope ServiceMax can help Comcast next!)
Government as a platform – playing nice with the private sector? – In another one of his sterling digital governance pieces, Derek posted the results of a sit down with Salesforce’s Vivek Kundra, who used to have the fun job of White House CIO. Derek raises questions on how federal, state and local should integrate, and while Kundra may have a more optimistic view of overcoming data sharing problems with the private sector, a clash of temperaments makes for a good piece, no?

Vendor analysis, diginomica style – Back from the Cornerstone user conference, Den filed a piece which examines everything from stock price fluctuations to global HR feasibility, to Cornerstone’s talent management platform play (Cornerstone OnDemand: under appreciated). Meanwhile, Phil sheds more insight into NetSuite’s ecommerce/omni-channel play in NetSuite founder Evan Goldberg: SuiteCommerce is our second act, and examines how data science fits into the mix.
Stuart took on the biggest services story of the week in CSC finds breaking up is easy to do, while Phil looks at an new Zuora acquisition (Zuora acquires analytics to broaden subscription appeal). Charlie Bess kicked tires on SAP’s IoT strategy at Sapphire Now, and gives his views of the pros and cons in IoT at Sapphire – what was really there? Martin Banks wraps this weeks’ vendor coverage with a look at how Progress Software is using its “old school” integration know-how for “new school” database purposes in When old glue may be the best glue.
Jon’s grab bag: Facebook is always at its best when it’s on the verge of being at it worst – for evidence I give you: Stuart on Crumbs! The Facebook marketing world beyond cookies (Facebook has a diabolically brilliantly strong grip on the demographics of its users). And Derek: Zuckerberg’s Internet.org project faces growing backlash (Facebook bringing Internet to the disenfranchised, hurrah, but as always, a Facebook undertow, this time, a thing some of us care about known as ‘net neutrality’).
Close it out with all the Den Howlett you ever wanted, and then some: a two part series on the morality of advertising, Advertising as a moral right? and Ad-blocking as a moral right?, wherein he picks a few bones with Ben Thompson of Stratechery, a genuinely smart dude who likely had no idea he was about to become a rock in Den’s shoe. Anyhoo, rock removed – until their next debate.
Finally, another weigh-in, this one on a genuinely concerning issue for the American economy, Driverless disruption coming your way, courtesy of eMercedesBenz. Driverless cars are one thing, but are we ready for the economy of driverless trucks? Hmm, I may be able to work this into the whiffs section…
Best of the rest
 Facebook, data science, and the perils of culture filtering, by several smarties
Quotage: “The biggest concern [about Facebook’s Internet.Org] relates to the potential of whether this free internet will in fact create a two-tiered internet with the world’s poorest people being kept in a “walled garden” with companies, including Facebook, deciding what they can and cannot see.” – Colm Gorey
myPOV: Several pieces hit on issues of culture, and the problem of content filters. Facebook got some PR sheen wiped off its Internet.org project via a potent open letter questioning Facebook’s commitment to net neutrality.  The issues can get complicated, but one commenter made it simple: “Facebook’s success doesn’t entitle it to take over the Internet.” Facebook’s Instant Articles raises other concerns, but as publishers post directly into Facebook the walled garden issues must be grappled with (Facebook Instant Articles: Bad for Marketers, OK for Publishers, but Great for Facebook).
Facebook is more than happy to charge businesses for a glimpse into the data their content generates. Just keep in mind we’re handing over the keys. Note to self: maybe it’s time to write a sequel to Who Moved My Cheese? Working title: “Facebook Took the Cheese (and we let them)”. How access affects culture is one piece – what about working across cultures? 10 tips for negotiating across cultures had useful tips (issues like informal vs. formal and direct vs. indirect communication can still make or break big deals).
Other standouts

Career secrets to the partner track (or CFO if you like) – A couple strong career pieces this week. Vijay Vijayasankar’s The path to partnership in big consulting firms is your guide to climbing the ladder while actually making a difference. Vijaysankar’s advice can be adapted to many pursuits, though “don’t do anything stupid or unethical” is advice too late for some, alas. More career nuggets come by way of Samuel Dergel’s interview with Craig Foster, CFO of Amobee. One keeper: Foster pursued banking as a way of learning as much about as many different companies as possible (expertise forms across projects).
DevOps isn’t a job, but it’s still important – I don’t think you need a perfect definition of DevOps to derive some value from it. As Klint Finley puts it, IT operations folks need to learn more about automation tools, developers need to learn more about infrastructure, test automation and integration, and the two teams meet somewhere in the middle. Oh, and a project is never finished. You’re always delivering something and adding new services. Another take on DevOps comes from the latest Geek Whisperers podcast (DevOps and a Career Inflection Point with the Goat Whisperer: Episode 86).

Honorable mention
Thinking Like a Data Scientist – Part II – A useful/practical series, low on hype and heavy on team building.
Microsoft, Salesforce talks fizzled over price: Sources – Dunno ’bout you but I’m fumigating on this story. Still, I guess you could call this an advancement as one (though not the only) mystery suitor is revealed.
Oracle Sued by Customer over Access to MICROS Source Code – Some digital lessons here, since we’re now (almost all of us anyhow) in the software business.
Modest Rant — Your HR Technology Portfolio Contains Three Types Of HCM Applications – Always up for an (informed) rant, modest or not. Time to think about platforms, and the “integrated core.”
Industry 4.0: It’s all about information technology this time – Speaking of Industry 4.0…here’s s short primer.
SAPPHIRE 2015: SAP, Amazeballs, but you’d never know it, and that’s sad – Pour a steaming cup for this long-form take, it’s worth the sips.
The enterprise technologies to watch in 2015 – It’s IT last change to lead real digital change – I’ll buy that. But either way, a good rundown of the “disruptive” tech coming to an enterprise keynote near you. Pass the Powerpoint.
Whiffs
Some quickies first: a click on this link, The Beginning Of The End For Terrible Wi-Fi On Planes, expecting some good news, but as I read the fine print, we’re nowhere near getting wifi that allows a business user to get something done online, well besides watching gmail desperately try to connect. But hey, craptastic article title Buzzfeed!
Oh, and I tweeted this today:

.@CNBC just a heads up: auto-play videos are a great way to get me to never share a link to your site. Auto-play-is-for-losers
— Jon Reed (@jonerp) May 26, 2015
Unfortunately CNBC’s Internet model is dependent on interruption marketing so aside from being dropped from their holiday card list, no changes are expected (well, until Internet advertising collapses).
And yesh, I’m all for a good debate about robots, jobs and automation – especially since my views on this are apocalyptic. Bring on an informed optmist. But don’t give me Humans Will Keep Jobs, Guiding a Machine, in which the author happily states, “Analytics-drive applications, robots, even self-driving cars aren’t positioned to eliminate humans.”
Eh… what? Granted, the tech and legal hurdles are vast. But would anyone argue that if companies could replace human-driven trucks with auto-driven trucks, even on some routes, they wouldn’t do so? Historically, massive tech disruptions displaced plenty of humans (see: the cross-cultural carnage of railroad construction). Den cited numbers in his auto-driving piece re: 10 million potential lost jobs in the trucking industry.
No, that’s not a done deal. And yeah, as the author points out, robots are great for cleaning up toxic waste dumps. Just like the NSA is handy for eavesdropping on terrorists. Doesn’t make it an inevitable force for good. Let’s have a debate about robots and jobs, and let’s pay attention to the optimistic views. But please: no ostriches.
Officially off-topic
So are you “thinking outside the box to proactively integrate next-generation cross platform synergy to monetize your assets?” You will be, after watching this classic Weird Al satire of corporate speak, all done to a sublime interpretation of a Crosby Stills Nash & Young chestnut. (h/t Mark Finnern).
If you haven’t squandered some cubicle time on explore.org lately, they’ve added an awesome Walrus Cam (funny, the walruses behave a lot like some companies I’ve been dealing with – h/t Jarret Pazahanick). Oh, and there’s David Letterman’s final top ten list, and a great run it was.
Itching for something a tad more productive? Then sample the range of courses in Summer School: MOOCs for Technologists. I’m also down with The Eureka Myth: Why Darwin (not Draper) is the Right Model for Creative Thinking – an important piece for those of us planning to stay two steps ahead of the robots via our creative re-inventions.
That’s a wrap – except to confess I am now watching AMC’s Turn: Washington’s Spies – so you don’t have to. We’re two episodes from the season 2 finale, and I’m still waiting on some spying to happen. One guy did wreck a submerged rowboat. On the plus side it feels intimate knowing that I am sharing this viewing experience with the actors’ friends and families… and with that, see you next time.
Which #ensw pieces of merit did I miss? Let us know in the comments.
Most Enterprise hits and misses articles are selected from my curated @jonerpnewsfeed. ìmyPOVî is borrowed with reluctant permission from the ubiquitous Ray Wang.

Image credits: Cheerful Chubby Man © RA Studio, Happy Children © Anna Omelchenko, Waiter Suggesting Bottle © Minerva Studiom, Overworked Businessman © Bloomua, Loser and Winner © ispstock – all from Fotolia.com
Disclosure: SAP, Workday, NetSuite, Oracle and Salesforce are diginomica premier partners as of this writing.

Read more on: Best of archivesHits and misses 