

This is a special Tuesday “back from long weekend” edition of hits and misses
diginomica hit: EU hits Apple with monster tax bill – on taxes, buyers, and tech media tail-chasing by Den and Derek
quotage: “The decision by Brussels is the latest in a string of rulings against international companies, including EDF, Starbucks and Fiat, but the decision against Apple is likely to have the largest financial consequence by a huge margin.” – Derek
myPOV: It started with Derek’s EU hits Apple with record breaking €13bn tax bill, with Derek raising the issue of EU member states losing patience, “finding that the payments they receive from these companies border on the absurd.” Then there is the UK taxation angle of multi-nationals to consider, filed under post-Brexit uncertainty.
Den riffed on Derek’s piece, flogging hitting on the Apple tax issue from several angles, including a fumigation of the tech media slopfest, Tech media has the Apple EU tax story wrong – it matters to buyers. Den’s take: Apple isn’t going anywhere (“contrary to all the huffing and puffing in the media and on its own website”),  and this will all get settled. A negotiated bill will be paid and we move on.
The buyer angle Den delves into is a political hot potato. It comes down to how companies should plan for tax costs in a multi-national context. Can’t settle that in one column or perhaps in one lifetime. Regulations bring both business and ethical considerations. The latter comes into play as customers tend to get a wee disillusioned when companies fall into the trap of slashing the bill for externalities that hurt communities.
diginomica four: my top four stories on diginomica this week:

It’s good to be a girl, says Vera Bradley’s “true social movement” as retail marketing gets digital – Stuart ventures into his retail stomping ground, with with a twist: a retailer planning brick-and-mortar expansion. Digital gets a makeover too, which brings us to Vera Bradley’s online rebranding. Stuart’s analysis comes with this caveat: “I’m totally not the target audience for Vera Bradley…” Same here, mate. Bonus: check diginomica’s special retail report (no sign up needed).
Digital government – a mid-year round-up of the key topics to keep an eye on – Derek takes stock of the year in digital government to date, with a focus on his influential UK coverage – with loads of lessons beyond UK borders. Quotage: “The best way to think about this is: if you were designing government now, would you design it like the current government we have? Absolutely not.”
US startup visas to boost entrepreneurship – an immigrant perspective – Speaking of borders, Den knows a thing or two about forging through U.S. border crossings (all of the legal variety, I should add!). He applies that grueling know-how to a new immigration law that could make the U.S. even more startup-friendly.
FiveFingers maker Vibram puts sole into social media – Phil filed a use case with a social twist. Mix a disruptive product, passionate/social savvy customers, and personalization advances, and you’ve got a modern retail recipe. I’m thinking of grabbing some FiveFingers running shoes for trade shows. Maybe I’ll spring Phil a pair also and we can hit press conferences in style, airing toes as needed. I also dug Jessica’s use case, Waterstones authors new DevOps playbook with New Relic monitoring tools.

Vendor analysis, diginomica style. Here’s my top choices from our vendor coverage:

Revenue Recognition – much more than a technology issue and a conversation with SAP – Brian pulls an SAP angle into an issue that will impact plenty of companies in 2018:  “Will these changes affect all organizations? Certain industries, especially those with lots of contracts (think cable television providers) or those that bundle services, products and warranties together, like IT companies, will be especially challenged. Public firms must adopt the new standards first with private firms following a year later.”
VMworld 2016’s keynote snoozer is no worry for the infrastructure innovators – Den’s got the blowtorch nice and hot for the VMworld kick off: “VMware missed an opportunity to energize the opening day crowd with a keynote that contained nothing particularly new and a series of on stage appearances that had little of substance.” Kurt followed with a provocative piece on the ground, locking up enterprise blog title of the week in the process: “IT diehards seek shelter at VMworld as the future rushes past.” (FYI Kurt credits Phil, who posted the piece, with dual honors for the post title award).

A few more vendor picks, without the quips:

Salesforce Wave comes to IT, marketing, financial services – Phil
Box beats on Q2 FY2017, looks solid going forward – Den
Splunk ramps up the enterprise use cases as proof-points for success – Stuart

Jon’s grab bag –  Diginomica doesn’t always make it to events in Shanghai, but contributor Paul Wallbank did (Huawei’s version of disruption – China style). That “rotating CEO” concept is pretty darn interesting… Meantime, Phil seized the chance to compile best-of pieces from diginomica and around the web in Top insights on collaboration, sharing and digital productivity and Big changes afoot in cloud platforms and infrastructure.
Den opens the diginomica kimono a bit further (don’t worry, not all the way), in Personalization – the next evolution of diginomica, which shares what we’re doing with opt-ins and trying to deliver you, faithful reader, the content you require and the pace and volume that suits. Martin nabs the feel good story of the week in 5G – fat pipes for all are coming in the air, who had me grinning like a Cheshire with “the days of the cabled internet infrastructure services companies will also come into question.” That day of reckoning can’t come soon enough for these chumps conglomerates squandering money trying to block Google Fiber and municipal broadband.
Best of the rest
 IT Blues: Why are Indian infotech firms losing steam? by Varun Sood
quotage: “The traditional approach by outsourcing companies of deploying an army of engineers at cheaper locations to complete work for Fortune 1000 customers is coming under pressure as automation and artificial intelligence (AI)-powered platforms and cloud computing erase the labour arbitrage enjoyed by these firms.” 
myPOV: Varun Sood ventures into the stomping ground of HfS Research: the outsourcing crisis, or reckoning. For years outsourcing critics told me there was a backlash against outsourcing due to cultural/process gaps. I said yes, but only to a point.  Turns out outsourcing does face a turning point but  it’s robotics and AI that are forcing the issue.
Sood, then, answers his own question. The weak part of the article is reading too much into earning reports, and assuming outsourcing companies aren’t reconfiguring their practices. These firms don’t have blinders on; they can see it’s not just a bumpy quarter, but a shift in models. I will, however, buy this: “revenue from these newer technologies [cloud/social/mobile] is not offsetting the business lost from legacy business such as managing servers and developing applications.”
Whether these firms can re-invent is the classic digital question. For more on that, I’ll refer you to HfS Research, as in this sensible piece on the impact of automation:”The choice will largely be down to the workers figuring out whether they want to stay in this industry and learn new skills and ways of working, in order to continue to be effective.”
Other standouts:

VMworld and SuccessConnect in review –  The New Stack published Scott M. Fulton III’s take on VMworld, VMworld 2016: VMware Scrambles for the Foundation. Fulton’s take is more optimistic than the ones we published, with VMworld headlong into containers, OpenStack, etc: “All of which, in a strange way, makes VMware no longer the “VM company.” Constellation’s Holger Mueller filed his take on SuccessConnect in the usual kudos-and-concerns format. Chief among his concerns: technical debt. Bonus: for more, check this SuccessConnect podcast wrap with myself and pesky-question-dude Jarret Pazahanick.
Salesforce.com Less Exciting, More Incredible, Amazing – Frank Scavo continues his second quarter of satirical Salesforce earnings call reviews, analyzing the temperature in the room based on the superlatives in play. It’s sad to see “phenomenal” lagging behind, though it’s good to see “incredible” holding its own. Funny bit about the stock price and reduction in earnings call superlatives…
Dealing with the “happy customers won’t do case studies” problem – Gartner’s Hank Barnes hits on a sore point for many vendors, and offers tips for overcoming it. Event gripe: still boggles how some vendors don’t see the imperative in getting customers in front of influencers. This one provoked an interesting Twitter exchange; here’s most of it.

Honorable mention

Google, Uber, and the Evolution of Transportation-as-a-Service – A solid lay-of-the-new-land piece that I may return to.
Why is Gartner spewing such irresponsible and unsubstantiated data about “robobosses”? – Not just Gartner, and this firm is arguably a Gartner competitor, but – point taken. Grim reader comment: “a good spew-filled headline gets more attention than would most good market research with a set of pragmatic findings.” More grim because it’s true.
OKRs are Old News — Introducing Goal Science – Some meat on this bone.
People in Los Angeles Are Getting Rid Of Their Cars – A sign of big cultural changes to come.
Whiffs
Tip: maybe don’t use your “Wanted” police photo for your Facebook profile pic.  This is awkward, but I’ve gotta call a whiff on myself. Yep, I posted fake news. Egg on face but moving on… Update: can’t find the fake news link – it was about a student who spent the week in San Jose thinking she was in Costa Rica. Will repost link if I can find it.
In our next installment of its-hard-being-a-copyright-Mussolini-with-a-team-of-overcompensated-lawyers, the geniuses legacy thinkers over at Warner Brothers took the dope door prize: Warner Brothers reports own site as illegal. Oh, and Dropbox buried the Lede about its password breach. Samsung did the tone deaf PR thing after its Galaxy Note7s started catching fire. Den got my dander up with this link: FBI Director wants ‘adult conversation’ about backdooring encryption. Don’t get me started dude, that may be a full article’s worth of whiffery… for now I’ll settle for The Register’s profane/concise response. Over to you, Clive.
Which #ensw pieces of merit did I miss? Let us know in the comments.
 
Image credit - Cheerful Chubby Man © RA Studio, Happy Children © Anna Omelchenko, Waiter Suggesting Bottle © Minerva Studiom, Overworked Businessman © Bloomua, King Checkmate © mystock88photo - Fotolia.com - all from Fotolia.com.Disclosure - SAP, Oracle, Workday and Salesforce are diginomica premier partners as of this writing.Read more on: Hits and missesThe new professional and IT as a service 