
diginomica four –  my top four stories on diginomica this week
Lead story – Themes that dominated the first enterprise software conference season of 2017 by Derek du Preez
myPOV; Derek racked up enough travel miles to spend the rest of his life living in a Hilton somewhere on rewards points, but at least he got the stories. In this must-read, he breaks down three big themes for customers:

Integration – it’s an obstacle to transformation, even in the cloud
AI – it’s early days, so we’re in an epic struggle for context (aka sorting keynote BS from actual results).
Service models – get closer to your customers (digitally), or get disrupted

During my own road adventures, I did run into some encouraging integration stories that have convinced me cloud-based integration – IF you adhere to open standards – is easier than on-premise. That doesn’t make it a frictionless cakewalk – especially when  you’re trying to avoid vendor lock-in by operating in a multi-cloud manner, which brings its own complexities.
More picks:

How DIY conversational hardware is yielding business opportunities well beyond Echo – Kurt updates on the push towards enterprise voice UIs, and the obstacles still ahead.
Youth and experience – ageism in the tech industry – Cath kicks off an important new series by asking: how ageist is the tech industry really?
Employee engagement – the differentiating characteristic of winning customer strategies – I’ve never understood why companies obsess on “customer experience” but breeze past “employee experience.” Is happy workers -> happy customers a big stretch? Denis’ latest piece goes deeper by explaining why employee engagement is lacking. He also drops this keeper on data: “Measuring outcomes doesn’t change them. To do that you need to go upstream to primary causes and actions.”

Vendor analysis, diginomica style. Here’s my top three choices from our vendor coverage:

Spreadsheet hell forces change as LT Apparel adopts Host Analytics – Den goes back to his war-on-spreadsheets and emerges victorious with a convincing use case via Host Analytics: “Functionally, Host enables LT Apparel to plan and budget in near real-time but more important, the company can now model without worrying about the impact that spreadsheets might have on the outcome.” Be sure to check the “keys to success” project bullet points.
Turbonomic finds the cost-performance sweet spot of multi-cloud – Multi-cloud looks to be a hits and misses theme for a couple weeks here. Phil kicks this off with a look at Turbonomic. AS Phil says, multi-cloud is about customers moving into a more “dynamic” cloud mindset: “IT often looks at this as first and foremost a performance and resilience issue. Tools like Turbonomic provide an important wake-up call that different choices can have a substantial financial impact too.”
Public sector orgs warn – Keep IT’s hands off of BI, give it to the evangelists – BI words to live by, in this case via a Tableau use case from Derek.

A few more vendor picks, without the quips:

Adaptive Insights Live – an upbeat conference with broad appeal – Brian
Another boost for QTC ecosystem as Salesforce backs Conga – Phil
SAP users still haven’t grasped the implications of GDPR – Stuart

Jon’s grab bag – Stuart’s got a retail two-fer for ya, one about the struggle: Omni-channel land’s end not yet in sight for Lands End, one about the future: VR and conversational commerce – retail’s omni-channel future according to Walmart boss.
Den continues his leadership series with Tone at the Top – Aaron Roe Fulkerson, CEO MindTouch on strong cultural pillars. Each piece will have leadership bromides brilliance – along with an accompanying podcast. Finally, Den unfurls a vintage think piece in Our love affair with terminological inexactitudes – Exxon Mobil is your starter for 10. Nutshell view: “If our basic understanding of information is flawed then how can AI help?” Den sees way too much “magical thinking” around AI, and it’s up to us to avoid a cautionary tale. Lookout, Den warns – “cue the consultants.”
Best of the rest
 Lead story – Manufacturing Is a Huge Opportunity for Cloud ERP – by Frank Scavo

Quotage: “If the size of the domestic manufacturing sector is large, then why hasn’t there been a cloud ERP provider for manufacturing with the scale of Salesforce or Workday?… But the lack of scale among manufacturing cloud ERP providers cannot be because the market is small compared to other industries. Yes, manufacturing’s share of the U.S. GDP has declined slightly over the past decade from 12.3% in 2008 to 11.7% in 2016. Nevertheless, manufacturing is still a major part of the U.S. economy.”
myPOV: In this data-filled post, Scavo makes the case for cloud manufacturing ERP, and addresses why there hasn’t been broad adoption to date. Scavo argues that comparatively slow cloud adoption does not mean this an unappealing market. So if the opportunity is there – what’s the problem?
Scavo’s answer: it’s tougher to build out comprehensive cloud manufacturing functionality than it is HCM or CRM, due to the manufacturing industry’s breadth and depth. That means the cloud manufacturing players that do existing have carved out sub-verticals rather than address the whole. Scavo doesn’t note – but I’d add – that for a while, cloud manufacturing adoption was hindered by the fear of putting mission critical systems in the cloud. I don’t think that’s a big blocker anymore.
Scavo’s advice for manufacturing customers? Consider SaaS manufacturing, but also evaluate “cloud” solutions from vendors that might not have a true SaaS architecture but might have deeper functionality in your (sub)vertical. As always it’s a matter of context not a golden magical quadrantlike trapezoid of vendor rankings.
Honorable mention

What’s the Role of the CIO in a Modern Agile Organization? – a public sector view. I like that courage was mentioned as change takes ovaries/testes.
Uber Received A Scathing Report On Its Culture Problems. Now It’s Trying To Change. – Go Lyft!
We Shouldn’t Use H1-B Visas a Political Weapon – Not a definitive treatment but raises the right questions.
Do More! What Amazon Teaches Us About AI and the “Jobless Future” – a bit sunny side up for my taste but I like the point about how AI innovation could impact the social good, not just shoe delivery.
Don’t confuse chatbots with artificial intelligence – owning an Echo helps to drive this home. I never for a moment find Alexa to be intelligent. I manipulate Alexa for a convenient delivery of a finite – if growing – set of services.
Event Report – Cornerstone on Demand Convergence 2017 – Back to Learning Basics – an upbeat take on an HR vendor on the move.
Women Engineers Who Inspire and Never Give Up (podcast) – The New Stack gettin’ it done.

Whiffs
So I went back to the ol’ bees nest, and yeah, the honey of monetization hypocrisy discontent is still flowing:

My no-airlines-bashing is looking mighty tenuous right now, but man, ain’t this a doozy?

Horror on EasyJet flight as pilot says only a 50-50 chance of engines working – https://t.co/r7as58T65D -> PR brilliance in action
— Jon Reed (@jonerp) June 11, 2017
Hey, if you’re not sure if the flight will make it on one engine, and your passengers have already had their will to live snuffed been massively inconvenienced by prior delays, why NOT put the flight up to a vote? I’d love to a have a long on – or off – the record chat with the nutty sod who voted “let’s go for it!”.
‘Facebook blasphemer’ given death penalty – As you all know I am not a Facebook fanboy but I’ll ride with Zuck on this one. Oh, and as for: “Human rights campaigners have expressed concern” – CONCERN?
Finally, last week’s whiff on the poor bloke who accidentally deleted his employer’s production system got plenty of Twitter debate. Though it was mostly one-sided. I have yet to hear from someone who defends the company’s firing the developer. Any takers? Over to you, Clive.
This is a truncated “Jon feels the road burn” version of hits and misses, which by definition excludes some worthy content – from diginomica and beyond. If you read an #ensw piece that qualifies, let me know in the comments as Clive always does.

Most Enterprise hits and misses articles are selected from my curated @jonerpnewsfeed. ‘myPOV’ is borrowed with reluctant permission from the ubiquitous Ray Wang.
 
Image credit - Cheerful Chubby Man © RA Studio, Happy Children © Anna Omelchenko, Waiter Suggesting Bottle © Minerva Studiom, Businessman Choosing Success or Failure Road © Creativa - all from Fotolia.com.Disclosure - SAP, Oracle, Workday and Salesforce are diginomica premier partners as of this writing.Read more on: Cloud ERP financials and supply chainHits and missesIoT robotics and AI 