

diginomica hit: Workday Rising – analysis and use cases by Den Howlett
quotage: “This year’s Rising was a much more laid back affair than has been the case in years past. Workday seems to have gotten past its self conscious adolescence to a point of maturity where it can afford to let its potential critics loose on the crowd. That’s a net good.”
myPOV: Den was a one-man content engine at this year’s Workday Rising event. We start with Workday Rising 2015: an upbeat mood for a confident company, which includes the keynote review and first impressions. Then it’s on to Workday Rising 2015: solid progress on financials, much more to come, which provides an initial evaluation of Workday Planning. Den considers Workday Planning an ambitious undertaking, given that no transactional ERP solution has hit planning out of the park – yet.
What about IBM’s acquisition of Workday services firm Meteorix? Yeah, Den was on that too. (Consolidation in the Workday implementer ecosystem spells danger). The catch? The danger isn’t what you might think. He wrapped the conference analysis with Workday Rising 2015: diversity, customers, product, confidence. These themes came together in a use case, Tribune Media replatforms to Workday financials in seven months.
For (relatively) new functionality such as Workday Financials, this is a significant use case. But the real wake-up call is reading about a modern deployment that must accommodate 80 percent of the workers on iPads. Legacy solutions need not apply. There is companion audio to hear the story directly. And that’s it for Den-does-Workday folks – for this time around.
diginomica five: my top five picks on diginomica this week

It’s time for the US cloud industry to stand up to Europe’s un-Safe Harbor bullies – Stuart’s got a warning for the US cloud industry: get ready for a fight regarding Safe Harbor, with the European Court of Justice set to rule on Safe Harbor this week. Unless U.S. cloud companies want to build a localized data center in every city in Europe, they’d best heed Stuart forthwith.
Creating a brain-friendly workplace – stop dealing with people as rational human beings – Wait – human beings aren’t rational? Janine tells how media agency Thomson Reuters is managing employees better with neuroscience. Ironic that science helps to address our illogical behavior, eh? Sign your co-workers up for self-awareness training today!
Top ten digital transformation actions from PwC – Stuart rounds up PwC’s bits of digital wisdom. I just went through all ten of PwC’s actions with a cynical eye. They all make sense, though I’d classify most as “digital common sense,” rather than brilliant insights. Stuart’s analysis of PwC’s digital transformation survey is the interesting part, with some useful lessons on addressing cross-functional divides, plus year-to-year data comparisons.
How graph database tech helped expose international tax evasion – Graph databases are starting to develop potent use cases. Jessica’s got one of them here, with the story of how the International Consortium of Investigative Journalists used graph database technology to help reporters track the money trail in the HSBC Swiss Leaks case.
Chasing the God particle with Pentaho – In one of the best diginomica blog titles of all time, Martin details how CERN, an organization which supports scientists in search of godly, infinitesimally small particles, is modernizing its IT processes with Pentaho. A key theme: the intentional choice of an open source database.

Vendor analysis, diginomica style – Den takes a crack at a complicated/important SAP story, DSAG users want a new deal with SAP, uses S/4 HANA survey to telegraph intent. We’re going to have to keep tracking this one; some answers are not yet revealed. Meantime, Dick Hirsch makes an unlikely comparison in Understanding the differences between SAP and Salesforce approach to vehicle networks. As Dick himself concedes, the comparison may be a stretch, but it’s a fun project nonetheless. More Internet of stuff from Phil: We make the IoT actionable, says ServiceMax CEO. Phil’s take? ServiceMax is taking a “strong position” in IoT-enabled field service, but it’s early days.

Jon’s grab bag – Readers liked Barb’s latest, Four steps to a great content marketing plan, a useful primer for doing content at scale. Derek had a fruitful trip to the Adobe Digital Marketing Symposium, where he got an update on one of the most unlikely digital turnarounds I’ve ever seen, Ryanair’s shift from ‘stack it high and sell it cheap’ to personalised, digital experiences.
Phil continues diginomica’s “all things robotics” binge with AI adolescence and robot dreams, a reprise of his Dreamforce appearance. It’s worth a careful read, I can’t sound bite it for ya, except for a new question raised: forget about human error, what about robot error?
Stuart has a cheeky update on career self-turpitude in Don’t be a dope! Social media, HR and marijuana selfies don’t mix, and yes, this is advice from seasoned recruiters! Selfie at your professional peril… Den’s been all over the ad blocker debate. Media insights a-plenty in Ad blockers: the debate rages on. Finally, Den skewers a truly horrific-sounding app in Throw up Thursday: Peeple, an app you’ll want to avoid like a dose of clap. I’ve got another roast coming Tuesday morning if it suits your fancy…
Best of the rest
 Strata and Hadoop World sparks, data scientist salaries spike – pieces by Doug Henschen, Merv Adrian and Gil Press
quotage: “There were plenty of nods to Apache Spark at Strata + Hadoop World, starting with Cloudera’s “one platform” pledge to make Spark an enterprise-class data-processing and data-analysis choice on top of Hadoop.” – Doug Henschen
myPOV: I didn’t think anything could take the buzz away from Hadoop at its own show – except Apache Spark. Fresh back from Strata and Hadoop World, Henschen reports that, sure enough, Spark’s in-memory database engine took center stage. Henschen’s roundup notes the Spark developments, as well as a slew of other vendor news from the show. He also pinpoints a couple startups to track: Startup AtScale and DataTorrent.
Merv Adrian takes a different angle in his conference reflections in Strata Standards Stories: Different Stores For Different Chores. He shares the latest in storage innovation, including Cloudera’s Kudu announcement. And yeah, there’s gotta be some spectacled geniuses to architect and derive actual value from this big data spaghetti. As Gil Press notes, you can make some serious bucks as a unicorn data scientist, but you’ll need a specific, rarified set of skills.
What skills? The short answer is three skill areas. As per Press:

familiarity with a specific domain, and knowing how to solve a problem in that domain
the ability to distinguish signal from noise, or understanding statistics
software engineering

The coolest thing about Press’ article is learning about Kaggle, an online “stadium” for data science competitions. The number one player in all of Kaggle, Owen Zang, picked up all his data science skills on the fly from Kaggle, without formal education in statistics or software engineering. But with considerable/mighty effort. Stellar bootstrapping, sir.
Other standouts

Assessing cloud ERP on Salesforce.com: Rootstock and Kenandy mature – In separate pieces, Frank Scavo of Strativa issued some well-considered updates on Rootstock and Kenandy, two cloud ERP players placing their bet on the Salesforce platform (Kenandy: Against the Tide of Two-Tier ERP and Rootstock Rounding Out Its Cloud ERP Offerings). If you’re a cloud ERP fangirl wondering about the other Salesforce cloud ERP upstarts – yeah, they’re coming. This year, Scavo is doing a separate post on all of ’em. Comin’ right up, you’ll get FinancialForce, AscentERP and a new entrant, SageLive (though ERP is dead to them, hope Scavo remembers to note that – lolz.) Just be patient, dear reader – Scavo’s had a lot of bonehead alerts to track lately.
The Post-Amazon Challenge and the New Stack Model – In one of the most significant – and deepest – posts on The New Stack, Alexis Richardson takes readers through the promise of the new stack for business-relevant software delivery. But Richardson also hits on the obstacles, such as the perplexing array of clouds and container technologies – many of which hold promise, but create debates and project holdups as companies sort the options. After wading through automated infrastructure and the proliferation of PaaS, Richardson takes a noble swipe at predicting the future of the new stack.
Jeff Nolan and Mark Suster go off, on disruption and “unicorns” – It was a bountiful week for enterprisey rants. One from Jeff Nolan, where he makes quick work of “disruption” buzz (You Want Disruption? Can You Handle it?). And I quote: “You want disruption in your business? Hire the right fucking people! Search out combative, difficult, and argumentative people who care in a very personal way about the vision and purpose of the effort. Teams are messy because people themselves are messy, don’t risk a mediocre outcome by hiring people who excuse mediocrity and have toned down their passion in order to fit in. Hire people who won’t compromise.” Damn straight Mr. Nolan! On the other stage, Mark Suster has grown a tad weary of startup unicorns, or so we can derive from his latest post, Why I Fucking Hate Unicorns and the Culture They Breed. All righty then!

Honorable mention
Business Software Trends Update – dense piece, far more interesting than the title. Includes good stuff on B2B buying behavior, and sales/marketing cluelessness.
Harman, Tech Mahindra, IBM, Accenture and Atos leading the Internet of Things phenomenon – Your IoT services market review.
News Analysis – Workday completes Talent Management with Learning – Finally – or too late? – The blow-by-blow analysis from the master of said format.
German SAP User Group: We Want More S/4HANA Information Before Purchasing – Title sums it up pretty well I’d say.
So Long Blogging. Hello—Yep, We’re Going to Say It—Plogging – the name is super-duper-dumb, but the “Plogging” trend matters.
Whiffs
If you’re an NFL football fan, chances are you’ve been bombarded by pondscumming ads from two rising “daily” fantasy sports leagues – Draft Kings and Fan Duel. Draft Kings claims it’s in the “giant check” business. (as in, creating millionaires). It’s really in the business of leeching off the American people, selling lottery tickets disguised as games of skill. I was super pleased to see at least one senator already has these schmoes in line for some onion-peeling. And he’s right: this is just “betting on fake games.”
Isn’t this the legal equivalent of slipping a ten spot to your bookie? Never before have I rooted for the giant hand of regulation so hard – just to force these rodents off the air waves, back to the dark web or shit-shoveling day jobs. But with the NFL and ESPN heavily subsidized by these LCDs (lowest common denominators), maybe I’m the dreamer, eh?
Whiff #2:

“Tim Cook’s Apple Has Forced the Whole Tech World to Realign” http://t.co/MSoBpAJMKk -> Wired brings us the Apple fanboy perspective
— Jon Reed (@jonerp) October 3, 2015
Evidently Apple has already conquered the enterprise – good to know.
Continuing with my potshots at unsatisfactory plane wifi: Streaming video, on the other hand, fares oddly better. At least that’s the case on Southwest, which has a pretty bug-free TV and movie service. I even coaxed it into working on my old Droid tablet. Meanwhile, their wifi is brutal. Delta’s version of this, on the other hand – Delta Studio – is a traveler’s padded cell, a veritable hit parade of software incompatibilities.
Delta Studio seems to be allergic to Droids of any flavor, even the ones it claims to support. The woman next to me wanted her NFL Sunday Night football, and she had a spanking new iPad. Delta Studio spanked that iPad good too, cranking out error messages at an awe-inspiring rate. Our football fan gave up, settling for the in-flight magazine that’s been in the seat in front of her since 1970.
Here’s an idea for the airlines to ponder: stop charging for in-flight wifi UNTIL IT DOESN’T SUCK.
Officially off-topic
Travel day absurdities have delayed publication too long – but I’ll add the off-topic stuff Tuesday morning from New York City. Till then…
Which #ensw pieces of merit did I miss? Let us know in the comments.
Most Enterprise hits and misses articles are selected from my curated @jonerpnewsfeed. ‘myPOV’ is borrowed with reluctant permission from the ubiquitous Ray Wang.

Image credits: Cheerful Chubby Man © RA Studio, Happy Children © Anna Omelchenko, Waiter Suggesting Bottle © Minerva Studiom, Overworked Businessman © Bloomua, Loser and Winner © ispstock – all from Fotolia.com
Disclosure: SAP, Workday, ServiceMax and Salesforce are diginomica premier partners as of this writing.

Read more on: Best of archivesHits and misses 