
diginomica hit: Better projects, better data – use cases by Den, Jessica and Phil
quotage: “The first steps towards digital transformation at business services giant Rentokil Initial were “nothing to do with IT,” admits Anthony Meadows, global director of enterprise IT. Initiatives led by business departments first demonstrated the agility and speed that was achievable.” – Phil
myPOV: A few nifty customer use cases on diginomica this week – all tying into better results with better data. Phil’s Business sets the digital pace at Rentokil Initial sets the tone, with business users taking their app destiny in their own hands, and IT “decomposing” the company’s core ERP to expose data and services as APIs. In Valspar gets a better shade of purchasing with MDM, Jessica tells the tale of Valspar’s purchasing problem (data spread out over disparate legacy systems with crummy visibility), and how an Informatica MDM project gave them the purchasing clout a $4.5 billion company should have.
When do you officially name a project a “Beast?” When you’re puling in data from more than 150 sources, that’s when. During Qlik’s annual partner event, Den got the story of how Lufthansa Cargo tames data using Qlik on Project Beast. The goal of this monster multi-year project? Streamline procurement efficiency, while putting self-serve data in the hands of business users, who have been burned by the bulky IT projects of the past.
diginomica three: my completely subjective “top three” stories on diginomica this week:

Digital disruption done right – the Starbucks way – No one has tracked Starbucks’ digital transformation as closely as Stuart. When Starbucks trashed its CD display, Stuart was there, assessing the Spotify partnership. This time around, Stuart looks at how Starbucks has disrupted itself around mobile (19 percent of all purchases coming from mobile pay and counting). Shopping malls may die but Starbuck’s ain’t goin’ anywhere – even if their mobile commerce has proven buggy in my admittedly anecdotal usage.
Is social media the key to winning the talent war? – It’s rare to see a sensible post about social media for recruitment, but I’d say Janine Milne’s qualifies, as in: “Recruiters are failing to do their homework into social media upfront and are ‘jumping in with two left feet.'”
CoderDojo and the Citizen Developer – Supposedly we’re going to need 100 million developers for all the apps we need, or will need soon. Martin looks at how Salesforce sees this problem, and why they’re putting some weight behind the CoderDojo movement. The “Dojo” kids pictured do look a bit young, though, even for Accenture (kidding!).

Vendor analysis, diginomica style – Den parses the Workday numbers – and rides herd on investor belly-aching (Workday blows out its Q1 FY2016 numbers, reiterates $1billion plus run rate).  Meantime, Derek continues our series of diginomica Salesforce interviews with Salesforce’s President of EMEA talks about the “customer gap” facing enterprises (some key points on Salesforce in EMEA and the art of shifting the customer relationship via better data/platform).
As a DevOps fan boy, I was stoked to see Phil’s Can DevOps transform an enterprise in 1-2 years? Chef CEO says yes. Phil raises the fair question: is CEO Barry Crist’s transformation timeframe realistic beyond the early adopters? Maybe – but maybe not. Plenty of lessons regardless. Elsewhere, in the Justice Department’s Box project is in the early stages, but Stuart has some fresh data on public sector collaboration to consider also (The Justice Department opens Box on cloud collaboration).
Den reads between the lines of some interesting SAP news in EMC acquiring Virtustream provides the SAP HANA alt case. Derek closes out my vendor analysis picks with Basho aims for enterprise operational simplicity with new Data Platform (never a dull moment in the NoSQL market) and a juicy bit from the Google I/O show, Google makes its pitch to own the Internet-of-Things with Project Brillo.
Jon’s grab bag: Continuing his fruitful line of inquiry from last week, Martin asks whether our means of measuring IT are outdated in And the productivity of IT is what?. Charlie Bess gets a useful jump on wearables strategy in Start planning for wearables – here’s how (teaser: “denial is not an option”). In Den’s Friday Roast on the Google vs Oracle API trial, he argues that  “If Oracle wins then the future of much software is at risk,” Ominous, yes – but not overstated. Wrap: foodies may dig Stuart’s look at the cloud (AWS) infrastructure behind Just Eat, now delivering the yummies in thirteen countries.
Best of the rest
 Finding nuggets in the Google I/O hypolooza – by several sharpies
quotage: “What is Google’s response to this surge in messaging client importance? Crickets. The Android Hangouts client attempts to converge Google Talk-style IM and SMS in one place, but is extraordinarily awkward to use, because it does not, in fact, converge them. Google Voice, meanwhile, was at one point a credible SMS and voice service, but appears to have been effectively orphaned.” Stephen O’ Grady
myPOV: Google’s I/O developer show prompted the expected combination of excitement and head-scratching. As Holger Mueller noted in his day one Google I/O review, this year’s I/O was all about Android. Forget about Chrome – even Google Docs and Google Cloud Platform got the cheap seats. Google’s developer message is fairly strong (O’ Grady has more on that in What Google I/O Was About), but I get a bit woozy when Mueller and O’Grady talk about Google’s plans to improve the Android user experience. Coming from a Droid dude, one thing Google is really good at is ruining a perfectly good UX.
Larry Dignan made a trenchant – yes, feels good to use that word – point in his Google I/O preview (8 reasons why Google could be vulnerable). For all Google’s forays in robots, driverless cars, anti-social goggles, and anti-social networks, Google still has one revenue trick: tiny text ads. Google will figure out how to expand its revenue base, but the clock-is-ticking – Facebook is starting to figure this advertising thing out.
Other standouts

Ron Miller on Salesforce’s big data Wave – and enterprise transformation – Miller, a long-time tech journalist, has been on the TechCrunch enterprise beat for a while now, now making his first appearance in hits/misses. Miller lives within a short drive of my house, yet I met him at a trade show – go figure. In Salesforce Helps Customers Ride Wave To Big Data Platforms, Miller reports on the news that Wave Analytics now connects to a slew of big data players (pick your fave). Another Miller piece from May 23, The Enterprise Transformation Conundrum, examines the corporate “inertia” that stands in the way of change, protecting silos and turning digital transformation into a farce (my words, not his). Welcome Mr. Miller, may you stay on this “hits” side of this column.
The Foundations of the As-a-Service Economy (Part 2): Avoiding getting burned without a burning platform – Where we hop onto the moving train of part two in Phil Fersht’s ongoing “As a Service Economy” series. I’ll bet you didn’t know what a burning platform is – neither did I. As best I can tell, Fersht sees a “burning platform” as a systematic boot in the ass of middle management mediocrity. And HfS has the data to back it. Fersht: “Why is it that over half of senior managers view As-a-Service dynamics as critical, while only 29% of their teams under then feel the same?  Answer – most people are comfortable with their daily grind – they stare at metrics on spreadsheets, ensure exceptions are handled and the corporate engine keeps running.” Running, yes, but only for now: Fersht thinks most of them will be Uber drivers obsolete in a few years. Oh, and Fersht also has a burning boot for the milennials, check out: The biggest threat to outsourcing’s future: Unfocused and unambitious Millennials.

Honorable mention
21 Inc. and the future of Bitcoin – Detailed and thought-provoking – and now I know what a Satoshi is
Musings – Speed matters for HR – how to accelerate – Part I –  I’m a sucker for musing, even of the concise variety. Plus: a good reminder that “true analytics” means taking or supporting an action, not just showing me a pretty dashboard.
Microservices are Real, the Cloud not so Much – I didn’t totally get this one first time, but it made me think, earning the coveted “re-read” status.
4 Critical Questions to Ask Before Designing Anything –  Useful post from a UX blog that had flown under my radar.
Silk Road Mastermind Sentenced To Life In Prison – Context on a troubling and atypical legal case.
Whiffs
Tip for anyone defending organizations mired in scandal: before you film a video defending your embattled org (FIFA in this case), make sure you don’t use, as exhibit A, an article published by satirical (fake) news site The Onion.
Oh, and did you know that the IRS is still running Windows XP, and fraud detection software as old as Justin Bieber? (ok, you gotta spot Bieber a year, but still). Surely this has nothing to do with the recent IRS hack news? Either way, not exactly tax dollars at work.
So I’m torn about calling The Hypocrisy of the Internet Journalist a whiff. It’s not every day you read a phrase as unflinching as “I’m selling you out as hard as I can, and I’m sorry.” The piece makes two worthwhile points: 1. online journalism is reeling for business models/selling user data is a common temptation; and 2. a determined/web savvy individual could compile a disturbingly complete dossier on most of us.
Granted. I can even accept why the author decided to participate. But the claim “I could slowly massage the ad messages you see, and in many cases, even the content, and predictably and reliably remake your worldview,” is over the top. We each have the job of erecting and maintaining our own BS filters. No, they won’t be perfect, but this isn’t Brave New World either. If we allow for complete indoctrination, we aren’t any better than the robots nipping at our jobs.
As for: “I’m selling you to make my living and have my reach. I’m selling you to hundreds of corporations and dozens of governments.” Uh, that’s a YOU problem. If that’s what we’re left with, let’s just walk into the ocean and let it sweep us into the sushi pit. Yes, we buy and sell data. I’m no Internet krishna, but I’ve talked with enough bootstrappers to know there is such a thing as a genuine value exchange, where both parties disclose their interests and share data/money/property based on agreed-upon parameters. It’s not utopia but it’s not Risky Business either.
Officially off-topic
Speaking on Google’s limited revenue sources, call me crazy, but I’m not sure a patent on making stuffed animals come to life is going to impact the balance sheet anytime soon…
When I read about the Woman who tossed a $200,000 Apple 1 computer into recycling (who has yet to be identified), I immediately placed a call to my mother. I’ll let you know what I learn. Oh, and Lionel Messi’s Copa Del Ray goal broke the Internet for a little while – if you didn’t see it, here’s some calls from around the world.
If you’re in the mood for a long form piece, this exploration on whether we should be afraid of Watson provides some narrative on Watson’s evolution. I also enjoyed this skewering of self-help gurus, though I wish the author had spent a few minutes taking down that four hour workweek huckster (most folks who have recommended 4 Hour Workweek to me work at least 60 hours a week – hmmm).
That’s it for now – back to MongoDB World. See you next time…
Which #ensw pieces of merit did I miss? Let us know in the comments.
Most Enterprise hits and misses articles are selected from my curated @jonerpnewsfeed. ìmyPOVî is borrowed with reluctant permission from the ubiquitous Ray Wang.

Image credits: Cheerful Chubby Man © RA Studio, Happy Children © Anna Omelchenko, Waiter Suggesting Bottle © Minerva Studiom, Overworked Businessman © Bloomua, King Checkmate © mystock88photo – all from Fotolia.com
Disclosure: SAP, Workday and Salesforce are diginomica premier partners as of this writing.

Read more on: Best of archivesHits and misses 