
diginomica hit: Questioning Gartner’s bimodal IT model – by Phil Wainewright and Derek du Preez
quotage: “Bimodal IT conveys a reassuring message that updating those systems can be be postponed and isolated. It encourages procrastination and condones a drawbridge-up mentality instead of fostering the collaboration and convergence that is the true secret of success in digital transformation.” – Phil
myPOV: Gartner didn’t invent the concept of bimodal IT. As Phil notes in Gartner’s bimodal IT considered harmful, Gartner coined the “bimodal IT” phrase to describe a particular approach to digital. Phil is not the only one to reject the notion of bimodal IT, but as an advocate for a frictionless enterprise, Phil’s body of work calls for a more “all in” approach to digital versus the hedging he perceives in the bimodal approach.
Derek took the debate in a UK direction in Does the UK government have a bimodal IT problem? (short answer: Derek says “yes.”). I try to name elephants in hits and misses: it could be argued that diginomica has something to gain by taking shots at Gartner. I’m not sure I agree, but if you search through our Gartner coverage, you’ll find a mix of views, probably leaning towards the positive. But not on this defining issue. Enterprise media owes customers a vigorous debate on bimodal IT.
diginomica five: my completely subjective top five stories on diginomica this week

Was 2015 the year that ‘legacy’ stopped being used as an excuse to avoid digital? – Derek hits the 2015 home stretch with one of his finest pieces of the year, a thoughtful review of how his coverage fits into different categories of digital change, from customer experience to the buzzword mouthful he calls servitization (yes, brutally awkward word, but important concept). This piece could have easily been my pick of the week – check it.
Customer use cases: racy, data-driven and social – Three nifty use cases for ya: Maxwell Cooter on why Virgin Racing’s approach to data mixing powers lessons for the future of business. Jessica rides on with Zuellig Pharma achieves on-time drug delivery with Blackbay, and Janine’s got another one from HR Tech Europe, this time on social media for HR communication: Holcim cements HR engagement with social media. Interesting change management themes in Jess and Janine’s pieces, though handled differently. As for Maxwell, who knew electric car disruption would extend to racing? Keeper quote: “One day, everyone in the heart of the cities will be driving electric vehicles: petrol-powered cars will be treated in the same way that smoking is now.”
The tech and finance industry want blockchain. Not Bitcoin. – Derek wraps another strong week with a look at The Linux Foundation’s blockchain news. (The Linux Foundation has brought key players in the tech and finance industry together to create a new open-source blockchain ‘hyperledger’. BIG story to watch in 2016…

Vendor analysis, diginomica style – (sorta) good news from… Blackberry? Stuart’s got the unlikely gambit in Blackberry begins to harvest revenue growth from software biz. More Stuart: IBM doubles down on Watson in IBM chooses Munich as the place to pitch Watson at making sense of IoT’s data, to the tune of $3 billion. Oracle’s earnings are a tale of three conflicting stories: cloud up, on-premise and hardware down. Stuart picks up Oracle’s high stakes long game in Mark Hurd’s cloud blizzard doesn’t alter the short range weather forecast for Oracle.
Two digital success stories taking hold: Accenture rides the digital disruption wave as outsourcing slows down and Adobe keeps the marketing cloud wars on the digital disruption agenda (I’ve been skeptical on both, particularly Accenture, but I’ll come around if these numbers hold). Phil wraps our vendor coverage with NetSuite takes cloud ERP further into Europe and a use case that will have some high-fiving and others hand-wringing (Why Sanofi chose Workday to replace SAP HR).

Jon’s grab bag – Derek pulled out some interesting nuances in Independent food outlets rising on Instagram, whilst Facebook/Twitter for the masses, including which networks are better for upstart brands. Den’s got some connected car ruminations for your holiday brain food, starting with Conflicts around the connected car expose conundrums beyond IT. He adds personal reflections on the rise of Uber in London: Uber exposes London Luddites in black cab trade. Note to self: maybe don’t call a London cabbie a “luddite” next time I’m in the city…
Best of the rest
 Bit of a slowdown week in the enterprise blogosphere, but I found a few standouts… such as the pitfalls of services collaboration, a Phil Fersht production.
quotage: “I am sure many of you are muttering to yourself, “This is very consistent with previous studies HfS has run” – and you are correct. Little is changing. However, it’s worse than just the buyers’ having negative perceptions of service providers… 80% of buyers simply aren’t engaging with their providers in a collaborative way.” – Phil Fersht, 80% of outsourcing relationships fail to deliver collaborative value… so what can we do? 
myPOV: HfS Research winds down a compelling year of blogging with a research riff on buyers’ negative views of service providers. Fersht reports that 80 percent of buyers “aren’t collaborating with service providers in a collaborative way.” Sounds right – but why is collaboration so important? Fersht points to the steady creep of design thinking, which fell off the hype cycle a while ago from what I can tell. The catch? The collaboration has to be ongoing – not just a weekend binge of white boards and vague follow-through.
I’m good with that – though my big objection with design thinking is that usually it begins AFTER the most fateful ideas regarding business models and tech solutions have already been decided. If you combine follow-through with the guts to question business model assumptions with outside stakeholders early and often, maybe collaboration can work. If not, there is always Facebook for Work to play around with while hungrier companies Uber your customer base.
Other standouts

IBM design thinking – under the big blue hood – Speaking of design thinking, Constellation’s Holger Mueller paid a visit to IBM’s modern design fortress in Site Visit – IBM Design Studio Austin. Mueller gets at how IBM is addressing the aforementioned issue of bringing in design thinking early enough to impact results – in this case product design. As Mueller puts it, “When mainframe engineers use Design Thinking for a zOS upgrade – you know IBM is onto something that works and transforms the way how the vendor builds its product.”
HPE on the map – and on dueling podcasts – It’s impressive to see HPE rolling out of the gate by embedding itself in dueling podcasts, one from RedMonk and one from The New Stack (I’m making up the “dueling” part, I have no idea if there is a rivalry between the two firms though the drama queen side of me sure as hell hopes there is!). Both podcasts come with writeups. New Stack: HPE Discover 2015: All About the Enterprise DevOps, Decreasing Builds That Fail Testing. RedMonk: A conversation about Continuous Deployment and Continuous Everything. It’s early days but if HPE can talk the language of devops influencers rather than stripmine marketing, that helps their cause.
Slack and the State of Technology at the End of 2015 – Ben Thompson closes out a strong year as the most literate consumer tech blogger with this ode to Slack, or, more accurately, the trend of ubiquitous collaboration that Slack represents that is now up for grabs. Though his notion of Microsoft’s enterprise dominance is hyberbolic at best, I agree with Thompson: Slack is kind of a big deal. I’ve kicked tires on countless collaboration tools – this is the first one I’ve seen that has a seamless desktop to mobile approach and ease of external feeds. “Work from anywhere” is already the trap we are snared in; it might as well be our liberation also, eh?

Honorable mention
OpenAI: AI for All – gotta love that Infosys CEO Vishal Sikka blogs in a personal style on his own web blog. In this case, about the potential of OpenAI and Infosys’ role.
Leadership lessons for the digital workplace – solid stuff here from Sanjay Poonen’s CXO Talk interview. Concept of “servant leadership” in short supply in the enterprise. Mandela quote: “Lead from the back and make other people feel that they’re leading from the front.”
IT managers: we’re hurting for more cloud and DevOps skills – more tie-ins to the “two speed” IT theme, but in this case, how lack of cloud/devops skills is keeping IT managers in the dreaded slow lane.
Situational Sales Management – research-informed ruminations for the win: “A challenge with the customer situation approach is that it is rare that the answer to these questions can be derived from CRM reports.” I sense CRM disruptions ahead in 2016 – call me Nostradamus…
Plot Thickens In Dell-EMC Deal As VMware Announces It’s Walking Away From Virtustream Deal With EMC. – this could easily be adapted into a soap opera, though I’d worry about the ratings.
Whiffs
Is there a category for wildly successful campaigns that completely undermine their intent? That seems to be the case with the Australian anti-marijuana campaign “Stoner Sloth,” which is destined for cult classic status, amongst the very stoners they are trying to ridicule:

Can someone please pass the pipe while I hit replay? Unintentional comedy par excellence? Yes. Drug deterrent? I dunno – I think the dude imbibes abides…
So when I saw Paul Carr of Pando had published a piece called, Yeah, social media is toxic. So quit. I knew it would wind up in my whiffs column. But after I read it – well, the part of it that sits outside Pando’s paywall – I can’t really knock it. I wouldn’t pay to finish the article, but Carr quit Twitter due to its “toxicity” and is sticking with it. I gotta respect that. Carr says “For all the bullshit about how social media is the first draft of journalism”… and goes on to say he is still in the loop on the stories that matter, despite stepping away from the tweetstream.
Except: social isn’t about breaking news, except in rare instances. It’s about ignoring/filtering/braving the noise in order to make – and deepen – relevant connections. Carr isn’t wrong about Twitter, but he was using it wrong. And while I won’t pay to read a belly aching rant, I’m rooting for Panda’s paywall model. No one needs another ad-infested tech media site. Do it differently by all means.
Which #ensw pieces of merit did I miss? Let us know in the comments.
Most Enterprise hits and misses articles are selected from my curated @jonerpnewsfeed. ‘myPOV’ is borrowed with reluctant permission from the ubiquitous Ray Wang.

Image credits: Cheerful Chubby Man © RA Studio, Happy Children © Anna Omelchenko, Waiter Suggesting Bottle © Minerva Studiom, Overworked Businessman © Bloomua, Businessman is choosing success or failure road – all from Fotolia.com
Disclosure: SAP, Workday, Infosys, NetSuite and Salesforce are diginomica premier partners as of this writing.

Read more on: Best of archivesHits and misses 