

This is a special “Jon on the road” edition of hits and misses
diginomica hit: The perils of automation complacency by Kurt Marko
quotage: “Until recently, one might have added enhanced safety to the litany of benefits flowing from software automation. However there are disquieting signs that over-reliance on software that is almost always right causes people to disengage from the task at hand, often with tragic results..”
myPOV: Kurt uses the recent Tesla fatality as one launch point for this insightful piece on how automation result in a negative outcome if it leads to complacent behavior from human operators. Kurt argues that the edge cases where automation breaks down to expose the danger of giving total decision control to “imperfect algorithms.” The business outcomes of such process failures might not always be catastrophic or life-threatening, but they can still be costly. One fascinating aspect, observed in airplane pilots reliance on automated tech: the “deskilling” of workers that occur where their skills atrophy based on automation dependence.
Kurt identifies three risks of “extreme automation,” borne out by recent use cases from Tesla, Microsoft (chatbot hell), and Target (horrible/embarrassing consumer data breach)

Complacency born of the system being almost always right, leading to human inattention and surprise when it erroneously handles rare or unexpected events.
Data overload that leaves people unable to detect meaningful information buried in a stream of noise or willfully ignoring valid warnings amidst a stream of false positives.
Unsupervised use of a self-training algorithm that ends up optimizing around the wrong set of inputs.

Plenty of contextual meat here, highly preferable to sensationalizing so-called “auto-pilot” fatalities.
diginomica five: my top five stories on diginomica this week:

Privacy Shield – EU signs off on transatlantic data transfer comfort blanket – thought you might like a short break from Brexit, to… EU data privacy legislation. Stuart’s on the case, with his vintage barbs in tow – though this is more of an ongoing soap opera that will require further review. Stuart’s (inimitable) take: data privacy guidelines matter, but the Privacy Shield is “a comfort blanket knitted out of wooly thinking.”
What happens to data protection post-Brexit? I don’t know, says UK Data Protection Minister – OK, there’s your break from Brexit. Now we’re back, with Stuart examining the data privacy issues left in its wake. Gist: the UK is in data protection and data transfer limbo. Amongst our Brexit coverage this week, my other pick is Derek’s Brexit – Bad news for digital government and SMEs, good news for large SIs?
Why Crocs customers don’t need an omni-channel experience – Phil with a nifty use case, wrapping with this takeaway: “Rather than slavishly following all the omni-channel fads, it’s important to study customer behavior and find out what’s going to work for a specific cohort.” If you want more retail-in-transition, also check Phil’s Catalog retailer N Brown’s 2-year transition to digital.

Vendor analysis, diginomica style. Here’s my two top choices from our vendor coverage:


Epicor goes to KKR in $3.3 billion deal – now what? – Den
US Senate goes sour on BlackBerry in latest blow to the device manufacturer – Stuart


Jon’s grab bag – My only issue with Cath’s Meet the woman entrepreneur cooking up a storm with developing world data – I wish I’d written it. Great angle on how compiling the right data could change farming priorities that in turn reduce malnutrition. Chris does a smart job of weaving two stories together in National Trust v Laundrapp – a tale of two digital marketing strategies: “Just as today’s robotics experts have to understand society and psychology, so today’s digital entrepreneurs need to be grafters and to get their hands dirty in the physical world.”
Finally, Phil’s got the skinny on one of the more interesting enterprise startups I’ve seen in LzLabs defines software to eat the world’s legacy mainframes. Den takes us home with some barbed wire commentary at the expense of idiotic Twitter behavior we should never try ourselves in Avoid the Leadsom Defense at all costs. If you want to know the real meaning of Den’s “Leadsom Defense,” read his deconstruction of a politician with social media disorder, but let’s just say plausible deniability doesn’t work so well on the Interwebs where scrubbing your miscues is futile.
Best of the rest
 Hadoop Summit 2016 – customer use cases and analysis by Doug Henschen
quotage: “Finally, I agree that streaming is shaping up as a next big thing in data management and analytics, but I’d advise newbies to start experiments with streaming-capable tools that may already be at their disposal, like HBase, Kafka and Spark. I’d get a taste of streaming challenges and consider the breadth of opportunities before adding a system like HDF.” (Hortonworks Data Flow) – Doug Henschen, Hadoop Summit 2016 Spotlights Enterprise Innovation, IoT Use Cases
myPOV: No one breaks down a Hadoop show like Henschen, who combined a conference analysis with summary of Hadoop customer progress. It’s part of Henschen’s view that “Hadoop is settling in as the next-generation enterprise data-management platform,” not just for Internet companies like Facebook, Netflix and LinkedIn, but for “traditional” companies like Ford or Merck. Henschen breaks out some customer use cases, including (in his words):

Blue Cross Blue Shield of Michigan is building out what Beata Puncevic described as the company’s “next-generation data platform with Hadoop at the center.
Progressive Insurance built its well-known Snapshot usage-based auto-insurance offering on top of Hadoop. The company has compiled more than 15 billion miles worth of driving data from Snapshot devices that plug into auto diagnostic ports and relay data from insured vehicles.
Ford – runs its FordPass connected car app on the Hortonworks Hadoop stack. It’s an early example of an IoT-style application where data is used in different ways at different locations on the network.

This customer detail sheds light on Hadoop’s enterprise maturity. Some of the examples are early, so Henschen will need to go back to Hadoop World next year to get updates.
Standout story:


Automation, Tesla, and assigning blame for bad driving – “self-driving cars” dominated the tech headlines again this week, raising uncomfortable questions about whether A.I.-assisted technology can protect us from our own poor driving decisions. Over at The New Stack, David Cassel asks is Can Technology Save Us From Bad Driving? Answer: yes, perhaps – but not due to auto-drive. It’s more about using tech to alert us to our own self-inflicted safety hazards, rather than taking our hands off the wheel. Buzzfeed raises a similar point about overestimating our tech in Tesla’s Big Problem With Autopilot Feature May Come Down To Its Name.

Honorable mention – the top seven:


Microsoft gives Salesforce a shove with new Dynamics 365 integrated cloud platform – Fisticuffs! But I love this type of vendor skirmish because customers get better choices.
You Can Never Fire Someone Too Early – Now there’s a feel-good sentiment. But Dave Kellogg is right. It’s a harsh adage, but slipping into mediocre/passive processes hurts more employees in the long run.
How A/B Testing at LinkedIn, Wealthfront and eBay Made Me a Better Manager – A deep dive with plenty of wonky specifics. Wonky A/B testing is wonky – and it works. Key point on type one versus type two decisions (type two being the kind you can course correct – ideal for A/B methodology).
Everything I’ve learned about Lean UX: AMA with Jeff Gothelf – Interesting gut check on what Gothelf has learned since his Lean UX book came out in 2006.
Household Products Industry Stuck in Neutral and Going Backwards – Authoritative drill-down, complete with fancy graphics.
A Critical Shift is Happening in Technology Markets – Here’s a keeper quote for ya: “42% of the CEOs cited improvements in customer experience and service as the key change that has driven more wins (Incidentally, the combination of new or better products was only 15%).”
Automation Impact: India’s services industry workforce to shrink 480,000 by 2021 – a decline of 14% – Good to see serious effort for real automation stats – not just flogging useless alarmist projections.

Whiffs
Speaking of awkward Twitter hacks, does it get any more “whoops!” than hacking the guy who sent the first tweet? (Twitter Creator’s Twitter Account Gets Hacked). I guess nothing is more reassuring than knowing we’re all in this hackable environment together.
Calling a whiff on an event that hasn’t even happened yet is pretty unfair, but could things look any worse for the upcoming Rio Olympics? Athletes dropping out ahead of time due to the Zika virus, scientists discover another drug-resistant “super bacteria” on Rio’s top beaches and Olympic venues, and police officers greet travelers at the Rio airport with “Welcome to Hell” signs? Oh, and your luggage is on carousel 3. Enjoy.
And:

“Facebook Once Again Blames Controversial Takedown On Technical Issues” https://t.co/iMtJETwCVl -> BS excuse, editorial process is culprit
— Jon Reed (@jonerp) July 8, 2016

Look, I get why Facebook is hiding behind the technical issues. Pulling a live stream that the president of the United States referred to as “important” gets a wee awkward (Facebook also blamed such a glitch on the removal of a Bernie Sanders video earlier). Technically, Facebook may be right – if you expand the “technical glitch” excuse to include algorithmic malfunctions – such as automatically removing a video that is flagged by enough Facebook users, or even Facebook itself. I haven’t typed this phrase in a while, but Buzzfeed is right to assert:
An automated policy effectively absolves Facebook of any editorial responsibility. A glitch implies a malfunction in the system. One that’s acting irregularly and is not the norm. Yet at a certain point it’s worth asking whether it’s not an irregularity at all, but rather a flawed system; one that’s poorly designed to deal with difficult issues.
Yup – and perhaps a flawed system that can be gamed by users? Help me out: how hard would it for Facebook to say, “We’re struggling with editorial process around when to remove controversial videos that speak to developing stories. Until we get that sorted, we may have situations of videos removed and then re-instated. But as you guessed, it’s not a technical issue; we don’t have five kazillion engineers for nothing.”
Instead Facebook burps PR sludge and calls it transparency. Have I mentioned how much I love Facebook?
Which #ensw pieces of merit did I miss? Let us know in the comments.
Image credit - Image credits - Cheerful Chubby Man © RA Studio, Happy Children © Anna Omelchenko, Waiter Suggesting Bottle © Minerva Studiom, Overworked Businessman © Bloomua, Businessman Choosing Success or Failure Road © Creativa - all from Fotolia.com.Disclosure - SAP, Oracle, Workday and Salesforce are diginomica premier partners as of this writing.Read more on: Analytics planning and data analysisHits and missesSecurity 