
diginomica five –  my top five stories on diginomica this week
Lead story – Amazon chows down on Whole Foods, and the aftershocks continue – by Den Howlett and Stuart Lauchlin
myPOV: Amazon has stolen enterprise headlines before, but never quite like this. Who better but Den and Stuart, two accomplished grocers home delivery divas digital services experimenters to weigh in on an acquisition felt on both sides of the pond?
Den kicks things off with Amazon chows down on Whole Foods, acquiring at $13.7 billion – it just makes sense, a purchase that passes his curmodgo-meter successfully. Why? The distribution boost is obvious, but Den also points to “access to a vast store of customer activity data that [Amazon] can use alongside its own algorithms to better understand customer preferences.” Enterprise buffs should note Den’s aside: Infor may have a big role to play here, now entrenched on the Whole Foods side.
Stuart added context with Amazon’s Whole Foods aftershock throws up some beneficiaries (perhaps), examining the only other grocery stores with rising stock prices in the wake – in particular Ocado, a online UK grocer seen as a potential Amazon acquisition. The implications? When Amazon looks beyond the U.S., it may have to flex its acquisition muscles again. I’ll add: if Whole Foods is as technically behind as some say, that will test Amazon’s jugular tech patience. Den’s right on this: the power of FANG is now a dominant force of its own.
More picks:

New York City Mayor unveils plans to invest in tech jobs to improve wage inequality – Derek on a Mayor determined to get on the winning side of the tech-versus-jobs debate. Semi-related, see my: Designing for policy change – Ariel Kennan on applying design to New York City’s homeless problem.
HR transformation at Sberbank, Lufthansa and Jaguar Land Rover – Phil with fresh views on changing HR with cloud in mind, from the recent SAP SuccessConnect show in London. When a banker says “People don’t need banks,” I’d say change is afoot.
Top tips for the Chief Data Officer to tackle Big Data, GDPR and omni-channel – Remember when “Chief Data Officers” were just hypotheticals, or big data carnival barkers? Well, today they are real enough to get on a panel and dispense  insights. Madeline has the story. I dug this one: “I actually bloody hate the words big data. I think it belies the fact that not all data is equal.“

Vendor analysis, diginomica style. Here’s my three top choices from our vendor coverage:

GE and ServiceMax – ‘Not investing in digital tools is just throwing money down the drain’ –  Since GE acquired ServiceMax, we’ve been wondering how the combined go-to-market might look. Derek’s got the scoop from GE’s Minds and Machines event in Berlin.
Cornerstone unveils overhaul – all customers benefit – Brian on Cornerstone’s “metamorphasis” from Learning specialist to HR cloud suite player. Enough bullet points here to keep you scrolling/absorbing ’til lunchtime.
Nothing half-baked about Greggs’ business transformation milestone – Jess with an SAP SuccessFactors/retail use case. Centralizing operations is one theme; freeing up staff to spend time with customers sound like the big win.

A few more vendor picks, without the quips:

Beyond SAP Cloud Platform’s multi-cloud stamp of approval – Dick
Accenture Digital CEO – ‘Fix the back-end, be open and eradicate your silos’ – Derek
Tibco takes on the ‘why do it’ aspect of digital transformation – Martin

Jon’s grab bag – Den vents productive spleen in Friday rant – personalization in email marketing for services is mostly a pipe dream. Mark explores location-based intelligence on the local government level in Putting customer data in its place in the public sector. Though “operational intelligence” is more oxymoron than reality, Mark likes the ambition.
Fancy an optimistic take on the future of work and AI? Look no further than IDC forecast – when AI meets CRM, jobs and revenues boom? Stuart parses some wildly optimistic logically -flawed reassuring data from a Salesforce-sponsored IDC report on the future of CRM-related revenues sparked by AI.
Finally, Stuart pays final loving tribute to his BFF-not Marisa Meyer in Yahoo! RIP. Mayer out as Verizon puts a dot com pioneer out of its misery. Hopefully Stuart takes the “Oath” not to cover this abysmal new concoction (AOL + Yahoo).
Best of the rest
Lead story – Amazon buys Whole Foods, Internet melts down – by everyone

myPOV: I didn’t see one brilliant piece on Amazon/Whole Foods, so you’ll have to settle for a few angles:

Amazon-Whole Foods Deal Is Bad News For Store Cashiers And The Fight For $15 Minimum Wage – Yeah, but it feels inevitable, don’t it?
Five telling things the Whole Foods CEO said about the Amazon deal in an employee town hall – Feels good to be a gangsta don’t eh? Though if you’re a dedicated Whole Foods, err, I mean Amazon employee – maybe not: “We’re all Amazon people now.” Gives the phrase “drone on” a whole different meaning.
Whole Foods Is A Luddite Among Retailers. Can Amazon Fix It? – On the perils of decentralization. Autonomous local stores are great for hand-picked strawberries, not so much for IT.

Honorable mention

Event Report – Cloud Foundry CF Summit 2017 – Microsoft joins the kingdom – Cloud Foundry now has all the major players on board except one (a big red elephant in the PaaS room).
Building the Confidence to Go-live – ERP go-lives are a yawner topic for many, but this breezy practical guide wet my whistle. Maybe it will for you also.
What is GraphQL and why should you care? The future of APIs – Too early to say whether GraphQL will disrupt APIs, but it’s an interesting twist.
Salesforce Launches Einstein Analytics: What It Means – “Access to this post expires in 9 days…” so get busy reading, once that firewall goes up it ain’t coming down.
Strategies for Dealing with Legacy Systems – A new research announcement, with an edge: “A small but significant percentage (7%) of organization have not upgraded their ERP systems for 10 or more years. These are likely to already be in technical bankruptcy.” Yikes!
The Best Advice We Overheard at First Round’s CTO Unconference – Not the best structured article, but some apples on the vine if you’re willing to scroll.
Amazon and Slack? A $9 billion coin flip between ‘makes sense’ and crazy – An instantly dated article. Cute premise though.

Whiffs
So there’s this:

Marissa Mayer says she looks forward to using Gmail again https://t.co/pYrcLDJSq9 -> a truly inspiring leader
— Jon Reed (@jonerp) June 14, 2017
Readers were not amused:

That’s right. This is not a matter of which email is better. It’s a matter of Marissa Meyer disrespecting the people she led for X years
— Frank Scavo (@fscavo) June 15, 2017

Such behavior is beneath contempt. We should demand much better from those who aspire to leadership across all public/private orgs.
— (((Naomi Bloom))) (@InFullBloomUS) June 15, 2017
There’s no need to pile on Uber when Josh Bernoff is on his game (Uber just ensured that their toxic culture will persist) – but has Uber considered the pretzel business? I’m not sure if this is a whiff, but it’s definitely dystopian: Canadian climate change study cancelled because of climate change.
My LinkedIn piece ruffled feathers but I stand by it: blasting links into groups is vastly inferior to actively moderating one. LinkedIn still gets a raspberry for pulling the ‘ol API bait-and-switch, however cynical and within their purview that is. (LinkedIn shuts down groups API – marketing mishap or smart community move?)
Also – if you think Mayer put foot in mouth, check out these schmoes that punked themselves while trying to punk Jarret Pazahanick for, well, having a strong point of view.

.@sap_jarret exposes an epic whiff https://t.co/ZNe6IMpgPL)
— Jon Reed (@jonerp) June 14, 2017

Finally, I wish I had a screen cap of this absurdity for ya, but during a masochistic Pavlovian ill-advised attempt to log on to Southwest wifi at 30,000 feet via Paypal, Paypal tossed up an identify verification screen (“We want to make sure it’s you”) involving a verification call to my phone. Inmates/asylum indeed. Over to you, Clive.
This is a truncated “Jon feels the road burn” version of hits and misses, which by definition excludes some worthy content – from diginomica and beyond. If you read an #ensw piece that qualifies, let me know in the comments as Clive always does.

Most Enterprise hits and misses articles are selected from my curated @jonerpnewsfeed. ‘myPOV’ is borrowed with reluctant permission from the ubiquitous Ray Wang.
Image credit - Cheerful Chubby Man © RA Studio, Happy Children © Anna Omelchenko, Waiter Suggesting Bottle © Minerva Studiom, Overworked Businessman © Bloomua, King Checkmate © mystock88photo - all from Fotolia.com.Disclosure - SAP, Oracle, Workday and Salesforce are diginomica premier partners as of this writing.Read more on: Hits and missesRetail e-commerce and the omni-channel 