
Diginomica picks – my top four stories on diginomica this week:

Macy’s CEO – we’re ready for an omni-channel Holiday season – Stuart primes the holiday retail pump with analysis of a bellweather: “Macy’s has done a lot to clean up its omni-channel act, resulting in a turnaround in its fiscal fortunes.”
Is CX the new killer app for ERP vendors? I seriously doubt it – Brian’s got a smoky chip on his shoulder again folks. Yep, it’s barbecue time again; this one’s a weenie roast.
HSBC aims for mobile-centric banking – Madeline Bennett looks at the mobile banking transition at HSBC, complete with cybersecurity and talent/recruitment challenges.
New data demonstrates generally superb cloud connectivity, but quirks remain – Now that AWS, Azure and Google Cloud have displaced so many company-owned and operated systems, it’s time to quantify their performance. Kurt’s on the case.

Vendor analysis, diginomica style. A few more picks from the road, starting with Den’s Workday Rising party crash in Vienna:

Workday’s Bhusri on indirect access, AWS, happy customers and next gen finance
Workday’s Adaptive Insights implementation – Robynne Sisco CFO in the hot seat

Oh, and SAP bought something expensive this week. Den took his first crack in Qualtrics acquired – SAP’s high priced bid to solve customer experience.
SAP and Qualtrics could not be more different and getting the two businesses working well together will be far from straightforward let alone getting results from the combined efforts into customer’s hands.
Den and I are currently arguing in dialogue with SAP about the whys and possibilities of this acquisition, and whether it nails down SAP’s CX play or not. We’ll share what we’re learning, as soon as it’s coherent on our side and public on theirs. More road work: also see Den’s SAP UK & Ireland User Group report continuing issues with indirect access and SAP technology adoption.
Meanwhile, I squeezed the remaining nectar from Detroit (Troy) and Las Vegas, nabbing use cases from manufacturing vendors on the move:

How Plex disrupted the analyst day – via a shop floor tour with customer Coastal Automotive
IQMS Pinnacle 2018 – How Eldon James is turning their integrated manufacturing vision into reality

A few more vendor picks, without the quips:

GlaxoSmithKline shuts down Yammer, gets started on Workplace by Facebook – Jessica
Zoho boosts AI, analytics to unify sales and customer service – Phil
Coupa platform reaches out to deliver enterprise spend as a service – Phil

Jon’s grab bag – Jerry asks the question Silicon Valley execs don’t want to hear in Are labor unions and collective bargaining coming to Big Tech? Stuart takes a break from Brexit analysis for much more serious UK concerns in Iceland’s digital marketing exemplar is no festive monkey business. Yep, it’s an absurd nationwide debate over a holiday ad, “a superb example of social marketing in action” – and, sure enough, the ad has far more traction than if it had been aired.
Brian set a slow-cooked record for his HR tech reflections on the barbie, but good news, dear reader – these tender morsels are finally ready for your consumption (Reflections on HR Tech Las Vegas 2018).
Barb raises another serious problem for the experience buffs in Why do brands struggle with content-rich e-commerce experiences? Finally, I talked Tableau’s CPO into going off the reservation of typical interview topics, and worked in my own spleenvent on fact-hating, online partisan thought thugs and pseudo-politicans grub worms in Tableau’s CPO on the spot – how can we extol the power of data in such a hyper-partisan world? 
Best of the rest
My top five picks from the enterprise blogosphere this week:
SAP buys Qualtrics – Some quick thoughts – I could have picked any number of pieces on SAP’s Qualtrics acquisition, but I picked IBM’s Vijay Vijayasankar, because he loves SAP, and he loves surveys (actually, I’m not sure about those last two, I’m unable to verify at this hour, but I’m sure Vijayasankar is happy to analyze a big acquisition not involving Red Hat). Vijayasankar writes:
From the press release – I understand that combining experience data from Qualtrics with operational data from SAP is where the value is. I think that’s a fair statement. But for that to be a reality – the differentiation needs to come from specialized algorithms.
As for me, I’m skeptical about this acquisition for any number of reasons, starting with the fact that I freaking hate surveys my belief that customer experience is tied to employee morale, which most companies could care less about investing in.
Qualtrics is geared towards employee experience also, which I like. SAP seems on a (hopefully) natural high on this acquisition, so let’s see if they can turn that giddy state into results. Also see: Vijayasankar’s thoughtful piece on Getting the most out of review meetings.

Key Issues for Generating Value from AI – Neil Raden has plenty of AI research nuggets to share this week. Start with: “Employees see AI coming and they will push back, either purposely or not.”
Twelve IT Project Disasters Demonstrate there are no “safe” choices – I jokingly asked the author, John Belden of UpperEdge, why he only had twelve IT failures – but they are doozies.
‘True Gen’ – Generation Z and its implications for companies – Forget the gross generalizations about the next workforce – McKinsey has oodles of charts and graphs.
Making sense of Microsoft’s approach to AI – Microsoft watcher Mary Jo Foley reads the Redmond tea leaves. Though she could have just asked Cortana…

Whiffs
Always tough to narrow to three whiffs amidst the flotsam and buffoonery, but that’s my job this week. But first – the eyebrow-raising headlines of the week:

Iceland’s president admits he went ‘too far’ with threat to ban pineapple pizza – and an official rebuke from Canada to boot!
Driverless cars will lead to more sex on the road, study says – you say that like it’s a bad thing.
Do you think that we’re living in a simulation? – If so, I’d like a word with the developer.

Now for the whiffs:
The “stranger than fiction” award clearly goes to Hasbro for putting out its millennial version of Monopoly, complete with mocking tone:

The millennials are not amused, but I sure am:

The laugh-so-you-don’t-cry-award goes to:

And please, no snark about the qualifications of some U.S. cabinet members, I see where you’re going with that. Finally, Microsoft might be on top of AI, but it’s evidently playing fast and loose with GDPR:

Hey, it’s for a good cause – Microsoft just wants to make sure the ads they are spamming burping inserting into your Windows 10 mail are highly personalized. A few snoops into your inbox gives them wayyy more data than the survey you ignored. Okay, I clearly need to get off this plane. See you next time…
If you find an #ensw piece that qualifies for hits and misses – in a good or bad way – let me know in the comments as Clive (almost) always does.
Most Enterprise hits and misses articles are selected from my curated @jonerpnewsfeed. ‘myPOV’ is borrowed with reluctant permission from the ubiquitous Ray Wang.s
Image credit - Happy Children © Anna Omelchenko, Waiter Suggesting Bottle © Minerva Studiom, Overworked Businessman © Bloomua, King Checkmate © mystock88photo - all from Fotolia.com.Disclosure - SAP, Oracle, Workday, Plex Systems, IQMS, Coupa and Salesforce are diginomica premier partners as of this writing.Read more on: CRM and customer experienceHits and missesRetail e-commerce and the omni-channel 