
diginomica three –  my top three stories on diginomica this week
Lead story – Shell Downstream CIO – “We should be scared” by Derek du Preez
myPOV – It’s not often we hear such blunt language from a high profile CIO, but it sure has the ring of truth eh? At Salesforce’s World Tour London, Derek “travel miles” du Preez scored the sit down, which tells the story of over-customization, and wrapping “legacy” with Salesforce in a push towards digital. As for the “scared” part, that’s about CIOs owning a business vision – realizing their posteriors are on the line if they can’t grow the business. Derek:
One of Shell Downstream CIO Craig Walker’s biggest fears is having to go and tell his director that he’d lost a billion dollar business because he didn’t foresee a new business model for Shell, enabled by new technologies.
Or as Shell Downstream CIO Craig Walker put it: “I think as their CIO, my job is to have some future vision. And you look at what other companies are doing and how easily I could be taken out.” Also see Derek’s follow-on, Shell Downstream CIO – ‘IT needs to add to the bottom line if it wants a seat at the table’.
Two more diginomica picks:

General purpose AI in business – too hard and waiting for its Netscape Moment – Kurt brings up some uncomfortable enterprise AI truth, such as a lack of compelling general purpose AI apps that someone without a Rubik’s cube and a propeller hat can make sense of (whoops, I mean data scientists, and for the record I own a Rubik’s cube, but don’t qualify as a scientist otherwise). That Netscape moment we’re waiting for? When general purpose AI gets enterprise legs.
Will it be an omni-channel GAP or a digital abyss? – Wall Street was impressed by the GAP’s latest numbers, Stuart – not so much. And for good reason. Old Navy is doing the in-store prop-up for the higher end GAP and Banana Republic outlets, whereas the digital strategy is, in Stuart’s words, “The fact that GAP is at a point just now where it’s only starting to execute against basic digital/omni-channel capabilities is the real story here.” Wade deeper into the retail quagmire for Stuart’s Marks & Spencer’s lack of digital urgency is costing it dearly.

Vendor analysis, diginomica style. Here’s my three top choices from our vendor coverage:

Citrix Synergy – A rather garbled message but a chance to kickstart real productivity – Calling your show “Synergy” really pushes buzzword-tolerance to the legal threshold, but Martin (mostly) liked what he saw: “Cisco still needs to learn to forget about the technology underpinnings and remember its goal is now all about business.” In that, Cisco is hardly alone.
Dropbox knows more about how your teams work than you do – Without over-sharing on the ruthlessly efficient absurd perfectly orchestrated inner workings of diginomica, I have no doubt this is true. Phil – aka collaboration maven – has the story.
Einstein meets Watson – a Bluewolf perspective – Put Einstein and Watson in IBM’s service delivery blender, and you’ve got… well, customer value. Or at least that is what IBM is striving for. Martin’s on the case.

A few more vendor picks, without the quips:

Coupa blurs functional boundaries in enterprise procurement – Phil
Stepping forward to take on The Challenge of the tech skills gap – Nifty UK Salesforce ecosystem story by Madeline
From green screens to results – how North American Lighting changed supply chain planning with Plex – a use case by yours truly
S/4HANA cloud customers emerge – a video review and analysis – yep, me again

Jon’s grab bag – A tad off our enterprise beat – but in a good way – check Jess’ National Museums of Kenya unearths a path to the cloud for its collection (soon to be available to the digital public!), Paul’s How NASA shoots for the technology stars, and Stuart’s latest BBC evisceration, Netflix one, BBC nil as the corporation abandons its digital download service, wherein we get lyrical beat(downs) the likes of:
A complete shambles. An unmitigated failure. The BBC, magnificent institution though it is on so many levels, is a schizophrenic beast when it comes to technology.
Best of the rest
 Lead story – We are in the People Elimination business. How did it get this bad, and can we change course? (Rant warning) – by Phil Fersht

myPOV: The “rant warning” was provided by Fersht himself, that’s not me being a snarker. Looks like Phil took advantage of the long weekend to find an extra spleen to vent.
It’s a worthy topic indeed, a deconstruction of the new breed of AI/automation buzzwords service providers are shilling to customers who are trying to buy time with automation/efficiency gains while peering directly over the talent abyss that stands in the way of digital re-invention. Or, as Phil put it:
a. Stop this inane drivel about digital, automation and machine learning and start focusing on proper business solutions. And:
b. Raise our social responsibility brand as discerning employers. Let’s celebrate firms which grow through great people investments. The short-term investor mindset is stubbing us (my add).
This is the enterprise debate/dilemma of our time, so I won’t settle it here. Den’s already responded with a riff of his own – I’ll get to that next week.
Two more standouts:

Enterprise Cross-currents observations from this years event season – Vinnie Mirchandani’s fruitful reflections across events, including: crucial points on AI, customers getting smarter, and vendors’ insufficient vertical focus. Bonus – see an interesting/short Twitter thread with myself and Mirchandani on this one.
3 reasons big data analytics goes wrong –  Good stuff on phantom data and overfitting, but I’d put it as: 1. Incomplete picture, 2. “See what you want to see” syndrome, and 3. Inability to execute even IF you are able to discern truth/opportunity. Still – good one by Gary Eastwood, via Data Nerd.

Honorable mention

Machine Learning: Beware the Bias – Add to our algorithms-are-people-too collection.
WA’s grand plan to rid government of IT ownership – Move to Washington, perhaps?
Blockchains are the new Linux, not the new internet  – A strained analogy, and a bit too cryptocurrency-centric (feels good to finally flaunt that phrase outside of a cocktail reception), but an interesting reality check.
Google, IBM and Lyft Team Up On Open-Source Microservices Management Platform – In the age of “FANG,” (Facebook, Apple, Netflix, Google), these kinds of alliances will be the new enterprise normal.
AlphaGo’s next move – With humans all-but-vanquished, cool to see the AlphaGo team turning their algorithmic attention to meatier problems.
SapphireNow – is SAP poised to lead the industry again? – A noted SAP critic reflects.
Effective Facebook Group Moderation [And Other Online Communities] – Handy tips from Bob Warfield, including the keeper “don’t mind a little controversy.”

Whiffs
Hits/misses reader Frank Scavo sent me a veritable cornucopia of whiffery this week, but first, a chip off my own shoulder:

.@Uber nice job price gouging in Bangor ME this weekend – you got me good. Demand pricing > customer experience
— Jon Reed (@jonerp) May 28, 2017
Or, as I could have said, just because you can, doesn’t mean you should [email protected]. Via Scavo: Sometimes our schools are part of the problem (Texas officials apologize after student named “most likely to become a terrorist”).
The clown who runs AT&T wants to cater to attention span disorder: AT&T’s purchase of HBO could lead to 20-minute Game of Thrones episodes.  Maybe they can chop “The Wire” up into five minute chunks also. Of course, it’s a miracle to stay connected on an AT&T Network for twenty minutes so I get that programming urge. Here’s a newsflash ATT: the world’s problems aren’t gonna be solved by nibblers, or those who obsess about satiating them. Speaking of problems:

Accused of underpaying women, Google says it’s too expensive to get wage data https://t.co/Pw0OscRjVD -> pass the hat for Google please…
— Jon Reed (@jonerp) May 27, 2017
I shouldn’t leave Facebook out of it though:

Google, Facebook lobbyists try to stop new online privacy protections https://t.co/1NeRxsVz2C -> b-b-but Facebook and Google are our friends
— Jon Reed (@jonerp) May 24, 2017
I’ll say something nice about Facebook next week, but for now, a long terminal layover quick trip via British Airways. I swore I wouldn’t bash the airlines anymore, but this one is in our baileywick as it’s an IT failure. So far we have strong talk from British Airways on getting to the bottom of the IT issues – which beats the excuses we’ve heard from other airlines. Get a load of this monster dump on customers from Delta’s CEO on a prior outage:
Delta spent “hundreds of millions of dollars” on technology upgrades and backup systems in the last three years to avoid such an outcome, Chief Executive Officer Ed Bastian said in a video message to customers Tuesday.
“I’m sorry that it happened,” he said. “This isn’t who we are.”
I’d be more reassured to hear Delta squandered Bastian’s per diem than learning they flushed hundreds of millions down an impotent hole. Still, power surge is a pretty awkward reason to bring down the BA grid – especially with incidents like Delta’s offering a warning cry. In my town, varmints like squirrels bring down the grid on a fairly regular basis. Let’s hope BA has a squirrel-proof plan for whatever’s next. Over to you, Clive.
This is a truncated “Jon feels the road burn” version of hits and misses, which by definition excludes some worthy content – from diginomica and beyond. If you read an #ensw piece that qualifies, let me know in the comments as Clive always does.

Most Enterprise hits and misses articles are selected from my curated @jonerpnewsfeed. ‘myPOV’ is borrowed with reluctant permission from the ubiquitous Ray Wang.
Image credit - Cheerful Chubby Man © RA Studio, Happy Children © Anna Omelchenko, Waiter Suggesting Bottle © Minerva Studiom, Overworked Businessman © Bloomua, King Checkmate © mystock88photo - all from Fotolia.com.Disclosure - SAP, Oracle, Workday, Coupa, Plex Systems and Salesforce are diginomica premier partners as of this writing.Read more on: Digital enterprise in the real worldFuture of workHits and missesMachine intelligence and AI 