
diginomica hit: Rimini Street ordered to pay Oracle $50 million – what does it mean? – by Den Howlett
quotage: “Larry Dignan of ZDNet posits this latest move puts Rimini Street in mortal danger. Dignan is flat out wrong to think that, though I get it makes a great headline. Rimini Street always knew that Oracle would come after them and planned accordingly.” – Den Howlett
myPOV: This is a tough one. Two diginomica partners in a legal skirmish – both companies I respect. What’s a blogger to do? Try to make sense of it, from a buyer perspective – which is Den’s angle in his two part series. Den believes that the viability of third party maintenance is essential for enterprise customers. Agreed – but that doesn’t make details easy to interpret, e.g. Howlett and Dignan, two savvy #ensw dudes, disagreeing on Rimini Street’s future. If anyone can do it, it’s Den, given he’s been tracking this issue with Howlett-style vigor.
In Rimini Street ordered to pay Oracle $50 million – what does it mean? Den issues first reactions to the ruling – which Rimini Street may appeal. In the follow-on, Oracle v Rimini Street – it’s getting ugly but customers are voting, Den doesn’t mince words. He’s not a fan of using legal action to attempt to push a competitor out of an industry.
My view: in the case where a company has a case for genuine legal wrongdoing (as in Oracle’s rightful victory over SAP in the TomorrowNow suit), I can understand the legal motivations. I just hope that when all this shakes out, customers will have ERP support choices, and let the best overall value win. If that’s Oracle, fine by me – but I hope the battle is won in the marketplace, not in the judge’s chambers.
diginomica six: my top six stories on diginomica this week

Living Services – the third era of digital – In a nifty two-parter featuring the views of Fjord’s Mark Curtis, Stuart lays out some new digital ideas – fancy some “liquid expectations?” Part one (linked above) includes a cool example of “living services” at the car dealer, winning customer loyalty via a mechanic sharing a video diagnosis while a car is in the shop (!). Stuart pours a dollop of cold water in part two, Living services – flexing around the ‘customer as operating system’, raising the obvious problem of needing better customer data. And even if you get your hands on that data, designers still need to master how to design with data when creating new services. A worthy ponder…
Cisco’s got talent for analytics – When is HR analytics the real deal? When it saves a company like Cisco from starting a plant in the wrong area of China for the talent pool. I especially liked Janine’s piece because we get an honest acknowledgement that Cisco is still on an analytics journey – but they can still get some payoffs along the way.
Looking at the cloud through European eyes – Last we checked, Stuart and Den were doing the diginomica face-off on the post-Safe Harbor cloud futures. But Phil, long-time chair of EuroCloud, knows a thing or two about European clouds himself. Phil’s feeling bleak about political solutions, but he sees hope in using technology to break down trade barriers.
UK child-poverty hotspots highlighted for local action through data visualization – Sick of bland visualization projects charting sales trends? Then how about Jess’s post on how the North East Child Poverty Commission has uses visualization software to publish maps online that track urgent areas of child poverty?
Fujitsu’s Steven Cox opens up about being a gay senior executive in the tech industry – I admire Derek’s piece and respect Mr. Cox for living openly – we only have one go-round after all.

Vendor analysis, diginomica style – In Love your maker – SAP TechEd preview, we find out why Den is coming to his seventh straight TechEd this year – and why he considers this one the most important. (For those not on-site, pay special attention to the Monday night keynote with Steve Lucas – which may end up being the key to the event). While we’re on SAP, Martin analyzes an new/unusual partnership in Nutanix gives SAP legacy apps a mid-life kicker.
Martin carries forth in Cloud services firms and the Internet of Things – facing up to the challenge of being ‘big enough’. He makes the case that Zach Nelson’s appearance at GE’s latest IoT event, backed up by a GE partnership, is an even bigger deal than maybe even SAP realizes. Den had a productive stint at Apigee’s “I Love APIs”, bearing fruit in an event analysis piece (Apigee brings API religion to unlocking business value) and a customer use case (Monetizing the API at Mapquest).
And… lest we forget, a pair of takes on the Dell-swallows-EMC mega purchase. Stuart is thinking Alice in PR Wonderland, Den is thinking the walking dead (Dell and EMC — waking the dead may not ensure survival). $67 billion says this story’s not over yet.

Jon’s grab bag – Stuart analyzes Netflix’s clever Wall Street maneuvering in Netflix blames new subscriber shortfall on chip-and-pin – and gets away with it. (I might add: “Netflix streams obscurity and mediocre originals and gets away with it,” but that’s the bitter couch watcher getting the better of me). Meantime, Barb continues her solid pieces on content and digital marketing with some sobering stats in Why aren’t you documenting your content marketing projects?
Den wraps a muscular week of editorial with this trifecta: Marry in haste, repent at leisure – SaaS price hikes (SaaS isn’t a safeguard for hasty nuptials), Advertising sucks says PepsiCo president (there’s a whiff in here I’ll get to in a jiffy), and Friday roast: Heh vendors – give up the buzzword bingo (a howl in the wind, or for whom the bell tolls?).
Best of the rest
 Dell + EMC = WTF? Analysis by Stephen O’Grady, Holger Mueller and Ray Wang
quotage: “Pressure on Dell to execute is massive, and that will lead to a clear roadmap and execution sooner than later. Overall, a very bold move by Dell, that is not even sure to go down as announced, pending financing and VMware stock value. – Holger Mueller
myPOV: Dell’s ginormous acquisition news generated its share of literary tropes. For Redmonk’s Stephen O’Grady (All In: On Amazaon, Dell and EMC), it’s the upbeat stylings of Swiss psychiatrist Elisabeth Kübler-Ross in her 1969 book, On Death and Dying. He’s making a point about disruption, and the fear or corporate death. Whether or not the parallel works, that is some wonderfully obscure and bleak stuff.
But in seriousness, O’Grady is looking at Dell/EMC’s move as, in part, a belated response to Amazon, which grew from a cloud puppy into a wolf before some #ensw vendors realized it could bite. Not all may see the connection between Amazon and the Dell/EMC news, but if O’Grady sees it, we should at least weigh the argument.
Constellation got in the game also, with a combo video/blog analysis, with Ray Wang kicking off the video and Holger Mueller doing his traditional press release dissection. Gist: Mueller sees this an an exceptional change for Dell to re-invent, if it can push this through. But the absence of a public cloud offering lingers, and, as Mueller says much more politely, purchasing EMC doesn’t do diddly about that.
Other standouts

What Makes You A Good Product Marketing Manager? – SAP’s Chirag Mehta makes a triumphant return to hits/misses with a very smart piece on how marketing managers screw up – and how to do better. As in: “As a vendor you need to have empathy for your customers on their buying process. Spending time articulating how your products solve their problems is far more important than outlining features.” Bonus quotage from legendary 49ers coach Bill Walsh.
Silicon’s tech bubble is bursting, and startup execs can be arrogant as hell – Peter Cohan has made money in good times and lost it in bad. He sees four reasons why the current tech bubble is bursting, and I tend to agree – though the real trick is knowing when it’s going to blow (I thought it was going to crater a year ago, but then I’m no Jim Cramer). We’ve got a different startup smackdown from Ray Wang, who warns enterprise customers to be wary of startups-gone-public who become insufferable a-holes arrogant, leading to unapologetic price hikes, indifferent service and more. (Monday’s Musings: Dealing With The Startup Who Went Public And Is Now Arrogant As Hell).
Multi-media picks – IoT and energy convergence, and ad blocking hits home – No one balances the pessimistic and the upbeat with more precarious effectiveness than Tom Raftery, whose video keynote replay from Tesla World on the convergence of IoT and energy is a must-watch as he grapples with the good and the really bad. He ends up on a very upbeat note, which I won’t spoil for you. But the real meat is the potential for IoT to regulate demand in a way that brings alternative energy into the primetime. I haven’t listened to this whole podcast yet, but I’m confident based on the individuals involved that Ad Blocking and the Future of Advertising with Seth Godin will be a good ‘un.

Honorable mention
SAP Highlights S/4 Hana Finance, Cloud For Analytics – Concise/savvy. Also functions as a good companion TechEd preview to Den’s piece above.
AscentERP Rises in the Cloud ERP Market – The final installment in a terrific series on cloud ERP in the Salesforce ecosystem. Correction: second-to-last installment.
What We Need to Talk about When We Talk about Software Selection: 5 Problem Areas – This functions as an overview for a series of future articles. It’s a decent overview; if the author follows-through on the individual pieces – no small matter – we could have a quality reference series on software selection.
How Useful Is Christensen’s Theory Of Disruptive Innovation? – Disruptive Innovation might be our most putrid #ensw catch phrase, but debating the theory behind it is still interesting.
Is The Data-Driven Business Is A Myth? – It’s not a myth, but it’s really hard.
Prepare Your Questions For #HRTechWorld and #HRTechConf – How to be an event nuisance, in the best way possible.
Whiffs
Sometimes whiffs can change on a dime. On Saturday, all Michigan had to do to beat their in-state rival was to simply punt the ball. Well, not so fast (video). A quick review makes clear the punter gets the bulk of the blame. Fine, life goes on, live and learn.
But when the punter started getting death threats on Twitter, the whiff shifted towards these pathetic no-lifers who would threaten a college kid over, well, nothing. Dust in the Wind people, Dust in the Wind. This kind of thing lends credence to Umair Haque’s critique of Twitter cruelty. Oh, and a little something for predictive krishnas to gnaw on. Prior to that play, Michigan State’s chances of winning that game were .2 percent (chart here). Machine learning < shit happens.
It’s been satisfying to see the ad industry own up to their utter failure to get messages across online without ruining the user experience – even if their apologia is caused by the Ad blocking spank tunnel. As Den says, when PepsiCo’s president says advertising sucks, change is bubbling. But as Den noted, smack in the middle of the PC World piece is flotsam, right on cue, an autoplay video. Which makes me wonder: how do we re-imagine the Internet? Will it consume everything in its path except for porn, Facebook, and (maybe, if you stay interested in our antics) diginomica? Time will tell.
Officially off-topic
I’m off to navigate my way through Vegas gamblers and morning people to setup our video studio. If that goes smoothly I”ll add the off topic stuff for ya later.
Which #ensw pieces of merit did I miss? Let us know in the comments.
Most Enterprise hits and misses articles are selected from my curated @jonerpnewsfeed. ‘myPOV’ is borrowed with reluctant permission from the ubiquitous Ray Wang.

Image credits: Cheerful Chubby Man © RA Studio, Happy Children © Anna Omelchenko, Waiter Suggesting Bottle © Minerva Studiom, Overworked Businessman © Bloomua, Loser and Winner © ispstock – all from Fotolia.com.
Disclosure: SAP, Workday, Oracle, Rimini Street and Salesforce are diginomica premier partners as of this writing.

Read more on: Best of archivesHits and misses 