
diginomica hit: Amazon gets Fresh with online groceries, and retail gets radically agile – by Jessica and Stuart
quotage: “It’s too simplistic to assume that Amazon’s entry to the online grocery market will automatically result in massive disruption in what is an already very febrile retail sector in the UK. This week’s weak financial results from J Sainsbury is a case in point and another indicator that the online business is still up for grabs. Online revenue there grew 8.8% for fiscal 2015-16, but average basket size declined 4% year-on-year.”
myPOV: We’re always debating the extend of shopping and retail change, and how the winners and losers will shake out. Customer use cases help to show where the real value is. Jessica’s got another one with Zalando embraces ‘Radical Agility’ in its bold platform play. One of Europe’s leading Internet fashion retailers, Zalando booked annual revenues close to €3 billion in 2015. But their plan isn’t just to sell more stuff – they’re building a fashion platform, “aggregating” the fashion ecosystem.
Underlying this push is an approach called “radical agility,” which pushes the agile envelope further than scrums and white boards. We’ll see how that goes – the thinking is a fresh, jugular approach to getting code done will be highly appealing to talented developers.
Speaking of Fresh, Amazon isn’t done pushing the online grocery envelope. Amazon trial ballooned fresh food delivery in Seattle almost a decade ago, and it’s been pretty darn quiet from them the last year and a half or so. But as Stuart reports, Amazon’s not done yet, now aligned with digital rock stars survivors Morrison’s in the UK for a new push into 69 London postal codes.
Given Walmart’s making its own delivery trials with Uber and Lyft, it’s no surprise that Amazon put down its toys drones to up the ante here. As Stuart says, the online shopping business in the UK is still up for grabs, and Amazon doesn’t get to win by default. But someone’s going to figure this out – on both sides of the pond. My only nit – Stuart withheld why he almost called the police on Ocado. Dish, baby dish! Diginomica gets to be a tabloid from time to time, right?
diginomica five: my top five stories on diginomica this week:

Competency over Pedigree – Plugging the tech skills gap by giving disadvantaged young adults a chance – Derek with a fine piece on the CEO and founder of Year Up, an organization that has a welcome/necessary approach to the tech skills gap so many talk about – yet so few do anything about. Smart stuff on targeted training based on shifting demand. Dear hiring managers: hire these folks. Sidenote: I wrote on tech education from a different angle in: How FIRST inspires students to find their place in our robotic future.
Enterprise mission for blockchain – sharing master data – A couple nifty riffs on blockchain-for-enterprise this week. Phils’ piece looks at how blockchain could tackle the vexing problem of master data management. Could MDM be the blockchain’s killer enterprise use case? I didn’t expect Acronis to be in on the blockchain, but they’re moving aggressively – see Martin’s Blockchain and the enterprise – enter Acronis Notary.
Jim Snabe, WEF – when digital and physical worlds collide – Looks like SAP’s former co-CEO is keeping himself busy, thinking around a few digital corners. Phil caught Snabe speaking at on behalf of the World Economic Forum at DocuSign’s Momentum show. Snabe sets the stakes: the digital winners will be at the convergence of the digital and physical, meaning that some are pushing to enter one side from the other (Google = digital, Siemens – physical). Game on.
Beyond financial ROI – the health analytics business case in food – Kurt looks at the potential of personalized data to impact the response when food becomes contaminated and subject to recall? As someone who recently ate a recalled food item about three hours before I got the robocall, I would vouch for the need for even better/timelier here. But I like the trend.

Vendor analysis, diginomica style. Here’s my top choices from our vendor coverage:

Pega CEO Alan Trefler and his conflict with public cloud – Derek always seems to score edge/interesting stories at the Pegaworld user conference, and this year was no exception. Derek gets a deeper look at Trefler’s strongly-worded views how the cloud can be problematic for customers if they wind up with silos. There are some nuances to these arguments that are worth a look. Al in all, a productive debate Derek finds himself in the middle of. Also check Derek’s new Pegasystems’ use case: TalkTalk hopes to turn around poor service reputation with a ‘consumer revolution’.
Salesforce wants to raise a posse of new developers – No stranger to developer engagement, Salesforce used its first developer-focused event, TrailheadDX, to unveil its latest developer push. As Phil notes, this is no small concern – the skills gap for developers in general is wide enough as it is, an unacceptable risk for Salesforce.
Zinc’s elemental message – beyond WhatsApp for the enterprise – Where does Slack fall short, you ask? With mobile-only field workers, that’s who – you know, the kind that are interacting with your customers constantly and acquiring valuable data. Zinc wants to do something about that, wading into enterprise waters where WhatsApp is in over its head. Stuart’s got the story.

A few more vendor picks, without my running asides:

Tibco may have nailed down the all-important edge of IoT – Martin
Sugar bowls over the CRM cloud giants on data and depth – Chris
$75m boosts Tradeshift expansion in Europe and China – Phil

Jon’s grab bag – Stuart got a firsthand hearing from U.S banks who aren’t taking digital lying down in Digital disruption isn’t something US banking establishment fears. As a long-time Bank of America customer, I can only say: if they’re not afraid, they should be. McDonald’s has a hundred problems, but Virtual Reality enabled training ain’t one of ’em. Janine has the story of this cool initiative: Super-sized gamification for training – McDonald’s is lovin’ it.
Stuart flexes his editorial chops in The digital economy needs defending from the hard left and the far right, an analysis of UK government minister Matt Hancock’s recent digital remarks, which has plenty of application on this side of the pond, where scoring political points has taken the place of big ideas.
Best of the rest
 Microsoft buys LinkedIn, the Internet goes nuts – by – everyone looking for clicks
quotage: “Many are asking me why Microsoft bought LinkedIn (and why the company paid so much for the company). I admit, I, too am scratching my head.” – Mary Jo Foley
myPOV: Mary Jo Foley watches Microsoft for a living. So if she’s scratching her noggin about this acquisition well then I feel more like I’m not an idiot (Microsoft buys LinkedIn for $26.2 billion). At this point, the early linkbait news stories are the only ones, plus Foley’s. By next week we should have meatier takes. Foley’s commenters seemed equally baffled. Some see the value in all that data, but – $26 billion requires more elbow-grease than mining my skills endorsements to figure out why someone thinks I’m good at migration. But hey, I guess when you hit home runs like Nokia and Skype you think acquisitions come easy.
Nadella uttered bromides about the future of work and that whole Microsoft productivity angle. But… is LinkedIn really tied to either of those things? Maybe the future of recruitment, but that’s a different valuation. The commenters had a field day. As in:
You really want to help users be more productive? Try integrating Yammer, Project, Planner, GigaJam, Team Foundation Service/Server, SharePoint, OneDrive, TwoDrive (that’s OneDrive for Business), Skype, Skype for Business, Lync, Office, Delve, and Sway.
Maybe by next week someone will tweak my cynicism with a sharp take. For now, I’ll leave you with a different take on areas where Microsoft is excelling: Steven J. Vaughan-Nichols on Why Microsoft is turning into an open-source company. Oh, and:

Hey, can anyone endorse me on LinkedIn for Windows 10, Azure, SharePoint,, Xbox, and Skype? -> #POSITIONING
— Jon Reed (@jonerp) June 13, 2016
Other standouts



Announcing the Salesforce.com Superlative Index – Good thing I call it “hits and misses” because I flat-out missed Frank Scavo’s satirical gem last week. Well, I didn’t miss it on my own Twitter feed which is probably more egregious. Reader Clive Boulton gets the credit for calling me out – done. Anyhoo, Scavo is pleased to announce the Salesforce Superlative Index: “We can now quantify the awesomeness of SFDC. We do this by counting the number of superlatives used by SFDC executives in their quarterly earnings calls, and analyzing the changes in the use of these superlatives over time.” As I told Scavo on Twitter, I’m just a tad concerned that “beautiful” designs that “delight” users are nowhere to be found. But hey, this is still an amazing and incredible ride that we’re on, eh?
Salesforce’s Demandware acquisition – the analysis keeps comin’ – And speaking of amazing/incredible/awesome there is that wee acquisition. The analysis kept coming in. In Salesforce acquires Demandware. Good? Bad? Buy! Paul Greenberg, who has been to enough Dreamforce events to strike fear in the heart of mortal man, says this was a good move (and he says a lot more, check it). Michael Fauscette chimes in also, from his (relatively) new perch at G2 Crowd in Integrating the Commerce Experience: Salesforce to Acquire Demandware.



Honorable mention
Drones to Deliver Life-Saving Medical Supplies to Rwanda – We need some feel good stories this week, no?
ASUG Briefing: SAP Developing Tech to Help Target Diversity, Unconscious Bias – Another interesting feel-gooder, this one from an SAP project-in-the-making.
Adam Grant On Interviewing to Hire Trailblazers, Nonconformists and Originals – If this article came out ten years ago, I’d be running for president now. “Look for people who have engaged in very visible acts of nonconformity” – works for me!
Top 5 Takeaways From Panorama’s 2016 ERP Report – Given how many ERP projects still go sideways (or worse), we’d best pay attention to these types of findings. “Too many companies are replacing systems because they have to – not because they want to pursue a larger business transformation.” – Yikes! That is system-of-record-purgatory defined….
Informatica’s Dilemma: How To Sell the Un-Platform in the Midst of Today’s Platform Wars – Some meat on the bone here, folks.
Cloud washing goes beyond the Oracle lawsuit – More like a nibble than a meal, but at least a good strong nibble, like a dark chocolate truffle or some such.
Whiffs
Before I get whiffin’, let me acknowledge that after a real tragedy, snark tends to sound petty and useless. With that said, we carry on. I got this PR spam release: “SURVEY: More than 1/3 of Working Americans Prefer Better Work Tech Over Better Sex Life.” Insert small sample size jokes here. There’s something amiss here, let me see the data.
Passengers’ fury as they are refused food on diverted flight for legal reasons – on the plus side, looks like there might be some openings in the PR department of Monarch Airlines. Oh, and:

“Citigroup trademarks “THANKYOU” and sues AT&T for thanking clients” https://t.co/DIH3FUL0xY -> nice one folks, great use of legal system
— Jon Reed (@jonerp) June 12, 2016
Then there’s:

Creepy startup helps landlords/employers strip-mine intimate data from your Facebook page https://t.co/SGdqadPh3G -> stay classy
— Jon Reed (@jonerp) June 13, 2016
Love the founder’s quote: “If you’re living a normal life, you have nothing to worry about.” Yeah, and I want a bunch of dotcom creepos defining normalcy for money.
Have I ever mentioned that Seeking Alpha is the Yahoo of enterprise software? Earning transcripts – useful. Just like Yahoo’s web directory once was. But the blogs? Take Workday Eating Into Oracle And SAP. Workday is clearly executing very well, and credit is due. Maybe, though, when you’re writing for an investor readership, you might want to mention that SAP and Oracle also have (increasingly mature) cloud HCM offerings? And how can you say “the market wasn’t too impressed with Workday’s outlook” and neglect to take a guess at why? But that’s Seeking Alpha for ya. I’d say buyer beware but you can’t charge for that sauce. Maybe “clicker beware…”
See you next time – in a special Tuesday edition (long weekend for me).
Which #ensw pieces of merit did I miss? Let us know in the comments.
Most Enterprise hits and misses articles are selected from my curated @jonerpnewsfeed. ‘myPOV’ is borrowed with reluctant permission from the ubiquitous Ray Wang.
Image credit - Cheerful Chubby Man © RA Studio, Happy Children © Anna Omelchenko, Waiter Suggesting Bottle © Minerva Studiom, Overworked Businessman © Bloomua, at the seaside © olly - all from Fotolia.com.Disclosure - SAP, Workday and Salesforce are diginomica premier partners as of this writing.Read more on: e-commerceFuture of workHits and misses 