
diginomica hit: Are companies ready for digital? Skills dilemmas and high stakes use cases by Derek and Martin
quotage: “[Caterpillar] CEO Oberhelman said that despite the disappointing numbers, the company would be focusing on things it can control. At the centre of this will be a data and digital resurgence inside of Caterpillar. Oberhelman also said that everything Caterpillar manufacture will eventually be connected across one core data platform.”
myPOV: Diginomica readers are looking for digital transformation insights – filtered through the real world. One wee problem with the real world: digital is never a cure-all, and usually invokes business model and technical disruption, err, change. Derek and Martin flagged the issues this week. Martin kicks things off with underwhelming news from a UK report, Surveys show UK (un)ready for digitalization. And that’s not one report, but three: from Cisco, Clarinet, and IBM/CBI. Bottom line: Martin says UK companies are “poorly prepared to implement and exploit digitalization, and the degree of unreadiness is surprising.”
Derek reinforce that point with two use case reviews that frame the problem. First up: Caterpillar CEO – ‘We have to lead digital. By the summer every machine will be connected.’,, which contrasts Caterpillar’s digital push with another disappointing set of financial results (yep, business model change takes time).Then Derek posted Profits down at Barclays, looks to digital and automation to strip out costs, where he warns that digital solely as a cost-cutting scalpel is a limiting mindset.
Finally, as more customers take digital in-house, Derek posting a living document, Fight for skills – things to think about when insourcing digital capability, where he runs through the key skills components of an effective digital strategy, from culture to senior executive commitment.
diginomica three: my personal top three stories on diginomica this week:

Personalized medicine – great potential, but questions to be answered – Cath juxtaposes personalized medicine versus “precision medicine,” the term preferred by scientists for health care based on genetic similarities by group (personal medicine, e.g. medicine customized for your genome, ain’t there yet). Cath also raises dilemmas pharma companies are facing as we pop less pills and focus on preventative measures.
Getting smarter at predicting talent – “The difference between good companies and great companies is having employees that are switched on” – I’ll buy that, but how does data-driven/predictive decisions fit into that? Janine’s got answers in this profile of recruitment outsourcer Mindfield. Turns out Mindfield is using a new predictive tool to target the right hires – the ones that will perform and stick around. And the platform from OutMatch uses machine learning to make the process smarter, rather than using static criteria. Oh, and they can rule out big swaths of “undesirable” candidates as well.
Invasion of the robo-bodgers – Yes, Phil warns, the robo-bodgers are coming. Scratch that – they’re already here. Yes, these are the infamous, supposedly game-changing software/chat bots being trumpeted by the likes of Facebook and Microsoft. But are they enterprise-ready? Not yet, says Phil – and not close either. So, buckle up for the robo-bodgers, warns Phil, as companies use you as the guinea pig to sort utility from time waste.

Vendor analysis, diginomica style. Here’s my top choices from our vendor coverage:

Infosys Confluence 2016 – it’s all about Mana and slaying myths – Den hits the high and low points of Infosys’s ongoing Vishal Sikka led transformation. The chatbot versus apps debate gets airtime also. Bonus points for Den avoiding the obvious HANA – Mana jokes, which I didn’t have the fortitude to stay away from. Either way, Mana raises the AI/predictive/automation stakes for Infy.
PowerPlex 2016 – day 1 – Den made the happy journey to Detroit to get a look at Plex’s latest. This SaaS manufacturing ERP player (and diginomica partner) always has tricks up its sleeve. Scoop: Den told me yesterday he has customer videos and more pending. Get a look at “curmodgeon row” in the pic, what a brilliant crusty lineup!
Workday 26 – financials see further major enhancements – Brian’s got the lowdown on one of the bellweather products in the SaaS market. Short version: Brian sees big things ahead when the budgeting/planning functionality hits.

A few more vendor picks, without my running asides:

ServiceMax brings performance metrics to field service – Phil
Marketo CEO – marketing automation grows up into digital transformation – Stuart
NetSuite heads into SuiteWorld on solid quarter and Gartner data points – Stuart

Jon’s grab bag – I’m rooting for Pandora but not placing any bets, no sirree. Stuart updates onTPandora’s push beyond two rocky years in Pandora CEO – getting past the misunderstandings and back to the music. It’s the “co-founder steps up” and repositions theme – but all that talk about personalized music recommendations being really freakin’ hard isn’t exactly reassuring.
Then Stuart picked up on our video and Facebook themes of late in Video fuels mobile consumer shift as Facebook triples profit (interesting that Facebook charmed Wall Street while both Apple and Twitter did not – see Stuart also on Twitter’s video gambles). Our first-ever “all Stuart” grab bag wraps with Starbucks reaps reward of rare digital faux pas (Hmm, I guess Stuart wasn’t counting my ongoing problems with auto-top-up – grr)
Best of the rest
 How Big Data Creates False Confidence – by Jessie Dunietz
quotage: “Initially, GFT was claimed to be 97 percent accurate. But as a study out of Northeastern University documents, that accuracy was a fluke. First, GFT completely missed the “swine flu” pandemic in the spring and summer of 2009. (It turned out that GFT was largely predicting winter.) Then, the system began to overestimate flu cases. In fact, it overshot the peak 2013 numbers by a whopping 140 percent. Eventually, Google just retired the program altogether.“
myPOV: A so-so article led me to a better one – with Dunietz doing a take down of big data, or at least confidence in cool looking charts that claim an authority their data can’t support. The Google Flu Trends cockup is one damning example. The lesson? Critically assess your data assumptions, and don’t fall for quantity for its own sake.
As a counterpoint to the GFT botch job, Dunietz cites the example of Columbia University researcher Jeffrey Shaman’s, who outperformed the flu predictions of both the CDC and GFT. How? He used CDC to compensate for the data skew of the GFT, testing the model against actual flu activity during that same season from CDC. He built a better algo. Sounds simple in theory, but Dunietz is right – it isn’t. Sidenote: I love that Google’s dumbed down “auto-complete” contributed to the skewed GFT results.
Other standouts

Envisioning Envision: Microsoft is once again at a crossroads…maybe – Some peeps crank out a quick event fart blog before their plane takes off and call it good. Not Paul Greenberg – he chews the cud of an event, sometimes for a few weeks or more. Then he gives you a well-mulled take. In this case, Microsoft Envision – a debut conference that got mixed reviews at best, though most analysts I know are hoping that a business-focused Microsoft conference pans out. Though he found the show “peculiar” due to key messages buried in subtexts, Greenberg ultimately liked Nadella’s keynote and Microsoft’s “core component of the business infrastructure” positioning.
OpenStack, IBM, and the “fragmenting infrastructure market” – Most of this headline is clipped and cobbled from Stephen O’Grady’s post on OpenStack’s maturity, and how that’s creating a new set of problems for customers, e.g. a proliferation of choices. Enter the near-ubiquitous Holger Mueller, who is as close as anyone to solving the mystery of the Ray Wang clones (Wang’s purported reliance on lifelike clones to attend all shows simultaneously has been the subject of enterprise jokery for years). Mueller’s got an analysis of one such OpenStack expansion, News Analysis – IBM Boosts Support to OpenStack’s RefStack… first serious attempt to make OpenStack interoperability real, which was his pick of news stories from around one hundred Open Stack press releases during OpenStack Summit.

Honorable mention
SAS Goes Cloud, But Will Customers Follow? – authoritative analysis from the SAS Global Forum user conference.
The future of work is about capabilities you (should) already have – Agree on the dual problems of entitlement and “loyalty is legacy.” Not sure we all have the creative/digital capabilities needed. But the unlearning of the crud is probably harder than any new learning.
Slack is 2016’s hottest startup, but can it make the leap to huge companies? – Not if it can’t solve the scale problem, a.k.a. “Why did I get 350 pings?“.
Sparking a New Conversation: Let’s Build a Network of Networks – moving off spreadsheets and email would be a start (supply chain ruminations).
Imperial ambitions – Another “one ring to rule them all” analysis of Facebook’s ambitions.
The Future of Media: Can Publishers Become Media Platforms? – A crusty view, not to be disregarded.
Lead, Follow or Get the Fuck Out of the Way – A fun takedown of whiny-ass dissenters. That said, you can’t fuss too much over the form dissent comes in – just use it, get better, and so on.
Whiffs
Firing a sports anchor for doing a Prince tribute which offended a coach potato somewhere is gutless stuff indeed. FOX 17 Nashville are in contention for dumbest firing of 2016; gotta hand it to the anchorman for his impossibly upbeat attitude though. As for ‘Vegetable oils’ may not be heart healthy after all, the author nails it. Another monster whiff for the FDA, which helped create a generation of diabetics by pushing low fat diets that sent people chowing on so-called healthy sweets.
Closer to the enterprise, it was a rough week for misleading headlines (keep in mind the author’s headlines are often overridden by the site editor, so the site editor usually bears responsibility). Big Data Will Lead You Astray is a misleading riff, which immediately hedges the headline’s bets As UX meets IoT, the need for screens will go away also concedes quickly, as in: “We’re still going to need screens for many of the things we do.” Don’t trip on yourself when you backtrack that fast…
OK, now let’s get to the main course, PayPal to hold all-male panel on gender equality in the workplace. How PayPal didn’t smell the aroma of PR disaster on this whiff is baffling. PayPal’s explanation defies credibility (the proper title was left off the poster, yeah, sure – we waste print budgets all the time). A frantic scramble to hire a female panel facilitator after the PR mess ensued was the right move, but not one that inspired confidence. The social herd piled on, missing the chance to learn about PayPal’s intentions, which were not terrible. Just one more question: how did the panel go? Did I ever mention how much I like carefully-moderated panels? Score one for the pajamarati.
Which #ensw pieces of merit did I miss? Let us know in the comments.
Most Enterprise hits and misses articles are selected from my curated @jonerpnewsfeed. ‘myPOV’ is borrowed with reluctant permission from the ubiquitous Ray Wang.
Image credit - Image credits - Cheerful Chubby Man © RA Studio, Happy Children © Anna Omelchenko, Waiter Suggesting Bottle © Minerva Studiom, Overworked Businessman © Bloomua, Businessman Choosing Success or Failure Road © Creativa, Loser and winner - Loser and Winner © ispstock - Fotolia - all from Fotolia.com.Disclosure - SAP, Infosys, NetSuite, Plex, Workday, ServiceMax and Salesforce are diginomica premier partners as of this writing.Read more on: Digital transformation - frictionless enterpriseHits and misses 