
Very bad quality road with potholes
The world of enterprise analytics is going through something of a nightmare at the moment.
Tableau, enjoyed much positive acclaim in the few years leading up to Q4 2015 when it slammed into a wall, shedding almost half its stock valuation in a day. But then surprisingly (to me), Tableau came back with a solid revenue result for Q1 2016, only to find the market unhappy that it’s forward forecast wasn’t strong enough for analysts’ taste, even though the forecast was better than had previously been thought. A closer examination shows that Tableau’s model is a mess. Stock based compensation doubled year over year to Q1 2016 and while management will argue the necessity of maintaining that hike in light of the stock price slump, that doesn’t help a company where sales productivity is marginally short of pathetic at the moment while R&D cost has exploded.
Then we have Qlik, which recently put itself on the block but then it also turned in solid Q1 2016 results which kind of flies in the face of reason for a company that’s up for sale. Customers I met at its annual conference were generally upbeat, talking enthusiastically about new capabilities and eulogizing its governance mode. Qlik has some very good technical initiatives in play and is both encouraging and expanding its developer ecosystem about more of which later. But then I’m not sure Qlik helps itself by expecting the company’s product and marketing leads to carry the weight of vision when the CEO uses his keynote to talk solely about corporate social responsibility. We are firm believers in being good citizens but is that what an audience of potential buyers wants to hear about? I like the way Qlik tied outcomes to the CSR message but in the end, the CEO’s keynote left the impresson of a founder’s pet project.
We bucket Qlik and Tableau in the same space for obvious reasons. They both play in the popular data visualization space. But – Microsoft Power BI has suddenly emerged on the radar as a viable alternative and at a fraction of the price of its competitors. Microsoft, Oracle and SAP now offer data viz capabilities they can bundle into a BI stack in a way that neither Qlik nor Tableau can offer. It should therefore be no surprise that the leaders in the data viz space are experiencing difficulties both in market and with their Wall Street masters. At the rate we’re going. both companies will join the pantheon of past leaders that ran out of road or became commoditized and got acquired. If nothing else, past history suggests the timing is somewhere about right. Let’s see what happens next in the Qlik saga.
Domo has not been short of detractors in recent times. A secretive company that is far from having the impact it claims seems to be in need of adult supervision and a degree of transparency that has been lacking. Claiming you can integrate any data source into any dashboard is a lofty ambition and the company’s roster of named customers is certainly impressive. But the numbers don’t stack up.
Anaplan, which provides modeling and planning capabilities topped up its funding by $90 million in January. Out of nowhere, Anaplan announced that its long serving CEO is out and the search is on for a replacement. A number of other key executives have been replaced. Why? The official reason is that Anaplan needs the kind of leadership that can ‘sell’ its proposed but as yet un-announced IPO to the money folk on Wall Street. I’m not buying that. You don’t get to be CEO since 2012 and raise $234 million along the way unless you know what you’re doing or have an exceedingly long line of BS. Competitors have accused the company of the latter but as always the proofs are in the numbers which we have yet to see.
Most recently, we have Palantir, the ultra secretive BI/security outfit that has raised an eye watering $2.42 billion but which, according to reports is losing staff at a fair clip and finding it hard to keep hold of customers. Co-founder Joe Lonsdale who is not longer close to the company hit back at the Buzzfeed story, labeling it as: 
From my perspective, it’s very easy to take a few select facts out of context and paint a negative story, which is what happened here. The article made false implications about customer traction — the company had been expansive in who it worked with and then scaled with the areas that made sense and were aligned with its ethos and goals. Of course a few of its client relationships might not have worked out – if that wasn’t the case it would have meant they weren’t exploring new industries properly. But that doesn’t mean the firm is “losing top customers”; in fact, it’s astonishing they are doing so well that he only found three names in the last 13 months with which to claim they had issues.
Follow ups to the Palantir story didn’t draw a direct response from the company – adding to the mystery.
In looking at all these stories and the snarky back and forth that goes with them, I can’t help but think that many on both sides of the arguments are missing the point.
On the one hand we have the flashy promise of what you can do with large amounts of data from numerous sources both internal and external. This is the much vaunted ‘big data’ play which has fueled both the establishment and growth of those vendors. The trouble is, no-one ever stopped to ask the basic question: what problem are we trying to solve? Palantir comes at this with a consult plus software approach but I can’t see great evidence that its consultants have much idea what they’re doing once they get inside the corporate tent. The kinds of question that are being raised may well be answerable by bringing many data types together but as we are constantly reminded, what data is needed and why?
Experienced consultants know that in framing questions, clients often go down a track that is sub optimal at best. Very often, clients cannot decompose the problem they’re looking at into pieces that are capable of rational analysis or, in some cases, where the dependencies are such, that finding an approximation to a good answer is progressively more complex and difficult. To me, this is one of those Wearing the Wrong Trousers situations where the answer has nothing to do with what was originally posed. Then again, there amy be many answers to the kinds of problem business faces today so the idea you can get to some mythical source of truth is often an illusion, even if that data used is in pristine condition. Is it therefore surprising to find that buyers lose faith in what they see in front of them?
On the other hand, BI solution adoption has had a notoriously rocky history. It was telling for example, at a recent meeting with epicor executives, when I was told that BI POCs went well in the late 1990s, but go live didn’t get the same sponsorship. That comment was in relation to relatively simple reporting but, as we can see from reports, the same seems to hold true in Palantir’s case.
Perhaps what we’re seeing is the natural evolution on a market where it just so happens that a confluence of events has led to a set of positions that give us all pause for thought. Either way, enterprise analytics is challenged.
Image credit - Potholes © Gudellaphoto - via fotoliaDisclosure - SAP and Oracle are premier partners at time of writing. Read more on: Analytics planning and data analysis 