

diginomica hit: Black Friday – Retail stress check edition with Stuart Lauchlan
quotage: “A big deal for JC Penney this Black Friday and during the upcoming holiday season is that for the first time customers can Buy Online, Pick-Up In Store (BOPIS) right across the US. According to Ellison, nearly 40% of total online orders are currently picked up in store. Growing that percentage is a priority.” – Stuart, JC Penney looks for Black Friday digital bounce
myPOV: Ahh, Black Friday. Where retailers’ omni-channel dreams go on-layaway get put to the ultimate test. As of now, retailers are optimistic. As Stuart reports in Target looks to digital investment to survive Black Friday retail systems stress, brands are looking to put their digital systems to the Black Friday stress test. Not just for online orders, but for delivering some semblance of omni-channel at scale (see: JC Penney quotage).
One thing’s for sure: we’ll know on Thursday, err, I mean Friday, err,  check Stuart’s Black Friday’s on Thursday, Cyber Monday’s on Friday – are retailers ready to give thanks? Why the changes? Yep, that big ol’ elephant in the retail showroom: “Essentially Amazon changed the rules and there’s no room to play by the old ones.” The stakes are high: a predicted 137.4 million US shoppers are expected to hit the stores this week, up from 135.8 million last year.  
As per Stuart, the National Retail Federation estimates the sector will see a 3.6 percent bounce in spending. We’ll find out. Let’s see how these mature-sounding digital-and-store services hold up under pressure.

diginomica three –  my top three stories on diginomica this week

An optimistic view of bot driven automation on the future of jobs – Denis has a measured-but-optimistic take on robotic job creation. Some of our commenters do not share his optimism, but give me a juicy comment thread over passive consumption anyday. I see this as more than a “rough patch” but then I’ve been too busy playing with my Amazon Echo staying ahead of the robots to chime in.
Buying cloud for enterprise? Forget the credit card, get the lawyers – Kurt blasts marketing slide decks to smithereens with straight talk on cloud risk and security: “Before committing to a cloud service, find out who has access to your data, both to the physical servers and drives and virtual storage instances and specifically ask whether the vendor outsources any data storage. If so, you need to press for details about who, where, how and the security measures used to protect data from third parties.” Usher in a new tagline: “cloud due diligence.”
Are marketing technologists held back by the marketing technology stack? – Barb’s on a roll with another savvy martech review. Is the role of the marketing technologist in trouble? Probably not, but too many marketing technologists lack the breadth of skills needed for digital transformation.

Vendor analysis, diginomica style. Wacky week of pre-holiday vendor frenzy. Here’s my top five choices from our vendor coverage:

GE Digital acquires ServiceMax for $915m to further IoT vision – Phil on the case of the most interesting acquisition we’ve seen in a while: “The journey ServiceMax has undertaken underlines the huge growth in the cloud application space over the past decade, one that’s continuing today as established enterprises begin to make the switch to a more adaptable, pay-as-you-go delivery model.“
Zuora CEO on the $8 trillion subscription economy opportunity – Yep, Phil again: “The subscription model is fostering new patterns of consumption that give buyers more freedom, says Tzuo. Done right, it lets them exchange “the shackles of ownership” for a relationship that lets them “try, buy, upgrade, downgrade, pause, cancel, rejoin” in whatever configuration and delivery model suits them best.” Me: more freedom, yes, but how much? Time will tell…
Okta CEO Todd McKinnon and the importance of digital identity – Derek scores another sit-down. Good luck getting out of London without giving him the details:  “It’s rare that a company goes all-in with cloud, particularly if they’re more of a traditional buyer. Okta, according to McKinnon, can integrate across both legacy and cloud. But if a company is predominantly cloud, then again, time to market is much quicker.”
MongoDB CEO claims to have won developers hearts from Oracle – As Derek learned, MongoDB is claiming a much higher win rate (30 percent) in migrating off of existing database workloads.
IFS World 2016 – intelligence, cloud, partners and the wrap –  Brian is always willing to buckle up for a nice transatlantic cabin cruiser so you don’t have to. Here, he wraps his analysis of IFS World, with a focus on analytics and why cloud messaging/architecture matters in U.S. markets.

A few more vendor picks, without the quotables:

Infor President talks $2bn Koch investment, Oracle/NetSuite deal and Brexit (Derek)
Nutanix.Next – coping with shrinkage – (Martin)
Visier – taking HR analytics into talent acquisition (Brian)
Workday CEO Aneel Bhusri on competitors, partners and politics (Phil)
Benioff on Trump, ‘old’ Microsoft and doubling Salesforce (Stuart)

Jon’s grab bag –  Stuart vents some productive spleen in Britain’s post-Brexit Industrial Strategy needs more realism, less rhetoric, bringing us up to date on a situation that is far beyond “good” or “bad” at this point. Chris Middleton raises potent questions in How the Echo could kill marketing. Check this:
Marketers will soon spend a great deal of time marketing brands, products, and services to machines – to platforms such as Amazon, Google, and Apple – and not to human beings. And that contradicts everything that marketing professionals have learned about their business over centuries.
I’m usually wary of handing our human foibles over to machines, but if it will spare me the robo-calls from hell and their lowest-common-denominator ilk, then sure – let marketers pummel my Alexa with their roman candle slot machine “personalized” omni-channel messages to their heart’s content.
Best of the rest
 Facebook, fake news, and the problematic future of media – by Ben Thompson and Tom Foremski
quotage: “Let me be clear: I am well aware of the problematic aspects of Facebook’s impact; I am particularly worried about the ease with which we sort ourselves into tribes, in part because of the filter bubble effect noted above (that’s one of the reasons Why Twitter Must Be Saved). But the solution is not the reimposition of gatekeepers done in by the Internet.” – Ben Thompson, Fake News

myPOV: I didn’t want to write about Facebook again. I’d rather write about Tinder Pinterest Tumblr. But the fake news fallout continues, and that’s where the best content landed. Media blogger Tom Foremski holds Facebook’s feet to the fire in Facebook is a tech-enabled media company. Foremski takes the position that Facebook is indeed a media company, which would completely disrupt not only Facebook’s business model, but almost any media platform, from Google search to YouTube.
I don’t see that happening, but the debate over Facebook’s accountability matters. I think we grasp how Fox News and/or CNN shapes people’s views; we are only beginning to understand Facebook’s attitude-shaping power – and that’s excluding the fake news brouhaha. Ben Thompson is clearly struggling with these issues; it’s caused him to take a more critical eye to Facebook, the once-and-future poster child of his aggregation theory. But if you check Fake News, you’ll see him grappling – as all free-thinking citizens should.
This begs the question: how should enterprises respond? I addressed that recently in Digital media disruptions XV – Overcoming Facebook’s algos and media monetization woes.
Other standouts:

What Motivates Gig Economy Workers – Via Frank Scavo I picked up on this interesting gig economy piece, which examines the learnings from a survey of 85 Uber and Lyft drivers. There’s a problem assessing the gig economy due to the mix of supplemental income and full-time workers. For now, gig economy platforms must find a way to accommodate the motivations of both.
Lecko on collaboration and Microsoft on Teams at SMILE – I’m not sure I could bring myself to attend an event with the acronym SMILE, resulting in the unenviable Twitter hashtag of #smilelondon, but The Agile Elephant’s David Terrar made it happen. Terrar posted this useful roundup on the state of collaboration, and Microsoft’s own positioning of Teams and Yammer. As for the “Yammer is going nowhere!” assertions, that sounds like Florida swampland to me – but good to get the official take.

Honorable mention

Glassdoor Study: Big Gender Gap In Key Tech Salaries – no surprises, and that’s not a good thing.
Walmart Plans To Track Fresh Produce Like Bitcoin – one of the more interesting blockchain pilots is underway.
Twitter Rolls Out New And Long-Awaited Anti-Harassment Tools – not sure why Twitter insists on moving in slow motion on issues it should have conquered years ago. My bank rolls out innovation faster than this.
Open source and coopetition are the new normal – Not a new insight, but there sure are some strange corporate bedfellows of late.
Why SAP Managed Payroll is NOT a Good Option for Most Customers – This story has turned into something of a gut check for SAP on transitional “cloud” offerings. The verdict is still out on this one.
Event Report – Microsoft Connect – No April’s Fools – Linux, Google and more – Anyhow, back to those strange bedfellows. Microsoft and… Linux?
Whiffs
This week in lifestyle fetish innovations, we’ve got Rovables Are Tiny Multipurpose Bots That Crawl on Your Clothes. Why put smart minds on the world’s ills when they can  lower their own bar working on… rovables?
Got a funny PR snafu from my colleague Phil Wainewright. An eager PR pitched him an AWS customer story from Yubl. Here’s Phil’s condensed version of the PR timeline:

Nov 10: “Yubl is the UK’s fastest growing social messaging app start-up that is taking on the established social networks”
Nov 21: “Unfortunately as you may know by now Yubl went into administration last week.”

Extra PR points for making me aware of “went into administration,” a term that reader Timothy Cooper was good enough to point out is legal terminology in the UK. I see “went into administration” as having great potential as a broader phrase, detached from its strict legal usage. No need to fail anymore – you just “go into administration.”  Too bad, as Yubl was supposed to move “‘digital conversation’ significantly closer to genuine human interaction.” If you’re wondering what “genuine human interaction” would have looked like, worry not, I’ve got a screen shot for you:

Dunno about you, but I reek of nostalgia for all that could have been – boo for “admin”.
Before I wish the U.S. readers a Happy Thanksgiving, and the rest of you a lovely week, I’d like to usher in the most dreaded bloviated insufferable inescapable tradition in our industry: tech predictions:

PR rep to me: “Are you planning on writing a 2017 predictions piece?” Me: “How did you know how I spent my weekend?” #lovetechpredictions
— Jon Reed (@jonerp) November 14, 2016
Then, the inevitable:

Received some exciting 2017 predictions from a thought leader: “More data will be external and generated in the Cloud” -> gutty call!
— Jon Reed (@jonerp) November 18, 2016
Over to you, Clive.
Which #ensw pieces of merit did I miss? Let us know in the comments.
Updated 11/22/2016, 7:30 am PT, with slight tweaks for reading clarity.
Most Enterprise hits and misses articles are selected from my curated @jonerpnewsfeed. ‘myPOV’ is borrowed with reluctant permission from the ubiquitous Ray Wang.
Image credit - Cheerful Chubby Man © RA Studio, Happy Children © Anna Omelchenko, Waiter Suggesting Bottle © Minerva Studiom, Overworked Businessman © Bloomua, Businessman Choosing Success or Failure Road © Creativa - all from Fotolia.com.Disclosure - SAP, Oracle, Workday, ServiceMax and Salesforce are diginomica premier partners as of this writing.Read more on: Hits and missesRetail e-commerce and the omni-channelSocial 