
diginomica hit: Frictionless lives – technology dies, by Phil and Martin
quotage: “Digital transformation projects most often fail not because of some problem with the technology but because the organization is not ready for the scale of change that is required to achieve success. Be ready to challenge functional tribalism and raise the collaborative readiness of the organization.” – Phil
myPOV: With chimes of New Year’s bells still lingering, Phil unfurled the latest in his piece on the “frictionless enterprise”, Frictionless enterprise: the goal of digital transformation. A foundation idea that drives Phil’s coverage, frictionless means rejecting shiny new object syndrome. Or as he puts it: “The proper goal of digital transformation is not to swap out technologies or adopt new models of engagement, it is reinvention of the enterprise itself.”
“Frictionless” sounds cool – but isn’t that another happy horseshit word designed to sell consulting projects? No, and here’s why. As Phil explains, today’s enterprise was designed at a different time, when the transaction costs of daily operations were far higher. Now the “massively reduced cost of digital transactions now demands a new organizational model.” When the friction caused by time, distance and lack of information goes “poof,” a whole new cost-benefit approach is required.
Then the kicker: digital transformation can’t be about digitizing current systems. Many existing processes can be re-invented, or delivered far more cheaply by external providers. And with that, Phil sets the table for 2016.
Meanwhile, Martin disposes of tech grandstanding to make room for… more tech. Martin’s no Luddite, but he too sees technology falling short, and performs last rites – of sorts – in Technology died in 2015; long live ‘technology’ in 2016. For Martin, it’s about delivering tech in the form of user-required services with direct business value. Vendors either need to get more useful – or they can polish their PowerPoints from the sidelines.
Martin then takes us through a slew of new service offerings, from the IBM Watson IoT service to the convergence of infrastructure with Nutanix. Their commonality? Take complexity headaches away from users, and integration/management time sucks away from IT. That ties in nicely with Phil’s reinvention themes. Making this a reality in risk-averse organizations is another matter entirely. But hey, if this stuff was easy, we’d all be serving burritos-as-a-service in 2016.
diginomica picks – a couple of faves from our 2015 exhale week:

Getting content marketing right in 2016 – Barb Mosher Zinck has upped our digital marketing editorial around here. She’ll be doing the same in 2016, so why not start with a hard look at why content is working – and why it isn’t. The plot thickens with multi-media raising questions about which content types to invest in. Oh, and there’s this pesky thing called the “buyer’s journey.” Content that hits buyers are the wrong time gets tuned out like a bad Legal Seafood commercial (Legal Seafood is a New England thing, don’t worry, you’re not missing much).
US lack of e-tensity enablement undermines its technology competitiveness – Den pokes holes in the myth of American tech supremacy. He pores through stats to show how America is falling down in crucial areas such as competitive broadband access (I feel ya Den, where I live, Comcast is the windshield and I am the bug). Is EMEA farther out in front on tech innovation than we typically think? And how does this contrast with prior diginomica takes on Safe Harbor? Stats don’t tell the whole story, but as Den says, “Well-funded US based players were wrong-footed in their assumptions about penetrating European markets.”

Vendor analysis, diginomica style – Salesforce hogged the #ensw stage this week with a clever little pickup (if you can call a $300 million + acquisition little). Phil cracked the first nut with CRM swallows CPQ as Salesforce buys Steelbrick: “It has repercussions not only for how we think about the CRM application category, but also for Salesforce’s relationships with its partners. It may signal a renewed vigor in its approach to the SMB market, and there are implications too for the future development of its industry cloud strategy.” Cats and pigeons are an awkward mix; Phil wonders if certain Salesforce partners might be feeling a bit pigeon-like right about now.
Den picks up the thread in Salesforce to pivot with Steelbrick acquisition?, where he doubles down on Phil’s concerns for Salesforce’s impacted partners, but adds in the threat competitors should be feeling. It just got tougher for cloud ERP players to position Salesforce as an ERP bolt-on. But Den thinks Salesforce is up to something more subversive: “If correctly executed against, this repositions Salesforce into an as yet to be defined category. That category can loosely be described as a true business solution that meets the strategic objectives of business going forward. “
Den spends the rest of the piece breaking that high falutin’ sentence apart. Den warns competitors not to take this lightly – “good enough” may not be good enough if Salesforce gets a head of stream in a marketing-to-billing cloud flow.
Jon’s grab bag – I thought Den was going to rip a bunch of Kickstarters new ones in his Friday Roast (Friday Roast: what is it with Kickstarter projects?), but hold on to your kilts, he was quite diplomatic. He actually researched why so many Kickstarter projects don’t deliver on time, and what we can learn about innovation while we are waiting on our overdue designer duds.
Wouldn’t it be lovely to kick off the year with a slew of stories about successful, well-run digital public sector projects? Well, sorry to tinkle in the eggnog, but that’s not gonna happen. Derek’s got more fodder for the digital debacles file in NHS data project ‘late, over-budget and doesn’t deliver’ – sound familiar?

Best of the rest
 Predictions – all we know is they are sure to wrong, by… those who dare
quotage: “The irrationality that came will bubble 2.0 will disperse. It took seven years to get into this situation so expect it to take a few years to get out. Moreover, since most of the bubble is in illiquid securities held by illiquid partnerships, there’s not going to be any flash crash — it’s all going to proceed in slow motion, expect for those companies addicted to huge burn rates that will need to shape up quickly.” – Dave Kellogg

myPOV: The tech press would shrivel in December without pompous predictions threads. Once every decade year or two, you get a few good ‘uns.
Dave Kellogg gave himself very good marks for last year’s exercise – aside from a whiff on IBM’s resurgence – before moving on to this year’s prognostications. Kellogg sees a “great reckoning” coming for “bubble 2.0,” a seven year startup run that is going to leave some burn rate carnage in its wake. The good news: “Quality, well run businesses will continue attract funding and capital will be available for them.” That’s downright sensible, eh?
Kellogg also sees the Internet of Things heading to the trough of disillusionment (this can’t happen soon enough!). Kellogg’s bullish on data science careers (he admits this prediction isn’t exactly a stunner). Then he fries some griddle cakes with scorching critiques of SAP and Oracle framed as predictions (clever move).
Via Frank Scavo I got my paws on a witty set of predictions from Fred Wilson, who intended to be provocative, and did so. Wilson hits on everything from how Trump will pave Clinton’s path to the White House to how Slack will conquer the enterprise. Dunno about conquer, but I put a similar prediction on a list yet to be published (with any luck, it won’t be). Wilson’s predictions about bitcoin, HBO spinning off from Time Warner, and the failures of publishers who made the stupid/desperate decision to post all their content on Facebook are all worth a gander. 

Other standouts

Top 5 Data-to-Decisions News Trends of 2015 – Doug Henschen’s latest doubles as a 2016 primer. As Henschen sees it, “Apache Spark, real-time, cloud BI & analytics, IoT, and self-service were the trends to watch in 2015, and they’ll continue to make waves into 2016.” More interesting is the “why” – Henschen sees Spark as the antidote for companies that need to handle disparate data types to achieve any semblance of analytics value.
10 issues defining the services industry in 2016 – The HfS team corralled their analysts for this terrific rundown of the hot issues from their Harvard buyers summit. Some dandies here, including a business case for design thinking, and “Ambitious providers will cannibalize their revenues when their buyers give them more to work with.” Cannibalize or bust – would make a nice t-shirt. I really liked “Automation is impacting entry-level roles—and the industry is not prepared,” which challenges the services industry to think about how you bring in talented young people as the entry-level jobs that once brought folks in are gobbled by automation.
The Year Ahead: What’s in Store for Machine Learning? – The New Stack put together a handy series of posts on the tech outlook for 2016, Good to see Kimberly Mok wasn’t pumping up today’s weak-ass digital assistants like some have: “While the long-term goal is to use predictive technology to understand patterns in user preferences in order to accomplish tasks, today’s digital assistants are still relatively limited in their capabilities, and aren’t able to handle more complicated requests involving many pieces of nuanced information.”

Honorable mention
Speed of Transformation – cold water thrown on those who threw cold water on bi-modal IT. Pull quote: “Transformation typically fails by default. you need to nurture it on a full time basis to let it thrive.
Three Big Leadership Turn-Offs – some leadership doodoo executives shouldn’t step in, such as “I closed the sale.” Truth: “If you’re not the sales rep, you didn’t close,”
Ford, Google Reportedly Teaming Up For Driverless Car Project – First, “do no harm” – to General Motors.
Whiffs
I didn’t spot too many blatant whiffs this week, though Buzzfeed’s “take a look at he future of Facebook” preview gave me a big empty feeling that required a very loud Jimi Hendrix song to purge. Seems like Facebook’s vision of spoon fed news into our filter is going to turn us all into bubble people, unable to function outside our incubator. Hopefully by the time we move into our bubble chambers, the Soylent formula will be perfected and we can just mainline while we control our Facebook while browsing with our neuro-sensors…
I already picked my biggest social media fails of the year… then I came across this doozy, 12 Times People In Tech Apologized In 2015 of the year. The apology circuit never fails to entertain. With number four, Google photos tagging black people as gorillas, foreshadowing the algorithms from hell in our future. Then there’s the simple verbal botch, like #9’s Apple executive who said that “women have a very difficult time finding music,” and walked those comments back as awkwardly as they came.
Final kudos to Airbnb (#5) for a tone deaf billboard campaign in San Francisco, which stepped into the tech gentrification divide with bizarre eagerness, patting itself on the back for generating tax funds for the city. And with that, I’m off into the London fog in search of a crumpet. See you next time….
Which #ensw pieces of merit did I miss? Let us know in the comments.
Most Enterprise hits and misses articles are selected from my curated @jonerpnewsfeed. ‘myPOV’ is borrowed with reluctant permission from the ubiquitous Ray Wang.

Image credits: Cheerful Chubby Man © RA Studio, Happy Children © Anna Omelchenko, Waiter Suggesting Bottle © Minerva Studiom, Overworked Businessman © Bloomua, Loser and winner – Loser and Winner © ispstock – Fotolia – all from Fotolia.com
Disclosure: SAP, Workday and Salesforce are diginomica premier partners as of this writing.

Read more on: Best of archivesDigital skills and trainingHits and misses 