

Lead story – GDPR looms while Facebook squirms – stories by Stuart Lauchlan

myPOV: With Facebook twisting in the wind, it’s easy to forget that the GDPR deadline will dunk plenty more companies in the data grinder – and it’s right around the corner. Fortunately, as Stuart reminds in The UK Information Commissioner on Facebook, GDPR and a new era of people-centric data protection, it’s not a drop dead deadline. But it is a new business-as-usual for companies that fall under GDPR’s purview.
Amidst sensational media diatribes in the U.S., the commissioner’s practical take on data privacy is welcome:
The GDPR has people at its centre too. It gives people new and strengthened rights that together, and gives people choices about how their data is used, shared and stored.
As Stuart reported, Facebook has already stated that the benefits of GDPR won’t extend to hapless suckers users in the U.S. users like me (Facebook later claimed otherwise, so we’ll see). Nonetheless Zuckerberg is on the apology circuit yet again (see Stuart’s “It was my mistake” – Facebook’s Zuckerberg pleads ‘mea culpa’, but insists he’s still the man for the job). As for that mistake bit: nope, not a mistake. It’s a fundamental flaw and/or agenda which users should be aware – as they decide if and how to participate on Facebook and other “free” platforms.
Stuart concludes:
My two main takeaways? Firstly, on the matter of Zuckerberg’s future – that’s a decision that others are ultimately going to make. Secondly, he’s going to have to do a lot better than this next week in front of Congress.
Diginomica picks – my top two stories on diginomica this week:

The ‘test-and-learn’ approach to digital transformation at “heritage brand” Lands End – Lands End was a pioneer of the yuppified trendy fashion catalog, but digital times (and Sears store closings) have been rocky. Stuart’s tracking the progress, from personalization testing to store expansions.
Blockchain and the ‘Pink Economy’ – a social enterprise model – Ordinarily I am a snob  skeptic about “let’s blockchain this!” use cases, but I’m making an exception here. This is a fascinating one that will put blockchain’s supposed anonymity to the test – and, as Cath explains, the need for a decentralized model is clear here. I won’t throw this one under the bus yet – we’ll see.

Vendor analysis, diginomica style. Here’s my three top choices from our vendor coverage:

SAP Indirect Access new policies aid transparency, users remain uncertain – It was a big week for SAP, as the PR lobster boil of indirect access finally got a cool off with SAP’s first major licensing announcement since last summer. SAP made a savvy move working closely with user groups, and we had some diginomica hash-it-out sessions also. In a coffee-cup-draining detailed analysis, Den explains the developments, gives his take on the progress made, and the work still ahead, as in: “During our conversations with SAP, we suggested to the company that while IA is not exactly the sexiest topic and one that will likely give marketers heartburn, SAP should work towards having customers talk openly about how this is working and the positive impact they see from this latest change.” Den looks to the implications of modern pricing models in SAP Project Trust – a stepping stone towards consumption based pricing. This issue is far from done, and SAP has lots still to prove, but the conversation has certainly been advanced.
AI at the edge gets in the SWIM as smart devices spew untapped data – I always ruled out “AI at the edge” due to limited data sets and computing power on edge devices. But as Kurt explains, SWIM has a way around this (to a degree): “SWIM takes a different approach by running models locally, while simultaneously streaming data and device metadata to a so-called digital twin that can be aggregated and included in more comprehensive analysis of an entire device environment.”
Apigee sees enterprise API management go native at Google Cloud – Phil examines Apigee’s progress under Google’s watch. Apigee’s market timing seems pretty good, given that 2018 looks like a big year for API adoption: “This recognition that APIs are core to a digital strategy is now spreading across all industries, including regulated industries such as financial services, healthcare, insurance and government.”

A couple more vendor picks, without the quips:

IBM and Sovrin partner to separate your digital identity from that of your dog – Jerry (diginomica blog post title of the week candidate)
Why progressive web apps are anything but boring – a retail view from Magento – Jon

Jon’s grab bag – Den gets nostalgic ponytail analytical about one of SAP’s sneakiest great stories: SAP Inside Track – 9 years in the making and still evolving. Formalizing the underground is a nifty community move. I got at least one chip off the shoulder in B2B influencer marketing mistakes exposed by crowdsourced e-books, contests, and guru festivals. Judging by the pings I got after I hit the “publish” button, this issue is bigger than I realized.
Best of the rest
 Lead story – Musings – Why splitting Windows is Nadella’s first major mistake by Holger Mueller
myPOV: Mueller’s ubiquitous event reports are handy and digestible, but it’s the occasional home-cooked meatloaf musings I look forward to. Though Mueller of Constellation Research isn’t specifically addressing Ben Thompson’s The End of Windows, you can see Mueller’s piece as a contrast, if not a rebuttal. Thomspon cites the closing of Microsoft’s Windows division (and prior decline) as a “classic case of disruption.” Mueller has a different twist:
According to Statcounter (see here), Windows is in a neck to neck race with Android for overall platform leadership. And that’s not a fair competition, different platforms, monetization, sales channels, purchase price and and… The real competition that is comparable is Apple’s OS X and that’s hovering well under 10%… so despite all these ‘Hello I am a Mac’ advertisements of years past, Apple’s OS X hasn’t moved up much on Windows 10. Would Apple split OS X? Don’t think so. Would anyone split responsibilities of a platform with way over 1B installs up?
Mueller sees a better way: “Platform Morphing beats Platform Abandonment. You don’t split a platform, even when it is old. You renovate it.” Microsoft, of course, would argue that’s exactly what they are doing by fusing the future of Windows with Microsoft 365 offerings. One thing is clear: the PC is a hot potato nobody seems to be betting on. Apple is taking hits from fanboys on their Mac line, Windows lacks leadership… is Chromebook set to surge? Or are we done typing?
Honorable mention 

Gartner fails spectacularly with its 180 degree flip on the impact of AI Automation on jobs – Horses for Sources has a dog in this particular fight, but Phil Fersht really gives Gartner the business on its dysfunctional AI mood swings, from predicting robotic overlords to rosier views of job gains. The funny thing is I think Gartner whiffed both times, with the truth landing somewhere in the middle.
​Enterprises learning to love cloud lock-in too: Is it different this time? – Larry Dignan raises a good point, but at the moment, cloud lock-in can be mitigated with tools to aid a multi-cloud setup. It’s SaaS lock-in that’s the real potsticker.
Enterprise Software Licensing in the 21st Century: An Industry Under Pressure and Seeking Higher Ground – Josh Greenbaum uses SAP’s licensing announcement as a chance to share his own research on auditing and indirect licensing across the industry – or, more precisely, the blockers he’s run into along the way. You can also pick up his detailed SAP licensing report. Vendors that are giving Greenbaum the cold shoulder should step up, and not just with him. This topic needs a bigger public airing than we’ve seen.
Jarret Pazahanick’s SAP indirect access compilation – a master snarker curator organizes the news overload for you. Check the comment thread for updates and links and a bit of hot sauce. Well, and some trolling, but that’s how it goes online.
Things I’d Like to See Go Away – The Logo Slide – Gartner’s Hank Barnes is fed up with the cheesy logo slide. But the Twitterverse blew up with questions on: what’s the alternative? Here’s a bit on that.
Facebook shows why data, not AI, is the thing that really matters – This is kind of a false juxtaposition, or maybe even a bizarre chicken-and-egg thing where the egg hatches, and whatever comes out of the egg eventually eats the chicken, but anyhow, it’s a valid point, and a chance to subscribe to a terrific weekly data email roundup via ARCHITECT.

Whiffs
So are we living in a computer simulation? It’s more likely than you might think, scientist argues. That explains a few things, though I don’t recall ordering the snow module in April! I guess if you don’t like your simulation, you can always take matters into your own hands:

Please stop smoking weed in the drive-through, SONIC asks https://t.co/gjIhkT8e6L -> an inconvenience for some, a major setback for others
— Jon Reed (@jonerp) April 4, 2018
Continuing with truth stranger-than-fiction, you really can’t make this one up: Lifetime ban from Empress for pepperoni seagull fiasco has been lifted. A ridiculous/amazing story. Meanwhile, a couple for the “welcome to dystopia” file:

Teen Monitoring Apps Don’t Work and Just Make Teens Hate Their Parents, Study Finds https://t.co/ZTbRQZv6X5 -> no surprises here….man if I’d had one of these app trackers it would have accidentally fallen in the river real quick.
— Jon Reed (@jonerp) April 5, 2018
The Department of Homeland Security is compiling a journalists database, and yes, sentiment will be monitored. I hope someone has alerted them to the problem of sentiment analysis in a fake and sarcastic news environment. Let’s not get ahead of ourselves here, the machines are still imperfect:

Google’s voice-generating AI is now indistinguishable from humans https://t.co/17oXUKVnA0 -> well, humans that talk like soulless bots at any rate
— Jon Reed (@jonerp) April 3, 2018
When Google masters a Boston accent, then I’ll be impressed. Nudging closer to the enterprise, Den got me pretty good on this strikethrough:

@jonERP scores the distinction of earning a double strikethrough in today’s #digidaily – https://t.co/g382JMJxZ9pic.twitter.com/RPtaww00gS
— (((Den Howlett))) (@dahowlett) April 10, 2018
Also, ZDNet issued a helpful article on dealing with crapware and bloatware that gets loaded on your devices. Of course, dealing with the crapadfestival on their own site is another problem entirely. Finally, I found out that I am indeed implicated in Facebook’s Cambridge Analytica mess, because one of my friends was dumb gullible desperate addicted bored enough to take their ludicrous quiz (here’s how to find out if you were implicated).
I participate on Facebook with the understanding my personal data is not well cared for, but the idea that simply being friends with an idiot someone somehow exposes you gives me the creepies. But my lasting impression hits closer to home:

yah, re-evaluating my friends now
— Jon Reed (@jonerp) April 10, 2018
I’ll get over it by next week; I’m definitely more imperfect than my friends. See you then…
 If you find an #ensw piece that qualifies for hits and misses – in a good or bad way – let me know in the comments as Clive (almost) always does.
Most Enterprise hits and misses articles are selected from my curated @jonerpnewsfeed. ‘myPOV’ is borrowed with reluctant permission from the ubiquitous Ray Wang.
Image credit - Cheerful Chubby Man © RA Studio, Happy Children © Anna Omelchenko, Waiter Suggesting Bottle © Minerva Studiom, Overworked Businessman © Bloomua, Snowboarder Crashing © dismagwi - Fotolia.com - all from Fotolia.com.Disclosure - SAP, Oracle, Workday and Salesforce are diginomica premier partners as of this writing.Read more on: Cloud platforms - infrastructure and architectureData privacyGoverning identity privacy and securityHits and missesRegulation 