
diginomica hit: Big data use cases and the market threat of the GPU database – by Jessica, Kurt and Chris
quotage:“Databases are at the forefront of a trend that will extend to many applications in realtime analysis, correlation and prediction of events from all manner of systems and applications. While incumbent RDMS providers like Oracle and big data platforms like Hadoop don’t face an immediate threat, they ignore this technological trend at their peril.” – Kurt

myPOV: At diginomica we try to remain appropriately cynical about (ahem) “big data,” without being crusty, close-minded yawners. Kurt blew out the search engines with this fascinating piece, Do GPU optimized databases threaten the hegemony of Oracle, Splunk and Hadoop?. For non-techies, the gist is that “hardware-optimized” software and databases is becoming a force. As Kurt says, he doesn’t use the “R” word lightly – and he’s not talking R the language, he’s talking revolution, fueled by the looming specialization of cloud hardware,
Meanwhile, Jessica posted fresh customer views on big data from her stint at the recent Hadoop Summit in Dublin (Talking Big Data culture at Hadoop Summit with Royal Mail, Centrica, Markel). A burning issue? Skill-building, which doesn’t need to be the province of data science PhDs alone. But IT has to shift perception and make a transformative impact. As Centrica put it, “What this journey has done for my team, and for me as an IT manager, is modernise the culture of work. ” Chris extends these themes to outer space, literally, in The biggest Big Data project in the universe.
diginomica six: my top six diginonima picks from a week of standout stories:

The politics of diversity in tech, 2016 – the black perspective – Guest contributor Gail Moody-Bird filea one of the best pieces on workplace diversity I’ve read in a long time. Moody-Bird shares disheartening stats on blacks working in tech, follows with solutions and shares her personal stake. That, ladies and gents, is how it’s done. I just hope we can maintain an expanded discussion on diversity that pushes toward results. Let’s not pretend that will be easy…
Learning software gets smart – at last – at last – Brian Sommer is many good things, but he is NOT what you would call a patient man. Asking him to wade through 600-1,000 learning management vendors is sure to drive him bonkers. Here he hones in on the business issues that make the LMS market highly relevant. Fresh back from Italy where he got a firsthand look, Brian scores one such vendor’s modern LMS readiness in Scoring Docebo, a learning management vendor.
Europe puts U.S. cloud companies on notice; THINK.cloud goes local – Are you getting a gray hair trying to track each twist in Europe’s post-Safe Harbor regulatory brouhaha? Well, keep your comb happy and let Stuart handle this one. Two updates this week, notably US cloud providers take note – Europe’s new data regime begins in 2018. And with that, the European Parliament raises the data protection stakes. Meantime, Stuart’s been knee-deep in THINK.cloud’s Local Government event. Since he was too busy chairing panels to file his usual lyrical/prolific copy, guest contributor Gary Flood pitches in with Think Cloud for Local Government – doing digital for Margaret.
Death, ageism, culture and Hubspot – Den files a trenchant piece on ageism and how Hubspot did – and didn’t – respond to Dan Lyons’ recent tell-all book. (Pleasure to find my first use for “trenchant” in 2016).

Vendor analysis, diginomica style. Here’s my top choices from our vendor coverage:

SAP pre-announces revenue miss for Q1 FY2016, maintains full year guidance – an analysis – Den breaks down the issues that led to the revenue miss, setting the table for a crucial Sapphire Now event next month.
NetSuite goes Dutch with big Benelux expansion – Stuart gets the skinny on NetSuite’s latest move in its EMEA expansion.
Zuora touts pay-as-you-go billing to world’s top companies – Phil assesses the rise of subscription billing and Zuora’s latest moves in what’s shaping up to be a massive subscription billing market.

A few more vendor picks, without my capsules:

Infosys turnaround continues, but slowdown possible – Stuart
Unit4 embraces its cloud destiny with latest release – Phil
Box teams with AWS and IBM to store content in-region – Phil

Jon’s grab bag – To say Volkswagen has had a rough year would be an understatement, but hard times can also force a resolve to re-invent. Maxwell Cooter looks in with Open source cloud drives Volkswagen’s DevOps culture transformation. Cath Everett takes a harder look at philanthropic tech companies in Invictus Games sponsorship – tech philanthropy meets corporate pragmatism. (I’m a fan of philanthropic commitments IF all involved understand that donations/sponsorships just scratch the surface of the change needed).
Den shares a few secrets from inside diginomica’s own service procurement in How to negotiate modest enterprise SaaS deals in the 21st century (Request: service providers currently negotiating with us do NOT read this article please). I’ll let Phil bring us home with a nifty Zuora use case, The Economist breaks with convention for digital subscriptions.
Best of the rest
 On chatbots, AI interfaces, and how Facebook stole the enterprise show (for a week) – by many scribes
quotage: “The thing is, if we started using Messenger for everything, how will we get the messages from our friends and family we actually want to see (presumably)? And then there’s the whole business of ads or what Facebook calls “sponsored messages,” which will mean you have even more extraneous stuff to wade through just to get those meaningful conversations.” – Ron Miller, Facebook sends a loud message about Messenger bots, but will we hear it?
myPOV: This isn’t the first time a consumery tech show has dominated the attention of enterprise scribes, but I can’t recall a more provocative convo. The scene of the hubbub was Facebook F8, their developer show, where a centerpiece announcement pertained to Messenger and the debut of several new bot-powered Messenger services (see Miller’s piece for more).
Bots, with their promise and limitations, go well beyond Facebook, as expertly noted by Benedict Evans in Chatbots, conversation, and AI as an interface. Harping on AI’s current limitations, Evans asked: “So, how likely is it that the users can ask something that breaks it? How badly?” Buzzfeed broke the shopper bot pretty thoroughly already, as shown in 6 Things That Definitely Sucked About Facebook’s New Shopping Bot.
Early days. But the enterprise is on the move also, with Dropbox and Salesforce announcing Facebook Messenger tie-ins. Constellation’s Holger Mueller tied this back to the Microsoft Build announcements in The Bots are coming to your conversation – what are the implications? 
These issues warrant several pieces, but the teaser list is:

Will AI-powered bots have as much impact as Zuckerberg claims? Yes, eventually, and on the enterprise also. But not without savvy human intervention/exception handling built in. Automation can be overdone, just ask Verizon’s online customer server bot loser helper.
Will chat overpower apps as the dominant platform on smart devices? Probably. It’s already happened with WeChat in China.
Will Facebook Messenger be that dominant platform? Yes, probably, on the consumer side, but it’s not a done deal. It’s up for grabs in the enterprise.
Do you hate to give Facebook credit for anything? Yes, but I can’t let Facebook knock the chip off my shoulder so easily, now can I?

Other standouts

Software is eating innovation: How trapped is your company? – Shocker: Oliver Marks is not as enamored with digital as your marketing department probably is: “Most firms are primarily focused on using digital communication channels for marketing and superficial user experience omnichannel skinning. It can be the digital equivalent of an annoying brick-and-mortar sales person shadowing you around their store.” -> “superficial user experience omnichannel skinning?” tip-of-cap, Mr. Marks – I wish I’d come up with that!
Big Data: it’s about time we stopped putting the cart before the horse – No one is better than questioning big data, and then somehow finding its redeeming qualities, then IBM’s Vijay Vijayasankar. He sums up big data’s fall from grace but then explains how customers are pursuing viable analytics projects, one project at a time, many miles away from the verbosity of the keynote stage.
Hubspot speaks for itself, doesn’t convince all detractors – Hubspot’s Founder and CTO posted a LinkedIn response to Dan Lyons’ book. Some praised Hubspot’s transparency and high-ground, including some of their own customers. I landed somewhere in the middle. The Ad Contrarian, however, is not a fan, though I thought his rebuttal more entertaining than coherent. Sidenote: Den was onto something pushing this beyond the foibles of Hubspot and into the issue of ageism and tech. Following Hubspot’s travails is just a soap opera that solves nothing.

Honorable mention
Rescuing BPO from its trough of directionless boredom: Make jobs challenging and creative – count me in.
Mossberg: How to make Slack better – I thought this would be another whiny “Slack overload” piece but the critiques are coherent.
Facebook Has Seized the Media, and That’s Bad – Belaboring the obvious, but, yes (and I get my cheap Facebook shot in also).
On Google’s Cloud Posture. GCP Next 2016 – RedMonkian.
Whiffs


Only posting because of how sad I would be if @jonerp didn’t see this headline. pic.twitter.com/KveMLpt2ng
— Jamie Oswald (@oswaldxxl) April 18, 2016
Rest easy, my Twitter rapscallion, I saw it. And I appreciate the nuance of that headline. Shall we make it official? From this point forward, anyone who takes a selfie with a wild animal shall get no sympathy for the obvious “what can go wrong?” Oh, and another one for the corporate PR “that went well!” file: Sprint Pulls Ad Featuring Customer Calling T-Mobile “Ghetto”.
Nudging closer to the enterprise: Tech World Up In Arms Over Leaked Senate Encryption Bill Draft. As they should be. If tech companies and the U.S. government can’t find a middle ground, it’s our own privacy that’s going down the commode. Without making us any safer. That means putting aside scorched earth pursuits on both sides, and applying imagination towards tech-appropriate solutions.
Speaking of getting it together, Metallica’s manager calling was over the top, but if you want to see two sides take untenable positions, look no further than this tinkling contest. The labels sound like they have no grip on emerging tech, or the fact that if I want to link to music in this piece, it’s gonna be YouTube. The dotcom CEOs (e.g. YouTube execs) also sound myopically clueless, wishful thinking their pathetic trickle of an advertising model is a viable way forward.
The good news is that software vendors are happy to hire artists to turn their work into pleasing marketing jingles. The bad news is we kinda need artists to make art. YouTube seems to think the creative production process is simply uploading a video. Once YouTube starts paying geniuses to lock themselves in studios and create art – I’ll listen. Until then, we’ll be putting up with hipsters, marketeers, and Biebers. Somebody put on some [email protected]#king Floyd.
Officially off-topic
I’m two hours west of Boston, the site of today’s Boston Marathon. This open letter to all who ran in the Boston Marathon today struck a chord. I’ll leave you with this:
You have returned with prosthetic limbs to run back to that same place where remorseless terrorists attempted to take your life. You are family members and friends and acquaintances and even strangers to the survivors of the Boston Marathon bombing, all still running the race with even more determination and courage than ever.
Damn right. See you next time…
Which #ensw pieces of merit did I miss? Let us know in the comments.
Most Enterprise hits and misses articles are selected from my curated @jonerpnewsfeed. ‘myPOV’ is borrowed with reluctant permission from the ubiquitous Ray Wang.
Image credits – Cheerful Chubby Man © RA Studio, Happy Children © Anna Omelchenko, Waiter Suggesting Bottle © Minerva Studiom, Overworked Businessman © Bloomua, Businessman Choosing Success or Failure Road © Creativa – all from Fotolia.com.
SAP, Oracle, Workday and Salesforce are diginomica premier partners as of this writing.
Image credit - Image credits - Cheerful Chubby Man © RA Studio, Happy Children © Anna Omelchenko, Waiter Suggesting Bottle © Minerva Studiom, Overworked Businessman © Bloomua, Businessman Choosing Success or Failure Road © Creativa, King Checkmate © mystock88photo - all from Fotolia.com.Disclosure - SAP, Oracle, Workday and Salesforce are diginomica premier partners as of this writing.Read more on: Hits and missesInternet of ThingsMachine intelligence and AI 