

diginomica hit: Oracle OpenWorld 2016 – Oracle CEO says AWS has the “ultimate lock-in strategy” – by Derek du Preez
quotage: “As I’ve noted in my previous posts, it would be silly to underestimate Oracle. It has a stronghold on many of the world’s largest enterprises and it has huge sway with these customers. And this is where I think Oracle’s IaaS offering will have the most impact – it may not necessarily win against AWS in direct competition with a buyer that doesn’t have a relationship with either, but it doesn’t want to lose its current on-premise customers to AWS at the infrastructure level..” – Derek, Oracle OpenWorld 2016 – Oracle UK boss warns buyers not to repeat on-premise mistakes in the cloud
myPOV: Diginomica did Oracle OpenWorld in style; check the full Oracle OpenWorld coverage for the run-down. Derek was in Derek-mode, firing off a flurry of analysis and use cases. The tech press will remember this OpenWorld as the year they made fun of Oracle for trying to take on Amazon. But that’s a sound bite myopia.
Yes, competing with Amazon is dangerous, pulling you towards commodity versus value-add upwards in the stack. But Derek’s quote is a better assessment. Right/wrong –  time will tell, but the rationale of customer retention is worth a reckon. Derek also nailed down some customer use cases, as in Oracle OpenWorld 2016 – Making HR a digital experience at the Co-Operative Group.
Den hits on the IaaS play and a host of other topics in his Oracle OpenWorld 2016 – the verdict – a work on progress. One overlooked point Oracle won’t be able to duck: “If it wants to win in infrastructure and platform then it needs to change the conversation by making developers first class event citizens.” Next up: the diginomica team descends on Dreamforce…
diginomica four – my top four stories on diginomica this week:

FedEx vs Amazon, Bed, Bath & Beyond vs the omni-channel – Stuart flexed his omni-chops again this week, with FedEx CEO – Amazon can’t do what we do (hint: watch your back FedEx), and Furnishing an omni-channel strategy – e-commerce thinking at Bed, Bath & Beyond. (E-commerce ain’t easy for home furnishings, but avoiding it is unadvisable – good luck).
Understanding leavers – an analytic app HR really needs – In a recent HR tech meltdown podcast with yours truly, Brian promised us an amazing HR tool (believe me, I know how that sounds). Not sure if this is that tool, it’s more of a handy analytics tip.
What is driving the disconnect between sales and marketing? – Barb hits home with an analysis of a disconnect that persists, despite how many times we keep saying “there’s no place like digital!”

Vendor analysis, diginomica style. Here’s my three top choices from our vendor coverage:

Transforming the supply chain for better customer experiences – Phil with a nifty two part interview/analysis on the future of supply chains with the president of GT Nexus (now owned by Infor): “It’s clear that, as in so many other areas, digital transformation in the supply chain goes way beyond simply deploying new technologies. It brings in its wake fundamental changes in how an enterprise organizes itself to meet customer needs..”
Arbella Insurance goes paperless in AP with a bold ERP technology refresh – Den – who is no fan of paperwork, or spreadsheets for that matter – filed a surprising Workday use case. Liked this Arbella quote on pulling HR and finance into one solution: “HR had been considering replacing their systems for a while so when their time came, the evaluation was pretty straightforward. We used the opportunity to bring payroll under the same technical umbrella because it had become clear that we would end up with a single system of record. A single system supporting by a single full vendor gave a huge opportunity to simplify our support model.”
Checking the ingredients for Box viral adoption – Den again: “Successful technology implementations should always be celebrated. This one from Box provides very good clues as to how a good project can work.” Indeed. Sidenote: I think I unintentionally set a record for most diginomica partners mentioned in a single use case in How Unit4 brought marketing closer to the business – a Hippo DX use case.

A couple more vendor picks, without the quotables:

Adobe turns in record revenues, uses subscription model to take on the pirates – Stuart
If Salesforce buys Twitter, this will be why – Phil (note: this is a fun riff, NOT a prediction)
BMC Engage – a primer on transforming digitally – Martin

Jon’s grab bag – Den continues his personal Uber data analysis in The full time Uber driver experience – his points on how Uber continually optimizes in a way other services don’t or can’t is a big digital tell: “The trick it is successfully pulling off is running enough experiments via its network application to allow business model optimization. That’s something the taxi business in its current form cannot offer.” Jess takes us home with a use case from LinkedIn China, Graph database gets behind the Great Firewall of China.
Best of the rest
 Gartner Fires Back at HfS as Debate Rages About Scale of Automation’s Job Destruction by Bianca Wright
quotage: “Perhaps the need to capture attention is part of the problem in the sector as a whole. As competition for audiences increases, media outlets, academic institutions, and even analyst firms are under pressure to offer insight in 140 character Twitter style sound bites in the hope that users will be tempted to read the full story. Often, though, the sound bite becomes the story and the nuance of the issue is lost in an increasingly cluttered environment.”
myPOV: Ordinarily I would not elevate an article about a beef, as that’s just me putting more linkbait beef on the barbie. But Nearshore America’s Wright did a considered job of weighing the issues – even scoring the elusive clarification quote from Gartner.
Wright nails it: the battle for attention becomes part of the story. When “hot takes” appear to get rewarded, we betray the nuance enterprise buyers need. Bad move – nuance is the elusive differentiator. Buyers are looking for content dinners of substance, not popcorn with Terrell Owens.
The shame – as Wright’s article makes clear – is that Gartner’s own research conclusion on robo-bosses is actually deeper, less sensational, and very well-defined. I would say to Gartner: you can reduce the risk of being misunderstood if you’re cautious with your headlines and painstaking in your definitions.
As for HfS Research, they obviously have an ambitious dog in the fight. I see HfS Research doing the sensational headline thing themselves here and there, but it’s almost always an opinion piece where the title fits the spirit, rather than an unnecessary funhouse mirror on serious research.
Other standouts:

Notes from Reality, an Interview with Paul Greenberg – Salesforce’s John Taschek continues his fruitful AI/AR interview series of our fellow Enterprise Irregulars, this time with CRM Godfather and, alas, New York Yankee fan Paul Greenberg. Greenberg’s view on AI/AR is disturbing hype-free – c’mon Mr. Greenberg, you can flog tech better than this! Anyhow, Greenberg sees these technologies as having the potential to enhance customer experience, if applied properly. “Valuable and supplemental” – aiding but not disposing of humans. This is also a make-up call for Clive, a reader who got on me last week for not featuring this series.
Analysis of SAP HANA Express, BW/4HANA, and SuccessConnect in review – SAP doesn’t like operating in Oracle’s shadow – who would? At SAP TechEd Vegas, media members weren’t there due to the OpenWorld conflict. But SAP programmer/expert Graham Robinson had a surprisingly upbeat (for him) take on SAP’s major TechEd Vegas announcement, the HANA Express edition for developers. Meanwhile, Constellation’s Holger Mueller took on SAP’s prior announcement, the BW/4HANA launch. Steve Bogner and his band of SAP HR experts do the podcast review of SAP SuccessConnect as only they can.

Honorable mention – the top five:

Salesforce, Google, Microsoft, Verizon are all eyeing up a Twitter bid – Not a fan of reporting on news that isn’t news, but it’s interesting to speculate on the range of uses for Twitter’s data. Evidently the courtship is heating up further as I type. Verizon would wreck Twitter. Otherwise we’ll see.
News Analysis: @Adobe @Microsoft Partner Up For Marketing Cloud, Azure and #AI #MSIgnite – Early analysis from Microsoft’s Ignite, now in progress.
The unexpected return of the CIO – Kind of belaboring the obvious, but still, the CIO is in a radically different situation than when SaaS took off and lines of business revolted. Better off? Yes, though the hot seat may be even hotter now. Either serve the business or get served.
Autonomous Vehicles: The Empty Re-positioning Challenge – Ponders serious implications of autonomous vehicles I had not considered.
Making Business Travel Bearable – Heed the tips of this venerable road warrior.
Whiffs
I’d say this qualifies as a rough week on Twitter award winner. And as per Den, Oracle’s Mark Hurd tasted the perils of live keynote polling. Ridiculous email subject header award goes to: “So, you have discovered Hubspot! Isn’t it an amazing tool?” Hmm not sure but the phrase “amazing tool” definitely stands out.
Facebook stepped it again (Facebook apologizes for feeding inflated video-view numbers to advertisers). This one might percolate; advertisers are not pleased they were taken for a ride on the video-changes-everything carousel. But as I said on Twitter, what’s a few hundred million smackers amongst “friends”?
Finally, a moment for Ben Thompson’s Oracle’s Cloudy Future. This may be as far as Thompson ventures into enterprise waters; he’s been a pick in my column many times for cogent, even brilliant Apple/Facebook/Amazon analysis. I assume Thompson was lured in due to his fanboyish interest in Amazon AWS. Look, I get why Thompson is a fan. Amazon justifies Thompson’s disruption/aggregation theories and is executiing to perfection.
But why do consumer tech bloggers become infatuated with the elevation of SaaS and user experience and assume what they perceive as legacy players are about to topple? I’ve got news for Thompson: deep pockets and ruthless ambition (Ellison) buys you a lot of runway. Oracle is not the San Francisco Yellow Cab Cooperative. “One throat to choke” integration and support doesn’t vanish as buying considerations just because the cloud is wondermuss.
Thompson thinks SaaS and UX pressures push customers away from vendor lock-in, changing buying criteria. Yes, those dominos are falling, but not in a way that will please disruption purists. It’s not a sexy thing to say at all, but Oracle has time. Thompson may want to study when Robert Scoble challenged Workday on user experience compared to sexy Expensify. Scoble fell in line – welcome to the enterprise, disruptive dudes.
Over to you, Clive.
Update: in a prior draft of this piece, I noted that Thompson added context to his Oracle views in a special note to subscribers. On Twitter, Ethan Jewett argued that Thompson also added more needed nuance in a public podcast in his Exponent series, a series worth listening to.

Which #ensw pieces of merit did I miss? Let us know in the comments.
Most Enterprise hits and misses articles are selected from my curated @jonerpnewsfeed. ‘myPOV’ is borrowed with reluctant permission from the ubiquitous Ray Wang.
Updated 09/27/2016, 5am ET, tightened for clarity and your reading enjoyment.
Image credit - Cheerful Chubby Man © RA Studio, Happy Children © Anna Omelchenko, Waiter Suggesting Bottle © Minerva Studiom, Overworked Businessman © Bloomua. Loser and winner - Loser and Winner © ispstock -  - all from Fotolia.com.Disclosure - SAP, Oracle, Infor, Workday and Salesforce are diginomica premier partners as of this writing.Read more on: Hits and misses 