
diginomica hit: Digital turnarounds and self-disruption – a use case smorgasbord from Jessica, Derek, and Stuart
quotage: “At the same time, there’s arguably as much collaboration as there is disruption in financial services technology, with large, established banks investing heavily in and partnering with start-ups. That makes perfect sense when you consider that, for many fintech companies, the liquidity events longed for by investors won’t be big, splashy IPOs, but trades sale to existing players in the market.” – Jessica, Wells Fargo’s innovation stagecoach gathers pace
myPOV: This week was punctuated companies in varying stages of digital change. Stuart set the tone with Weight Watchers counts the progress on digital transformation, a story that has had as many ups and downs as – insert-cynical-Oprah-weight-loss-joke-here. But things are on the good tip of late, with a 4 percent subscriber bump in the last three months. Maybe Oprah’s star power will ultimately help, but in the meantime, sounds like reduction of technical debt and improved/personalized/gamified user experience are key drivers.
Jessica’s Wells Fargo’s innovation stagecoach gathers pace is the piece that inspired the self-disruption tag, because some companies seem to be able to force the issue, pouring incumbent resources onto upstart challengers – or better yet, collaborating with them. Jess has insights from her chat with Wells Fargo’s head of R&D and innovation Bipin Sahni. Interesting that the best ideas, including the pending “Wells Fargo Wallet,” stemmed from a culture infused by fresh thinking. This digital thing doesn’t sound so hard when you put it that way now does it?
Also see: Derek’s Ladbrokes reports profit as digital turnaround begins to take hold, a gambling firm that rolled the digital dice and went from losses to profits, mostly by integrating digital and storefront channels. Derek’s got more sunny side ups, as in Online marketplace Etsy posts strong growth, points to maturing tech platform. Lessons on differentiating with services and user experience abound…
My top two stories on diginomica this week:

Mashing it up – APIs and how the small bits are becoming ‘big’ – Martin reads between the lines of recent API-related news to envision where API-enabled micro-services are headed. It’s not just about opening up legacy systems and data silos, it’s about a shift to line of business managers “composing” their own services. No, we’re not there yet – but I do think Martin is onto something.
A neuroscience perspective on chaos and change management for a Brexit world – A bit of distance from Brexo-shock is giving way to some nuance, as in Janine’s look at how neuroscience can help us to understand why the brain struggles with political aftershocks. But there’s a workplace application also. Though we’re only scratching the surface, a neuroscience angle has promise for workforce management, such as handling change management in a people-smart way, rather than in a clunky/tone-deaf one.

Vendor analysis, diginomica style. Here’s my top choices from our vendor coverage:

Does Quip takeover mean Salesforce and Microsoft are less BFFs, more ‘friends with benefits’? – Does Salesforce’s purchase of a next-gen cloud word processing and productivity suite ruin its BFF fun with Microsoft, specifically Office 365? Stuart makes the call, and from his view, this one has a “great deal of potential” if executed properly. As for BFFs, no one knows, but Stuart’s thinking we might have shifted to “friends with benefits.”
SAP S/4 HANA – the numbers and the business case – For reasons known only to him, Den decided to wile away part of his summer delving into the mysteries of S/4HANA. But the benefit comes to you, dear reader, with some of the firmest S/4HANA adoption numbers we’ve seen, along with some useful info on business cases and industry solutions. Den wisely left the cloud aspects of S/4HANA out of this one – that was plenty for one post – but cloud (private and public) is the other part SAP will need to clarify when we hit fall TechEd season.
Jive sees uptick in cloud adoption uptake – Stuart reports on something I didn’t expect: good news from Jive on multiple fronts, including upbeat earnings news and cloud uptake. And: the focus on working alongside Google and Microsoft (Sharepoint) seems sensible, if not earth shaking. Stuart’s last word: “Signs of life, but not out of the woods yet. But there have been some steps in the right direction.”

Jon’s grab bag – Digital technologies have changed politics, but… diplomacy? Stuart’s got a new twist in The rise of the Digital Diplomat in a turbulent age. Digital governance buffs watch the UK’s moves closely, so the leadership upheavals at the Government Digital Service (GDS) bear watching. Derek and Stuart advanced the story from several angles; check Derek’s New GDS chief Kevin Cunnington says the organisation “is here to stay” for starters. Finally, I don’t think of airports as digital vanguards, but Phil’s got me thinking with How Heathrow Airport learned to apply tech innovation. Phil left “less skeptical than when he arrived,” so that’s something.
Best of the rest
SaaS trends for 2016 – and vendor selection know-how by Charles McClellan and Patrick Gray
quotage: “A major challenge with any new software deployment is migration to the new platform and subsequent end user training. Check if your potential SaaS provider can assist with these challenges through data migration tools, premade training tools, or consulting assistance on either front. For a large SaaS deployment, these can be points of leverage in contract negotiations.” – Patrick Gray, SaaS checklist: Nine factors to consider when selecting a vendor
myPOV: ZDNet published a couple of useful SaaS “state of market” pieces this week. The above from Gray hones in on vendor selection tips. Nothing earthshaking here – but contract negotiation is the time to review this info, not after the deal is signed. Integration issues are a stickler, and, something missed by the article: consultant quality review. Agreements on remote versus on-site consulting should be part of this mix. Gray did hit on mobile app support.
In SaaS in 2016: The key trends, Charles McClellan covers recent studies on SaaS (and PaaS) maturity (check the graphic from ECP on the contrast between cloud enablers and cloud distruptors). Nutshell: it’s about SaaS moving to platforms for better ecosystems (read: customer retention), with mobile and UX raising user standards/requirements. Add in microservices and API trends and that’s your state of SaaS/cloud apps, summer 2016.
Honorable mention

Cognizant cuts Q3, 2016 outlook as enterprises curb spending – Not a deep article, but the news on Brexit, banking and US healthcare making buyers nervous bears watching.
Event Report – Pivotal SpringOne Platform – Spring in its 2nd spring – Video and takeaways from an event that puts PaaS/CloudFoundry in the spotlight: “Adoption remains a challenge for all players.”
Integrated Planning: Is It Rubbish? Be Careful What You Ask For. – Nahh, not rubbish – but look out for these pitfalls, such as “high forecast bias.”
Oracle and NetSuite: Separate Fact from Speculation – A balanced review that looks at who stands to gain, or not.
Cybersecurity Costs – An Unsustainable Tax On Business – Notes from a provocative panel, juxtposing tension between security and user experience that must be resolved.
The Price is Right: Essential Tips for Nailing Your Pricing Strategy – Watch out for the mind-numbing exit pop-up, but the content is quality.

Podcast bonus: A couple podcasts to peruse: Kevin Kelly On The Promise And Future Of Technology (one of the few “futurists” I have time for), and a five year/50 podcast anniversary edition from the pros at SAP HCM insights. And if you want to hear me on the hot seat, the “Enterprise Should Suck Less” guys put me in the virtual chair for a chat about digital transformation – what’s real and what’s, well, not.
Whiffs
So Delta had a data center snafu (early reports said fire), and passengers on my favorite American punching bag airline got the ol’ “make yourselves comfortable.” Twitter sentiment was sad face, but to what extent are such events preventable?
Southwest might have a view on that one, having brought their own system to its knees with a router malfunction that a Southwest suit compared to a “thousand year flood.” Call me a dreamer, but it seems like a router malfunction might happen more than once every thousand years? We have to live with failures, but the debate over their prevention is more important than the PR gymnastics/Twitter spank tunnel routine. Oh, and did you hear about the so-called “Chinese straddling bus?” It’s pretty much a scam – well, according to the Chinese state – and besides, it’s a freaking train, not a bus.
A bunch of Twitter notables pimped tweeted this piece, Influencing the influencers: Where tech industry analysts look for expertise and information, as if the information it contains is remotely useful or interesting. Some – if not most – of the sources on this list are worth a look. Ray Wang’s work made the cut in this column just last week. But their sum total is generica:

“Where tech industry analysts look for expertise and information” https://t.co/8ChKFqzz1w -> Wow, no wonder the echo chamber is so generic
— Jon Reed (@jonerp) August 5, 2016

Is it just me, or do you get a groupthink vibe of smart peeps grazing at the same celebrity-greased trough? The survey takers over at Geekwire are part of this myopia; they should have asked these “analysts” how they do primary research, or their best underground source besides the obviousness of the Wall Street Journal.  And: if you pay good money to an analyst, do you really want them regurgitating “what I saw on TechCrunch or Forbes today?”
Officially off-topic
My Twitter pals liked Kip Keino’s Emotional Speech And Everything Else NBC Edited Out Of Its Opening Ceremony Broadcast (always good when the Internet can do us a solid). Speaking of Twitter pals, Tammy Powlas sent out a YouTube pick, Hot Fun in The Summertime. I’ll go old school and recommend the underrated 70s Aerosmith brilliance of Draw the Line and Kings and Queens. See ya next week…
Which #ensw pieces of merit did I miss? Let us know in the comments.
Most Enterprise hits and misses articles are selected from my curated @jonerpnewsfeed. ‘myPOV’ is borrowed with reluctant permission from the ubiquitous Ray Wang.
Image credit - Cheerful Chubby Man © RA Studio, Happy Children © Anna Omelchenko, Waiter Suggesting Bottle © Minerva Studiom, Overworked Businessman © Bloomua, at the seaside © olly - Fotolia.com - all from Fotolia.com.Disclosure - SAP, Oracle, Workday and Salesforce are diginomica premier partners as of this writing.Read more on: Cloud platforms - infrastructure and architectureDigital transformation - frictionless enterpriseHits and misses 