
diginomica hit: The bold pursuit of HR transformation, a two part series by Janine
quotage: “Cloud computing and the Software-as-a-Service model provide the tools to make this shift. Where companies are falling short, as ever, is not with the technology itself, but with the strategic and change management issues surrounding it. The technology may be transforming, but the processes and particularly the people can be hard to change.” – Janine
myPOV: The cloud HR market has reached a maturity level that provides clarity on cloud benefits but, as per Janine’s pull quote above, underscores that WonderfulCloudTechnology can’t save us from ourselves. In her two part series with Mike DiClaudio, advisory principal in KPMG’s people and change practice, Janine gets the context on a recent KPMG report, Cloud HR: the future belongs to the bold.
In part one, Tactical focus clouds vision for HR transformation, Janine looks at why cloud HR tech doesn’t deliver business results out of the box, and why tactical benefits aren’t delivery strategic value.  (Survey results showed only 24 percent of executives said their HR projects drive greater business value). In HR transformation and the pursuit of boldness, Janine gets DiClaudio’s take on the always-relevant problem of change management, and shares an HR transformation to do list, including why analytics is tricky, why collaboration can fall short, and yes – “be bold.”
diginomica three: my top three stories on diginomica this week:

Yahoo! plus Verizon equals…no-one’s entirely sure just yet – I still have no idea why Verizon bought Yahoo!. Glad Stuart is on the case, though it’s early days.
Retail e-commerce – fresh numbers and use cases from L’Oreal and Figleaf  – Derek’s L’Oreal CEO – ‘E-commerce isn’t the cherry on the cake, it’s the new cake’ looks at the numbers behind L’Oreals latest earnings, and digital-or-bust push. Jessica’s Figleaves changes the brief(s) on IT with Demandware illustrates how IT can shift to support strategy and not legacy coding. Check this: [We decided to become] “more of a retailer and less of a development house, procuring best of breed technologies and using them to the max, so that we can focus our IT efforts on niche areas where we know we have a point of difference.”
How the cloud helps Camfed empower girls in rural Africa – Phil with a cool story on how this worthy org, which serves more than a million girls in rural Africa, relies on Salesforce and, more recently, FinancialForce to streamline their IT burden and keep their focus in the field. And not to be under-estimated: better collaboration.
Upgrading your application software? Our primer – Brian’s got some salty tips for buyers, including “Don’t listen to the caterwauling from vendors,”  why third party maintenance should be a consideration, and how to avoid another IT debt pileup down the road.

Vendor analysis – from another slow summer newsweek in enterprise software:


NetSuite returns to the ancestral home as Oracle pays $9.3 billion for Larry Ellison’s ‘other’ cloud company – The rumor mill mercifully shuts down as Oracle ponies up. Stuart’s got the analysis, though any definitive views would be premature: “the devil will be in the detail. At present, there are huge unanswered questions.” Stuart’s burning issues include: how much leash Oracle will give NetSuite, the pricing implications for both firms, and two-tier skirmishes with SAP. You can expect more analysis as details emerge.
Can Sage pull off a cloud re-invention? Event coverage by Derek du Preez – Crossing the pond has been a weekly past-time for Derek, who did it one more time to track Sage’s cloudy makeover. Start with: Interview – Sage CEO Stephen Kelly on transitioning to a ‘pure’ cloud business. Then bot fever:  Sage takes on the bots challenge – believes finance is the “perfect use case”.  Then the closeout: Sage Summit wrap – is the turnaround plan coming together? Derek notes a familiar ERP vendor predicament: a “huge on-premise install base that may very well be stubborn about shifting to the cloud.” Partnerhips with AWS, Microsoft and Salesforce indicate a new cloud resolve. But for now, if Derek says your user event as a “Dreamforce feel” to it, that can’t be a bad thing.

A couple more vendor picks, without my running asides:

ServiceNow pushes into new markets as founder earns a break – Stuart
AdminX brings enterprise stamp of approval for Dropbox – Phil

Jon’s grab bag –  Barb continues her missives on the pursuit of digital intelligence in Marketing analytics – just how real is real-time? Historical analytics are table stakes now. But where do the vendors stand on real-time?  Me: we’re not there yet, but at least the marketing slide decks on “real-time” personalization don’t look like science fiction anymore. Kurt raises some issues that a big (guess who) analyst firm may have underestimated, in Infrastructure management is moving to the cloud – wireless networks prove the case.
Stuart’s nailed down the “productive rant of the week” award with Enough with the Brexcuses – we’ve got quite enough to worry about, wherein he takes media bottom feeders news chasers to task for linking Brexit to Lloyd’s most recent layoff around, when the layoffs are in fact an extension of the previously announced digital transformation and simplication programme that the bank has been engaged upon since 2014, which Stuart has amply covered in the past. But sure, let’s stoke the flames of economic uncertainty for headline grabs.
Best of the rest
Oracle Acquisition of NetSuite Is a Mixed Bag  by Frank Scavo
quotage: “NetSuite is one of the few vendors—cloud or traditional—that has a fully integrated solution for ERP, CRM, and e-commerce in one system. Oracle’s offerings to these markets is only satisfied through multiple products, such as Retek, a legacy retail industry package that Oracle acquired in 2005, and ATG, a well-regarded e-commerce platform that Oracle acquired in 2010. NetSuite’s newer integrated cloud solution is a much more attractive offering and it addresses a weakness in Oracle’s portfolio.”
myPOV:  The Oracle-NetSuite acquisition provided the fodder for several solid posts this week, as analysts attempted to see the writing on the wall before the paint is dry – no easy feat. In Scavo’s piece, he predicts a year for customers to wait until NetSuite’s place in Oracle’s roadmap is sorted, along with the sales force transition.  Scavo also sees some writing on the wall based on prior acquisitions. He sees Retek fading with NetSuite’s ecommerce solution front/center. Same goes for JD Edwards; Oracle has had a nice run with JDE, but Scavo sees NetSuite as the go-to SMB solution.
Scavo also raises the question of NetSuite’s cloud ERP competitors, who likely see bigger opportunities in the SMB market from here. FinancialForce has chimed in already, others are likely to follow. Meanwhile, the cross-sell opportunity into Oracle’s customer base is a intriguing perk on the NetSuite side.
Standouts:
More Oracle/NetSuite news analysis, from Holger and Wang – If you fancy a bit more, stylings from two Constellation Research stalwarts should do the trick. In News Analysis: Oracle’s $9.3B Acquisition Of Netsuite Is About Cloud Consolidation, Ray Wang’s recommendations for customers include this phrase: “Oracle has had a good history with post-merger integration.” And yeah – he’s right. I was expecting JD Edwards and Peoplesoft to be ground from existence years ago. That buys NetSuite customers time to make sense of it all.
Mueller chips in his patented hit-by-hit analysis, with the curiosity-inducing title, Oracle acquires NetSuite – Oddly consolidation means more options for customers. Mueller points out the not-so-tiny Wall Street part of this thing: Oracle now gets to claim another $1 billion in cloud revenue – handy in litigious times like these – and the days of bashing the cloud are now firmly in the rearview.
Honorable mention


Data Driven Software Buying Decisions – Yeah, a tad dense, but informative stuff on pulling all kinds of data – and networks – into buying decisions.
We are all outcome workers, whether we like it or not  – a spicy cocktail of career philosophy and sanity productivity tips for the modern worker.
Workday Plans for Platfora Revealed – Clarity from a recent briefing, including roadmap info Platfora customers will want to read asap (especially the part about, well, the on-premises sunset).
Lithium: Watchlist 2016 Elite, LiNC 2016…Total(ly) communities – Did you know Lithium has become a “very Zen company”? Yeah, neither did I. Maybe I overlooked this “community platform provider.”
IBM Secures Blockchain Services with LinuxOne – Another (secure) plank in the bridge from blockchain hype to enterprise viability.
Episode 18: Making education technology suck less with Edmodo’s CEO Vibhu Mittal – the latest from a cool – and (relatively) new – enterprise podcast series. I may be making an appearance shortly….
Defining Product Design: A Dispatch from Airbnb’s Design Chief – I’m not going to withhold this piece of long-form goodnews just because I had a crummy experience with Airbnb this week (I also had a good one, but the bad ones sure do stick).
Tesla and SolarCity agree on merger terms in $2.6 billion all-stock deal – Yes, the companies in question bragged about “cost synergies,” but I’ll try not to hold the use of the S-word against them.

Whiffs (and a non-whiff)
This is linkbait, of the “be very concerned for your own well being” variety. This is an evisceration – of someone who looks like he deserved it. This is an Olympic disaster in the making. This is a bad web site.
I’m as big a supersonic jet fanboy as they come, but I was left scratching my head at Boing Boing – not for the first time, when they hailed “Lawrence Azerrad’s magnificent Boing Boing classic feature “Flight of the Concordes!” “Magnificent classic” feature? What-the-hyperbole? It’s a cute little 847 word piece, albeit with some nice pics but with a notable absence of the poetic or the revelatory. If this counts as a classic I would hate to see an average Boing Boing piece. Then again I think I have – many times.
I’m going to cut the whiffs short this week for a decided non-whiff. Turns out that the person behind the TSA Twitter handle actually knows what they are doing. No, they aren’t fixing the TSA – nobody without a lot of power could fix that – but they are giving a master class in social media relations. Check this:

@saradioboy Our condolences, Walter. Passengers may transport crematory remains as carry-on property. Pls read: https://t.co/2MetVngjRS
— AskTSA (@AskTSA) July 15, 2016
Or:

. @AskTSA wondering if it’s OK to bring this mummified head of Jeremy Bentham as a carry-on item. Thanks! pic.twitter.com/cbX69kPjS9
— Sam Lavigne (@sam_lavigne) July 15, 2016
I hate the TSA a little bit less today. Well played.
Which #ensw pieces of merit did I miss? Let us know in the comments.
Image credit - Cheerful Chubby Man © RA Studio, Happy Children © Anna Omelchenko, Waiter Suggesting Bottle © Minerva Studiom, Overworked Businessman © Bloomua, at the seaside © olly -  - all from Fotolia.com.Disclosure - SAP, Oracle, Workday, NetSuite, FinancialForce and Salesforce are diginomica premier partners as of this writing.Read more on: Cloud ERP financials and supply chainHCM and the digital future of workHits and misses 