
diginomica hit: Questioning the cloud TCO mindset – by Phil
quotage: “The TCO comparison is a hangover from an old-school approach to IT purchasing that really has no relevance when transitioning to the cloud. Certainly, carry out your due diligence on costs and make sure you’re paying a fair price. But if you’re so unsure of the business value of moving to the cloud that you have to carry out detailed TCO comparisons then believe me, you’re looking at the wrong cloud system.”
myPOV: Some of you might think of Phil as an even-keeled, articulate cloud expert. But don’t be fooled, Phil has a curmudgeon side. And nothing gets Phil’s dander up like false clouds and tunnel-visioned TCO talk, which he dismantles in If you’re comparing cloud TCO, you asked the wrong question. The comment thread yields some nuances; Bill Kirwin writes: “Cost alone is a poor basis for making any decision. The trick is to get the procurement folks to see the business value.”
Bonus: Phil slices and dices some specifics on cloud adoption in 6 surprise wrinkles in enterprise cloud app adoption. This data comes courtesy identity and access management vendor Okta; Phil points to adoption trends we might not expect, while reminding of survey limitations to factor. (p.s. don’t get me started on surveys again…).
diginomica four: my top four stories on diginomica this week,

Tesla rises, and Uber – falters? – It was a tale of two automotive stories this week, with Den asking Do the monster lines at Tesla stores for the Model 3 signal a sea change in automotive? Or: is Tesla the (eventual) iPhone of the automotive market? Once burned by iPhone vs Blackberry skepticism, Den isn’t ruling it out. He’s got a different tack on Uber, as the title Did Uber screw the pooch with price slashing? makes clear. Den’s talked to his fair number of disgruntled Uber drivers, and the driver comments are revealing, as in “It is a race to the bottom. AS drivers make less money; only the more desperate will continue to drive. As a driver I have found that I have to be a lot more selective about how and when I drive in order to optimize my earnings to the detriment of customer service.” Another driver/commenter moved to Lyft. Me: if Tesla is a future iPhone, could Uber be… MySpace?
DVSA – a 10 week cloud use case – We’ve heard plenty on diginomica of public sector projects gone awry – not this one. How about ten weeks “to take a legacy outsourced system used by 60,000 users, transfer it to a new in-sourced cloud platform, and get it live over one weekend to handle 10,000 specific tasks on Monday morning?” Stuart’s got the story in DVSA passes the test as it transitions to the cloud in 10 weeks (p.s. DVSA = UK Driver and Vehicle Standards Agency).
Customer experience – it’s not about being great, it’s about being effortless – Wait – don’t delight customers? Nah, you can still delight them, its just that making things effortless is the real key. And, as per Barb’s latest, the stats back it up. Commenter Lou Altman says, “This is the first time I’ve seen this revelation articulated so clearly. It also emphasizes (hopefully with a sledgehammer) why your business policies and processes MUST, MUST, MUST be focused on the customer’s result.”

Vendor analysis, diginomica style. Here’s my top choices from our vendor coverage:

Exclusive – Bluewolf CEO on why the Salesforce services pureplay’s future is as part of IBM – Stuart’s got the sneaky big vendor story of the week, with IBM chasing where Capgemini and Accenture already plunged – headlong into Salesforce services/consulting.
Build 2016 – from potty-mouthed bot to pizza bot, ethical tech choices ahead – Fresh off the awkward timing of Tay spraying profane AI absurdity across Twitter, Microsoft’s developer show bravely forged ahead. As Stuart reports, Nadella didn’t back away from Tay (which I shish-kabobbed in this column last week), but doubled down on Microsoft’s bot-centric future this week.
Salesforce State of Marketing 2016 – it’s all about customer engagement – Vintage Lauchlan: “With Georgia having re-applied for admission to the 21st century through Governor Nathan Deal’s veto of discriminatory legislation, the Connections digital marketing conference is set to go ahead in May.”

Jon’s grab bag – Martin’s got me hooked with this “Babel Fish” motif, as in his latest, The Babel Fish becomes a paradox, as Druva demonstrates. The paradox? The flexibility of distributed systems – complicated by the proliferation of local databases. So much for limitless services and limitless possibilities… Jessica filed a neat use case, CF Trust opens up new technological front in battle for ‘a life unlimited’, about how a UK charity charity representing people with cystic fibrosis is using Skype for Business to drive virtual engagement (bonus: I managed to avoid a snarky Skype comment).
Den goes back to his “Accman” bailiwick for All’s well with the US economy – not so fast say CPAs, which shows an industry in transition, with the push for value-based pricing clashing with the persistent need for commodity work. Den sees a way forward with automation of commodity processes.
And finally, I’m biased, but I think Phil’s done a swell job of articulating Why does a tech media site have a focus on diversity? The diginomica team argues about just about everything – ask us – but this is one thing we agree upon. Now we have to execute… I trust you’ll hold our feet to the fire.
Best of the rest
 Microsoft Build analysis – “Hell freezes over” – again. By – several tarmac-loving reporters
quotage: “But the strange new camaraderie between Linux and Windows seems to have surprised even the people who were working on it. Dustin Kirkland, part of Canonical’s Ubuntu Product and Strategy team, shared his experience as a “sponsored guest” at the event. “That’s perhaps a bit odd for me, as I hadn’t used Windows in nearly 16 years.” – David Cassel
myPOV: The “hell freezes over!” hyperbolics are getting a bit blasé as the new Microsoft regime seems to deliver unlikely bedfellows at a promiscuous vigorous rate. Microsoft Build brought more eye openers to jaded reporters, as in the surprise Linux announcements Cassel noted above for The New Stack. Adrian Bridgwater covered Build from several angles; my fave was this cool piece on how a Blind Microsoft Developer Can ‘See’ Using Artificial Intelligence Headset. For an enterprisey flavor of Microsoft Build, check Holger Mueller’s event report (and other posts),which include on-site video reactions with Mueller and Constellation Research colleague Alan Lepo.
Other standouts
Adobe and Infor push ahead with digital conquests – Paul Greenberg comes through with another epic event report in Adobe doubles down, but it can’t just stay in Vegas. (Yes, his review of Adobe’s Digital Marketing Summit comes complete with his letter grade report card). The nutshell? Paul thinks Adobe has the best marketing cloud story, which doesn’t necessarily mean they have the best marketing cloud – yet. Adobe’s platform play is a work in progress, but Greenberg is overall bullish on Adobe. Elsewhere in digital pursuits, Cindy Jutras goes in-depth with New Group at Infor Helps Customers Navigate Digital Disruption. Jutras gives her take on a new group Infor has spun off from their Hook & Loop design agency, Hook & Loop Digital.
Honorable mention
Protecting identity could be key to enterprise security – Wait, you mean obsessing about breaking into an iPhone doesn’t solve our security woes? (As for creating terrible passwords, more on that in a jiffy)
Interview with Malcolm Frank of Cognizant: Davos and Digital – A view on digital market maturity and why bigger xervices players are making inroads.
Beyond the Buying Cycle – Good to see expansion of “informed buyer” framework beyond the formal buying cycle. I have a blog cooking on this topic that is started to overheat.
A Year After the Ellen Pao Verdict, Tech Still Gets Diversity Wrong – A reflection on events that few seemed to have learned from, from a reporter who was on the case.
Lessons Learned from Insurer AIA’s Initial Journey into the Cloud with Ariba – “The biggest part of any kind of rollout and transformation is the mindset change you’ll have to force through the organization” – Indeed.
Million-dollar babies – Silicon Valley – make that digital companies everywhere – are raiding academia for AI and robotics talent.
Brooklyn Microgrid: A Blockchain-based Platform for Locally Traded Electricity – Buckle your seat belts folks…
Whiffs
So the CIA decided to withdraw its email destruction proposal– amusing given that “unsend” or “recall” emails remain hilarious fictions. Emails never go away, they just come back to haunt you. Here’s a lesson as old as Enron: rather than “destroy” incriminating emails, don’t send them. Gee, I could be an intelligence advisor…
Speaking of password fun, via Den Howlett I got this bit of corporate tomfoolery: CNBC Asks Readers To Submit Their Password To Check Its Strength Into Exploitable Widget. I’m not sure I can add much to that – it’s like telling someone who stepped in a warm, stinky cow pie that they stepped in a warm, stinky cow pie (and yes, I resisted the urge to pull you a steaming picture of said pie).
And then we get to the sophisticated market analysis titled We’d Totally Pay Way More For Netflix. I realize this is low-hanging fruit for hits/misses, but man this stuff is ripe! This needs to be tackled from two directions: first, value. Yes, some folks would pay more for Netflix.
But I’d challenge those on Netflix in excess of two years who aren’t into Supernatural to make the Netflix argument. I’d argue for those deprived of TV that the HBO Go offering, with the full archive of all HBO shows, is the superior value. Netflix used to have the full Battlestar Galactica (the modern sci fi TV classic). Now it’s got… Dollhouse. Personally I get more these days out of Amazon Prime video, where I see far more recent movies of note. Granted I paid a ridonkulous amount of money to see Leonardo De Caprio blast through western hardships, but the point is: not all of us want a bunch of mediocre streams for a bargain price.
It’s not the time to drive up profits with plenty of deep-pocketed competitors on the move. The real value is inventory of proprietary, or fully-owned content. Ergo, Netflix’s original series push. In the cloud, adoption is a volume game. Adoption is the lock-in on which successful cloud businesses are built. And, as John Appleby put it to our Buzzfeed author on Twitter:

@jonerp@katienotopoulos Hold the press, subscription pricing is a trade-off between volume and unit cost.
— John Appleby (@applebyj) April 2, 2016
The commenters who got mad for revealing their little secret made my Monday. Yeah, Netflix, with all its data science initiatives, has no idea you’re willing to pay more for Friends reruns. Netflix has the user experience edge, but the content edge is up for grabs – and Netflix, to paraphrase my UK colleagues – bloody well knows it. A tip to the author: when you have to clarify to readers that your piece wasn’t native advertising, it’s time to sharpen your editorial blade. And with that, back to the snowy northeast… see you next time.
Most Enterprise hits and misses articles are selected from my curated @jonerpnewsfeed. ‘myPOV’ is borrowed with reluctant permission from the ubiquitous Ray Wang.
Which #ensw pieces of merit did I miss? Let us know in the comments.
Image credit - Cheerful Chubby Man © RA Studio, Happy Children © Anna Omelchenko, Waiter Suggesting Bottle © Minerva Studiom, Overworked Businessman © Bloomua, King Checkmate © mystock88photo - all from Fotolia.com.Disclosure - SAP, Workday and Salesforce are diginomica premier partners as of this writing.Read more on: Cloud platforms - infrastructure and architectureHits and misses 