
diginomica hit: Time for adult supervision at Domo? by Den
quotage: “They know how to spin a magical story that spellbinds the listener and for that I give them enormous credit. It also means the recipients of such tales of fantasy are often thrown off the scent of the story they should be following. Those stories were followed up by one of the most breathtaking pieces of myopic ‘journalism’ I’ve seen from TechCrunch in quite a while.”
myPOV: It would be easy to pile on Domo for its CEO’s bonehead “We have been lying about the opportunities ahead of us” confession (“A” for honesty though). It would be equally knee jerk to make excuses for one of the true darlings of the enterprise startup crowd, a BI vendor that is positioning itself as “the world’s first business cloud.” Ambitious? That’s part of Domo’s charm. Specifics? That’s the Domo rabbit hole a naive tech journalist can get bamboozled in.
You can call Den Howlett a lot of things, but naive tech journalist ain’t one of ’em. Here he resists the temptation to roast in order to weigh out the pros and cons in detail. Granted, he sneaks in a fart joke. But the key is not whether Domo screwed up their PR, but whether they are ready to backup their enterprise ambitions.
Den likes the micro-service hub potential, but for now, he’s got one eyebrow raised: “I challenge Domo to explain how any service can credibly be called a ‘business cloud’ that manages everything you need without access to the financial information.” Scott Cummings, one of our commenters who says he is heavily involved in enterprise sales, adds: “I have yet to meet a paying Domo customer, and those who have tried it have stated it is at best “frosting on the cake” The plot is already thick, my friends….
diginomica five: my completely subjective “top five” stories on diginomica this week,

Digital CTO warns against ‘cargo cult’ transformation – Phil gets into the nitty gritty of digital change with Lebara CTO Finbarr Joy. So what is the ‘cargo cult’? That’s a historical reference about airstrips (check Phil’s piece for more), but the gist is: learn from Amazon/Google/Facebook/Netflix (companies with first-gen digital architectures), but don’t expect to be just like them. 

Digital leaders hit out as North Carolina ‘out-bigots’ Georgia – Stuart continues his stellar coverage of tech company responses to retrograde legislation. As he says: “A breathtakingly ruthless shoving through of draconian legislation that would make House of Cards Frank Underwood proud.” All eyes on IBM, the state’s biggest tech employer…
Are bio-chips going to have a greater impact than wearables? – Didn’t think you’d get an enterprise view of bio-hackers did ya? Well, Cath’s got one, though she sees the impact as five to ten years out. Me: the answer to her question is an emphatic yes, but it may take a generation – and a couple more Justin Timberlake sci-fis – to get used to chips under our skin.
Digital reinvents recruitment – for the third time! – As someone who was managing a recruiting firm when the first wave crushed us, I read Phil’s piece from HR Tech Europe with interest. Teaser: artificial intelligence is involved.
Apple and healthcare – a marriage made in heaven or hell? – And who better than Den to answer? Though it’s not clear which way this marriage will go yet (the hell side would be if data privacy got pummeled/hacked/exploited).

Vendor analysis, diginomica style. Here’s my top choices from our vendor coverage:

Have we passed the digital tipping point? Accenture says, ‘yes’ – Stuart with a two-fer on Accenture. As for the tipping point, the interesting piece is the debate over in-store versus digital experiences. This one isn’t settled yet. See also Stuart’s Digital drives 24% profit leap at Accenture.
Apttus customers find sales efficiency boosts deal size – Phil with an update on quote-to-cash cloud vendor Apttus, the Salesforce-native ISV, and the potent impact automation has on the sales process.

A couple more vendor picks, without my running banter:

Salesforce driving into Europe on Kroes control (Stuart)
Next continues to invest in multi-channel, but faces ‘toughest year since 2008 (Derek)

Jon’s grab bag – Martin reports live from the UK Cloud for Digital Governance conference in Government cloud – in the end it’s about people, informed by the field lessons of public sector cloud veteran Rebecca Kemp. Den continues his analysis of Amazon’s havoc-wreaking ways in Amazon to UPS, USPS and FedEx – it’s your turn next.
Den’s also got a cranky view on Twitter’s ten year mark that, if you sniff closely, has the whiff of nostalgia beneath its crusty exterior. Finally, we continue our series on diginomica’s new look and reader priorities with An advance Easter egg for our avid readers. Granted, that particular egg is no longer fresh with Easter in the rearview, but we hope you enjoy our views behind what we do. As always please vent your spleen directly below – or heck, anywhere you want, just press the red button on the left – and go.
Best of the rest
 A CFO Success Story: Vinay Mehra, CFO of POLITICO by Samuel Dergel
quotage: “I think there are 2 kinds of CFO – there are CFOs who are very financial-focused, and then there are CFOs like myself – CFOs who blend the financial and the non-financial data. What I have found in my career, what has made me successful is the fact that I am able to overlay the non-financial data with the financial data itself. So I can tell a story around what exactly is happening.” – Vinay Mehra
myPOV: If you’re tracking CFO issues, Samuel Dergel’s blog is a nifty place to hang out. Dergel, an executive recruiter, has figured out if you create specialized content and share it with love, good things happen – imagine that!. His weekly “CFO Buzz”- a handy roundup of CFO news and notes – is his most common post – but he also mixes it up with interviews like this.
This interview with Mehra brings out financial themes from old media to new media, non-profits, and leadership/team building. When you hear a CFO talking about addressing employee turnover and being a “cultural caretaker” of an organization, you know times are a changin’.
Other standouts

Constellation Research disrupts cloud events of all kinds – If you’re holding an enterprise cloud event, look out – Constellation is coming to disrupt, or, at the least, expertly chronicle the disruption. They fanned out like locusts butterflies – Holger Mueller hit the Google Cloud Platform inaugural event in San Francisco, filing two stories with videos (here’s his day two wrap). Google is pushing hard for the enterprise cloud; Mueller sees a mix of pros and cons. Meantime, colleague Doug Henschen continued his big data beat with Cloudera Takes to the Cloud, Highlights Industry Use Cases. Chris Kanaracus got to rekindle his love of the Dulles Airport (Washington D.C.) as he dropped in on OracleCloud World DC and filed this report.
Content and design thinking are eating the world (burp!) – Two posts on content and design impact. First Round published Content is Eating the World — Contently’s CEO on Winning at Marketing’s New Hotness. One demerit for gratuitous use of the word ‘hotness,’ but typical in-depth substance; I may riff on this one later this week. The User Testing Blog has its peaks and valleys, but is usually good for a couple high caliber pieces each week. This time it’s field views on design thinking, and tying that back to product: User-centered design thinking and the product lifecycle: an interview with User Defenders’ Jason Ogle. Particularly useful for one person UX design team who find themselves on a political/skills island.
SAP HANA Vora goes GA, SAP upgrades go… ok? – I thought SAP HANA Vora’s original announcement was lightweight and premature -but intriguing. Now that the product is GA, it’s shaping up promising – and a clear commitment to the combo of in-memory and Hadoop. Holger Mueller seems to feel the same way, judging by his blow-by-blow review of the SAP HANA Vora general availability announcement. Jelena Perfiljeva is an SAP Mentor and works for an SAP customer. She doesn’t blog often, but every time she blogs is a terrific mix of openness, humor, and practitioner credibility. Check out Chronicle of an SAP Upgrade Foretold. Bonus: good Forbes interview (gosh that was hard to type!) with Jonathan Becher, SAP’s Chief Digital Officer.

Honorable mention
Encryption Pioneer Phil Zimmermann Backs Apple in Fight With FBI – Yeah, this story wears me out too but it matters, so…
This Is What It Feels Like When A Robot Takes Your Job – OK, another well-flogged story but a new angle, a worker who gets replaced by an alogorithm “he’d unwittingly helped build.” Doh!!!
Introducing a New SaaS Metric: The Hype Factor – Not exactly a new metric, or, to put it better – should have been a metric all along.
Disrupting the wrong stuff – Ironically posted on TechCrunch, host of the “Disrupt” conferences. If this is a howl in the VC wilderness, then listen for my answering howl, somewhere in the east coast hills.
Requiem for Tay: Microsoft’s AI Bot Gone Bad – Relax, I’ll get to this in just a sec (see: Whiffs).
Whiffs
So a Woman’s home demolished after Google Maps error, but – meme alert – I’m not sure we can blame the machines for this one. Yes, Google Maps botched up compared with the correct maps from Apple, Yahoo and Mapquest. Shame the demolition company in question relied on Google Maps eh?
Swell of Google to send a letter of apology to the (former) homeowner. But seriously – what kind of demolition company blows out out whatever house Google Maps brings them to? I sure hope Google Maps doesn’t drop them off at the Smithsonian…
Not to be outdone, ESPN was eager to prove that they too can implement processes that leave room for poor human judgement. Violating their own “no politics” policy, someone at ESPN decided that riffing on Fidel Castro would be a nice break from boilerplate:

(Sportscenter deletes tweet calling Fidel Castro “Savior and Scourge”)
Where are the machines when you need them? Funny you should mention that: Microsoft’s got a new AI toy, the now-famous machine-learning-teenage-“girl”-tweetbot known as Tay, abruptly silenced by its corporate creator after a torrential storm of delightfully offensive tweets, many of them provoked by a subversive effort from Twitter users to draw Tay into inappropriate conversations, which Tay happily obliged – with all the verbal appropriateness of a teenage girl, or a boy for that matter.
Tay’s tweet gaffes were brutal, from pro-Nazi sentiments to racial insults. My fave, however, was the unequivocal iPhone endorsement:

(I kinda like Tay already).
Robert Scoble, who knows a thing or two about geeky AI gadget worship, rightfully scolded Microsoft for making beginner mistakes. Via The New Stack:
Some are saying this is an indictment of artificial intelligence. No, it’s an indictment of human beings,” [Scoble] wrote. “It’s also an indictment of what happens when you let garbage into your system. Inadequate filtering… It’s amazing to me that Microsoft didn’t realize this is a problem, especially after other systems have provided plenty of danger signals.”
Nobody seems to blame AI for this self-inflicted black eye. This is a definitive case of “Garbage in, garbage out,” courtesy the humans Tay was “learning” from. This was an indirect Twitter fail, underscoring the futility of Twitter’s efforts at improved “civility.” Heading towards presstime, I didn’t think I’d have a hot/contrarian take for you, but as it turns out, I do:
Microsoft should have never shut Tay off.
Tay wasn’t just gamed into misbehavior by mean hackers. Tay was a perfectly accurate reflection of the social herd, the degraded mob, the blissfully ignorant electorate. As such it was a wonderful corrective to all those “wisdom of crowds”  preachers of elevated techno-humanity. This infamous Tay interaction shows us everything we need to know:

Yup, Microsoft F’d up, but they unintentionally hit a cultural bullseye in the process. So hats off to Microsoft, for giving us the mirror we deserve. That’s a far more profound AI trick than anything Siri or Echo has ever pulled off. See you next time, Florida bound…
Which #ensw pieces of merit did I miss? Let us know in the comments.
Most Enterprise hits and misses articles are selected from my curated @jonerpnewsfeed. ‘myPOV’ is borrowed with reluctant permission from the ubiquitous Ray Wang.
Image credit - Cheerful Chubby Man © RA Studio, Happy Children © Anna Omelchenko, Waiter Suggesting Bottle © Minerva Studiom, Overworked Businessman © Bloomua, Loser and Winner © ispstock - all from Fotolia.com.Disclosure - SAP, Oracle and Salesforce are diginomica premier partners as of this writing.Read more on: Hits and misses 