
diginomica hit: Can cloud technologies save health care? A two part series by Narinder Singh
quotage: “How well these legacy solutions have done in helping the industry is a matter of perspective. Their performance relative to paper-based records has been positive but mixed — some acknowledging their impact and others seeing initial benefit paired with painfully slow advancement. Evaluating them against the apps we use as consumers has led to vitriol and cruel parody. 
Yet the true cost to the healthcare industry is more than just less-usable solutions or being one cycle behind in technology adoption. It has left the industry on the wrong side of a massive technology chasm.”

myPOV: It’s rare for a new contributor to nab the top spot in hits and misses. But in his special two-parter on the health care industry, Singh pulls it off. The quote above lays out the circumstance. In US healthcare — the cloud computing sequel, part 1, Singh makes the case for cloud computing, examining why cloud adoption by the healthcare industry has lagged. He outlines five steps to a cloudier health care future, including middleware, data infrastructure, and EHR (electronic health record) cloud migrations.
In part two, Singh shifts to look at the players who will dominate the healthcare cloud era, reviewing everything from “inverters” to “progressives” to “new deal digital” companies building cloud EHR anew. He doesn’t pick a clear winner, though I wouldn’t want to be in the “old money” category. Singh wraps with musings on how machine learning, genomic data, and other emerging data sets might transform health care. In this mix is a far better user experience, though I’d argue that the “health care experience” will be one of the toughest things to improve, raising issues far beyond what most UX designers are capable of. Lots to dig into here – get to it!
diginomica three: my top four stories on diginomica this week

Success of drones depends on global air traffic control system and overhauled regulations – Derek flies headlong into the drones issue (sorry) with his review of PwC’s drones study. Commercial opportunities contrast clash with regulatory barriers and privacy constraints. Derek points to one big sticky wicket: this is an international issue. Solving in one region with exposure in others won’t help much.
Enterprise analytics in disarray? Tableau, Qlik can’t catch a break, Palantir on the slide – The enterprise analytics market isn’t a cakewalk. Leadership fluctuations, Wall Street spankings, and flashy solutions in search of problems. Den tries to make sense of the dysfunction, as in: “Experienced consultants know that in framing questions, clients often go down a track that is sub optimal at best. Very often, clients cannot decompose the problem they’re looking at into pieces that are capable of rational analysis.”
Educating the University of York – How would you like to manage your team’s skill competencies and address ISO 9001 compliance with spreadsheet data? That was the labor-intensive predicament of the University of York, prior to their Cornerstone OnDemand cloud HR project. Stuart has the before-and-after.
Vue gets front-row seat to monitor audience appetite for blockbuster movies – Predicting movie success is an art form; predicting server capacity is an expensive pain. Jessica has the story of Vue, a Rackspace customer who switched to VMware-based Managed Virtualisation from Rackspace. Bottom line?  Take the  the guesstimation out of infrastructure planning. Scale up/scale down for the win…

Vendor analysis, diginomica style. Juicy vendor bits this week – here’s my top choices:

What I learned at FinancialForce Community Live 2016 – Den scored four video customer stories at the latest FinancialForce event. Lessons on implementing within six months, fusing financial and customer data, managing complexity and transforming global processes are some of the nuggets that await you.
At Inspire, Coupa extends spend management footprint – Phil hit the Coupa event in San Francisco, and came back with the story of how Coupa is extending its cloudy spend management footprint.
Intacct, RevRec, Workday – confusion or opportunity? – Brian kicked off a meaty two-part report card on Intacct (see part two here). 11,000+ customers and counting, Intacct is proving out the cloud accounting market. Brian unfurls this zinger; “All in all, it’s a good time in the cloud business applications and, surprising to some perhaps, the financials space. The only struggles I’m seeing are from older ERP vendors who are still fighting their own clumsy way to the cloud.“
Customer data lost as Salesforce US outage rumbles on with degraded performance – Stuart with a considered take on a serious issue.
SAPPHIRE 2016 – the preview – Yeah we’re here – with another contingent at NetSuite and/or ServiceNow. Den files an update – with a surprising view on a potential SMB emphasis. We’ll see, Den, we’ll see.
Oracle shows its CX cards in Vegas – a conference analysis – And yes, with Esteban Kolsky’s diginomica debut, we welcome another grouch crank curmudgeon seasoned contributor to the team. Will this be a one-off, or the beginning of something special? We’ll find out, but for now, check the Oracle CX review, Kolsky-style. Welcome!

Jon’s grab bag –  Mobile lip service is easy – getting it right is the hard part. Barb faces the questions in Mobile first, mobile optimized, mobile only – mobile confused? Diginomica’s been looking at the blockchain on a per industry/region basis of late, a theme continued by Den in Briefing Note – Finacle and the blockchain. It ain’t easy times for easyJet, but if this company can pull of a digital transformation it will speak volumes. Stuart’s got the latest in easyJet looks to digital differentiators as profits hit turbulence.
Best of the rest
 No special accolades this week, but here’s some standouts:
The Informed Data Lake: Beyond Metadata – In a position-paper styled blog post that (thanksfully) errs on the side of brevity, Neil Raden puts forth some useful views on the so-called “informed data lake.” What is this wet beast, you may be asking? Well, Raden thinks traditional data lakes are flawed, for a laundry list of reasons include backward-thinking, dirty data, poor security, and an analyst time sink. Sounds fun right? Raden puts forth an informed data lake for consideration, a lake that can be used across industries utilizing “graph-based data discovery and investigative analytics tools.” It’s not clear to me from the post which vendors, if any, are offering solutions that satisfy Raden’s requirements, but from the tone of the post it sounds like we’re getting closer – and if so that’s good news for BI-weary customers.
Apache Spark for Deep Learning: Two Case Studies – Nifty post from The New Stack on
“Hadoop MapReduce and young buck Apache Spark,” with use cases on the Spark side that demonstrate Spark’s appeal. Gist: MapReduce might be more flexible, but Spark can parse data “on order of magnitude faster.” Why bother? If you have real-time use cases like a recommendation engine, an order of magnitude faster sounds pretty intriguing. Another use case? An image recognition engine that can 60,000 handwritten digits in five minutes. These are early adoption scenarios for Spark/deep learning, but it’s worth a look. Also see: smallish article, biggish story, Amazon open sources its deep learning software.
Honorable mention
ASUG and DSAG Present Our View on Digital Transformation for the SAP Community – A milestone in user group collaboration as the two biggest SAP users groups forge a combined position on digital, a necessary precursor to any kind of SAP product position. I interviewed Geoff Scott of ASUG on this today and we got into a good back-and-forth – more to come.
Event Report – Salesforce Connections – Bringing together Builders and Studios for Marketing Success – Analysis anchored by the from-the-ground video recap.
Why designing for delight doesn’t always work – Punctures some design misconceptions. “You don’t know your customer”  (as well as you thought!) is a keeper, and special Jon Reed kudos for dragging Facebook’s much-maligned “Your Year in Review” feature through the design spank tunnel. Speaking of which:
Sometimes We Need Human Employees, Facebook Admits  – some Facebook twisting in the PR wind. But an interesting story on humans versus Facebook’s precious algorithms. I have a piece coming tomorrow that hits on some of this.
Whiffs
I like Host Analytics, and their CEO Dave Kellogg is one of the best CEO bloggers, but I got a kick out of a Host Analytics press release forwarded to me, which includes a buzzword ninja moment from Robert Kugel of Ventana Research, who calls for solutions with “better mental ergonomics” for users. Darn – gotta update those Buzzword Bingo cards again.
If there’s a whiff in this story, alas, it’s probably the customers that haven’t patched a known SAP vulnerability in enough years to have their systems plundered, but you gotta love The Register for letting loose with 36 idiots running SAP under attack after flubbing 2010 patch. I’m not going to condemn that as clickbait. I’m gonna give it my vaunted editors-who-don’[email protected]$ck award.
Most Enterprise hits and misses articles are selected from my curated @jonerpnewsfeed. ‘myPOV’ is borrowed with reluctant permission from the ubiquitous Ray Wang.
Image credits – Cheerful Chubby Man © RA Studio, Happy Children © Anna Omelchenko, Waiter Suggesting Bottle © Minerva Studiom, Overworked Businessman © Bloomua, Businessman Choosing Success or Failure Road © Creativa, Loser and winner – Loser and Winner © ispstock – Fotolia – all from Fotolia.com.
SAP, Oracle, Workday and Salesforce are diginomica premier partners as of this writing.
Image credit - Cheerful Chubby Man © RA Studio, Happy Children © Anna Omelchenko, Waiter Suggesting Bottle © Minerva Studiom, Overworked Businessman © Bloomua, Businessman Choosing Success or Failure Road © Creativa - all from Fotolia.com.Disclosure - SAP, Oracle, Workday and Salesforce are diginomica premier partners as of this writing.Read more on: Analytics planning and data analysisHealthcare transformationHits and misses 