
diginomica hit: 3 big data science trends that will change business software by Phil Wainewright
quotage: “Smart computers are no longer science fiction. Many of the industry’s leading names along with countless hot new startups have succeeded in harnessing the potential of data science.”
myPOV: This time it was Phil’s turn to blow out the numbers with a run down of three big data, or, more accurately, data science trends that seem to be sticking to the wall (meaning: actually providing value to enterprises, as opposed to keynote fodder). Those three are: predictive analytics, big data platforms, and everyday analytics.
I’ll buy that, though constructing a big data platform is not as easy as the brochures, and the requisite skills are not exactly sitting on corporate shelves either. I doubt Phil would disagree, knowing Phil he’s already got a post on this simmering.
diginomica five: my completely subjective “top five” stories on diginomica this week

Two HR goodies – Phil with a terrific HR event report, HRTech Europe: are you ready for the network economy? which paints a stark contrast between next-gen HR technology keynotes and the mundanity/backwards processes most attendees struggle with. Janine Milne chimes in with an HR public sector use case, ServiceNow helps UK university graduate to HR success.
CIO questions asked and answered – Charlie Bess pulled a neat trick: he attended an online event where they didn’t answer his submitted questions – so, he (fruitfully) answered them himself in The CIO’s opportunity to be a pioneer enabling business change.
Use case maestro Jessica Twentyman files a two-fer-one – With Stuart on a well-earned respite, Jessica came through with two customer stories this week, Fat Face turns its gaze on NetSuite to deliver customer convenience and Durham Constabulary uses Microsoft Dynamics CRM to make arresting insights.

Vendor analysis, diginomica style – Den wrapped up the Oracle HCM World coverage with Oracle HCM World – the pragmatic reality, wherein he asks: Can we get excited about Oracle from an HR perspective? His answer? A cautious ‘yes’, though caveats are noted. Meantime, Martin Banks pushed away from the “cloud is disruptive!” table with a  nuanced Microsoft piece, Cloud not defeating on-premise as Windows Server 2003 prepares to hit support buffers. Phil filed a nifty ServiceMax use case, Variations on a cloud theme for Inspecta field teams, and Brian Sommer profiled an HR upstart, Fairsail tacks into competitive, crowded HR waters.
Indiana/tech companies and diversity update – We had several updates since my foray into tech politics on dignomica. The two most notable, both by Derek: Tech industry’s campaign to protect Indiana’s LGBT community a success – RFRA fix agreed, and Infor CEO puts pressure on Arkansas to amend its ‘religious freedom’ bill, following Indiana backlash. Tech companies and diversity is a story to watch – I’m personally uncomfortable anointing heroes but it’s undeniable that tech companies have room to influence and got a result. Now for the long haul…
Jon’s grab bag – Den’s settling into San Diego and that means we can expect some meaty weekend ponderings, in this case: the future of work (Easter weekend musings: Holacratic or Jobsworth?). Count me as a Holacracy skeptic (not sure flat orgs can scale), but workplace culture in a world of virtualized work is a topic worth a ponder. Also enjoyed Derek’s Martha Lane-Fox’s vision for reclaiming the web is inspiring, but is it realistic?
Best of the rest
 Infor analyst day – cloud ERP transition taking hold? by Doug Henschen and Larry Dignan
quotage: “Phillips says Infor can sell SaaS ERP to C-level and line-of-business execs without worrying about also selling databases and middleware to IT as Oracle and SAP do.” – Doug Henschen
myPOV: Spicy article summary, no? Infor’s analyst day event coverage provided somewhat of a gut check on cloud ERP, with Infor going all-in with its messaging. It seems the “UpgradeX” program is working, with 1,600 of Infor’s SaaS customers having moved from on-premise versions, as per Henschen. One question is whether there will be more cloud gains in core ERP and industry apps, as opposed to the “edge SaaS” of CRM, HCM, and so on.
In Infor ramps cloud strategy, eyes next gen experience, apps, Larry Dignan had more quotage from Infor execs that brings that point home. Infor President Stephan Scholl: “The real opportunity is moving mission critical systems in the cloud. (Industries) are the biggest hold out.” A story to watch.
Other standouts
Cloudy thoughts and rants – Michael Coté does things his own way, so he’s not a SMAC guy or a “digital business” guy – he’s got a “software-defined business” terminology bandwagon going. In Betting on the Software Defined Business for growth, he ponders some cloud futures talk (though guessing he enjoyed the lobster bisque even more than the lunch convo).  Coté, now at Pivotal, makes his case for where the cloud market opportunity lies. Meantime, hot on the heels of his last readable rant (The Scapegoat Mentality) Esteban Kolsky’s got another one to digest, On Electrical Grids, Cloud, and What We Are Doing Wrong. I hadn’t compared the ineffeciencies of electricity to the problem of so-called “false clouds,” but Kolsky just did. Lesson: don’t build your own power plant!
IBM Doubles down on IOT, and launches Verse, their escape-from-email hell email client –  Doug Henschen had the story on IBM raising its IoT bet to the tune of $3 billion and a dedicated business unit (IMO: Softlayer landing the Weather Company’s business is the compelling part of this story, indicating the so-called multi-cloud customer appetite and also providing Weather Company data to IBM customers for their own data/IoT projects.
Also on the IBM tip, Constellation’s Alan Lepofsky, who has been on top of the Verse story from the pre-launch announce, has a Verse burning questions list now that Verse has launched (Lepofsky sees Verse as a big step up for IBM customers in terms of email + collaboration, but he’s not annointing it as best-of-breed just yet).
Honorable mention
Why aren’t there more women and minority leaders in HR? – Naomi Bloom tackles a critical question with no easy answers.
Big data opportunities and challenges are getting a bit clearer – Agreed – and it’s not often you see a post arguing that we need more marketing (albeit of the informative kind). Talent shortage is a biggie.
Microsoft Convergence 2015 lives up to its name – A post so comprehensive, a critique of Taylor Swift’s music is included (evidently Swift’s music made an unwelcome keynote background).
The Shut-In Economy – A different take on virtual work that rang a few bells with this virtual dude.
 
Whiffs
Yup, got some doozies for ya – how’z about Plagiarism guideline paper retracted for…plagiarism (the author who plagiarized has been an anti-plagiarism advocate and plagiarism victim in the past). Then: Australian disability conference not wheelchair accessible (Walk of shame for conference organizers – wow.)
And, drumroll…is it time to just get rid of April Fool’s Day entirely? (not my idea, I’m piling on). The messes have tainted the hilarity – like this law firm, which made the (admittedly boneheaded) move of sending an April Fool’s email banning email overnight in the interests of work life balance, which was not recognized as a joke by some employees, who praised the firm/learned the joke/got REALLY PISSED. The firm was forced to issue an apologize; they went with the wet noodle variety, saying, in essence, “We care about work/life balance but not enough to do anything about it, so plan on doing your TPS reports again this weekend.”
These colossal misunderstandings happen in the #ensw market also – take Phil Fersht of HfS, the reigning king of #ensw April Fools announcements, who issued a clever one this year, HfS announces its entry into the outsourcing advisory market, which included a hard-to-miss-unless-you-were-multi-tasking April Fool’s confessional at the bottom of the post. NOPE – not enough – he had to issue a clarification post the next day (HfS officially exits the sourcing advisor business (even though we were never in it in the first place). Another scary point: I’m thinking his proposed fake advisory business model might actually work, but that’s another topic.
Yeah, our grasp of satire is waning (at least in America, Patton Oswalt just made fun of this and the related political correctness servitude on Twitter), but the real issue is attention-span disorder and social scrolling that encourages a headline glimpse and a quick browse through the text, but not enough to grok. And: information worker overload. We’re reading tons, but as Fersht learned from those who said “congratulations!”, we’re not parsing very much.
Of course he should know – he’s been out in front on this issue (2015: Time to salvage yourself from your digital wreckage of a work-life). Bottom line: do an April Fool’s post by all means. But plan your apology and/or clarification post for April 2 also.
Officially off-topic
The flip sides of innovation: on the one hand, very bad intrusive shite coming our way via the creepy aggressiveness of drone advertising, but on the other, Internet radio’s potential to save the soul of modern radio (if only a business model will stick – live curated music is what the world needs – trust me).
Flap your career wings: How to become a data scientist for free (useful resources even for the dabbler), and some cautionary and unsparing career advice from the Ad Contrarian (“The greatest source of misery was status anxiety“, and “The greatest freedom is not having to give a shit,” and, the line that gave me goosebumps, “I don’t replay the successes; I replay the dishonor.”
TV: A fine tribute to Mad Men’s television impact by Alan Sepinwall, timed with release of the final seven episode season. Music: I know that the long-running stealth songcrafters in  Strung Out are resolute and happy toiling in “just famous enough” status, but damn, they just keep on doing it. Not just the best punk/metal fusion band of all time, but the band that always makes we want to try harder/write better, and never waver. Thanks guys. (YouTube samples from recent albums:  Blueprint for the Fall, Tesla, City Lights). See you next time.
Which #ensw pieces of merit did I miss? Let us know in the comments.
Most Enterprise hits and misses articles are selected from my curated @jonerpnewsfeed. ìmyPOVî is borrowed with reluctant permission from the ubiquitous Ray Wang.

Image credits: Cheerful Chubby Man © RA Studio, Happy Children © Anna Omelchenko, Waiter Suggesting Bottle © Minerva Studiom, Overworked Businessman © Bloomua, King Checkmate © mystock88photo – all from Fotolia.com
Disclosure: SAP, Workday and Salesforce are diginomica premier partners as of this writing.

Read more on: Best of archivesHits and misses 