
diginomica hit: Salesforce’s stand against legalised bigotry deserves credit – updated by Stuart Lauchlan
quotage: “Bigotry is bigotry even when it’s dressed up in a cloak of so-called religious freedom. Full marks to Marc Benioff, CEO Salesforce and other digital leaders for taking a stand.”
myPOV: Stuart blew the doors off our web servers with this take-no-prisoners review of Indiana tech companies – led by Salesforce.com’s Mark Benioff – who committed to reducing planned investments after Indiana’s passage of its “Religious Freedom Restoration Act.” Since the initial flurry of stories praising the tech companies, I’ve seen some snarling critique that this was a PR move at best.
But I think the reason Benioff’s words resonated, and why Stuart’s piece stood out, was the palpable conviction behind the editorial. Yes, 20 other states have similar laws, and yes, there is plenty of hard thinking to do about doing business in oppressive regimes globally, but as Stuart points out, visible stands like these can also lead to negative financial repercussion for said business. That’s why this discussion carries weight beyond PR – it’s not often we get a glimpse of what capital-accumulating tech companies actually stand up for, besides accumulating said capital. Bonus:  Stuart filed a weekend update, Is tech pressure on Indiana’s bigots charter paying off?
diginomica four: my completely subjective “top four” stories on diginomica this week:

Outsourcing at the as-a-Service crossroads – new contributor Charlie Bess asks if the “as-a-service” market will make the same mistakes as the outsourcing market did? (Me: yes, unless there is a shift away from a cost control mindset).
The UK’s smart meter rollout is a government “IT disaster waiting to happen” – Derek fires off a flare regarding a project that seems doomed from the get-go. Considering this rollout is set to cost £10.9 billion, I’d say the time for some navel-gazing is now. (The list of concerns is long, and includes the dreaded hacking vulnerabilities).
Remastering the digital business one API at a time – Wherein Martin Banks is pleasantly surprised that Apigee’s “I Love APIs” conference was light on tech wonkery and heavy on business implications, leading Banks to asset that businesses that can’t re-oriented their IT around the customer are headed for a “bleak future.”
Meinestadt.de pilots Hadoop platform in search of individualised customer experience – Speaking of the customer experience, voila – Jessica’s reveals why Meinestadt.de is opening up its classified apps platform to real-time customer inquiries, and the tech behind the mission.

Vendor analysis, diginomica style – Straight off the tarmac, Den’s posted his take on Oracle HCM World, Mark Hurd, co-CEO Oracle: welcome to Nobody Cares, a follow-on to his preview piece, As Oracle HCM World looms. Agresso and Coda – we hardly new ye. Phil’s got the story on Unit4’s data-science-infused future in Unit4 retires legacy brands in ‘people platform’ launch.
Den’s got the lowdown on FinancialForce (FinancialForce raises $110 million as it goes for growth – “now it’s time to execute.”) Based on the Plex analyst event, Den also has a story on how Plex is pushing the manufacturing intelligence and wearables envelope, Intelligent machines – the Plex dimension.
Jon’s grab bag – Derek put the Kleiner Perkins mess lawsuit in a broader context (prior to the verdict) in Silicon Valley sexism on trial, with top firms in the firing line (Den also did a weekend riff on the Kleiner Perkins verdict). Meantime, Den put TechCrunch on his wee lap and gave them some good ‘ol fashioned discipline in Sunday Roast: corporate travel WONT be disrupted by the sharing economy. (Dude stole one of my whiffs, but I don’t even care, that was epic!).
Best of the rest
 Ellen Pao verdict fallout – by every scribe with a laptop in Silicon Valley
quotage: “This trial resonated with many women in Silicon Valley, because they perceive the playing field isn’t level when it comes to getting a job at a tech company, earning a promotion, securing funding or working at a VC firm. And I’m pretty certain the outcome of this trial will not change their minds.” – Michelle Quinn
As Quinn put it, the plaintiff wasn’t perfect, and neither was the defendant. While the verdict was a defeat for Pao specifically, it’s not clear it was a defeat for women in Silicon Valley. The issues will be hotly debated, but that is better than sweeping-under-carpet. Here’s my capsule reviews of a few takes:

Quinn: What the Ellen Pao verdict means for Silicon Valley – Thinks a “significant step” for “future Ellen Paos” has been achieved (the ugly comments on the piece are a counter to that optimism, however.)
A Fish Is the Last to Discover Water: Impressions From the Ellen Pao Trial – Another female exec (former President of Yahoo) reflects. (LOVE that the author pulled her daughters from school to hear the final day of deliberations. Forget “take your daughter to work” – it’s  “take your daughter to see the BS that she will need to overcome in order to shine day”.
Ellen Pao Disrupts How Silicon Valley Does Business – Starts optimistic but ends on a (properly) cautious tone on how much change will result.

Other standouts
Oracle HCM World: fresh takes off the griddle – key point by Vinnie Mirchandani in Oracle HCM World: “Fracking” for Talent – digital change is dead in the water without skills development and savvy recruiting (sounds like the emphasis on strategic discussions versus tech paid off).  Holger Mueller also chronicled his instant reax in First Take – Oracle HCM World Thursday Keynote – off to a good start, wherein he makes a point that the presence of Mark Hurd shows Oracle putting more weight behind its HCM events (and strategy0 than some of its competitors.
Ruminations on Facebook’s dominance (and the media implications), plus the “shut-in economy” – two good reads, one a monster of the long form, Facebook hosting doesn’t change things, the world already changed, only it’s not really about Facebook, it’s about the state of online media and the problem of attention. Well, attention is only a problem if you are trying to sell something, which is to say, most of us. Had to chuckle at The Shut-In Economy – never used that phrase but indeed it took some takeout to make it happen. The work-at-home crowd and service providers who serve them – yeah, that’s the future for many.
Honorable mention
What Machine Learning Can and Can’t Do – Why can’t we have more informative data sciences pieces like this? Probably because a machine can’t write ’em (yet). See what I did there?
With Manufacturing ERP, the Best UI is No UI – Insights on UX in a manufacturing context, the ERP/manufacturing gap, and a bit on what Plex is doing about it.
Oracle Increases Runtime Database License Fees for SAP Customers – ASUGnews.com breaks a story that may provide SAP with a golden opportunity to boost HANA adoption.
News Analysis – Pivotal makes CloudFoundry more about multi-cloud – A definitive dissection of a press release.
Worst Case Scenario for Technology Buyers – No Decision – It may not be the worst case scenario (had a brief Twitter battle about that), but it’s a swamp bog to avoid at any rate.
Content Marketing ROI Starts With A Strong Business Case – A useful primer for those who feel like seeing a return on their expensive content investments someday.
Whiffs
So I’m not sure why the owner of Legal Seafoods is squandering huge coin trying to convince us that his 20+ identical seafood restaurants are not a chain. Evidently, owner Roger Berkowitz has some issues in the “can’t have it both ways” department. Again the commenters pinned it down: “The day Legal Seafoods started making chowder in a central commissary to deliver to each “outlet” in a plastic bag is the day it became a chain,” or, the more concise, “Tourist Trap.”
Oh, and this intercepted TSA document on how they spot “terrorist” behavior is cause for concern. Good luck flagging passengers who seem to be “arriving late for flight” – yeah, that definitely narrows it down. Not sure about the “bobbing Adam’s apple” either. Critics say “the program suffers from lack of science and simple inconsistency“. I might have just said “the program suffers.” Too bad we have to suffer the program.
Finally, from Buzzfeed we have Why Is Uber New York Funneling Thousands Of Drivers To This Training Class? Uber is involved in Olympic-caliber gymnastics to get its drivers into training classes without having them classified as employees. From what I know of the swell folks at the Internal Revenue Service, Uber is really pushing the limits of the independent contractor definition. For all their headline-grabbing PR meltdowns, this small classification issue could be the one that hurts them financially. I won’t spoil the pungent comments for you, have a look-see.
Officially off-topic
With all the fuss over Ellen Pao/Kleiner Perkins, we missed the big tech gender story of the week: The RSA conference is banning booth babes. I’ll try to fight through the crippling waves of nostalgia for booth babes gone wayside…(bonus: best blog pic I’ve seen in a long time).
On a heads-up note: Google plans to penalize web sites in search results that fail their mobile-friendly test (starting April 21). Here’s the link to see if your site will thrive or be relegated to obscurity. More happy web conglomerate news: Facebook’s Internet drones are pretty darn cool – massive wingspan and Internet to remote geographies for the win.
Any driver who looks longingly at the carpool lane can appreciate this imaginative (but failed) endeavor to successfully “carpool” with a cutout of the “most interesting man in the world” buckled up in the passenger’s seat. Finally, if you’re a fan of brutal takedowns for the greater good, check out Deadspin’s
Seth Davis Is Still Promoting His Mom’s Hoax Cancer Cures. Yup. Blammo.
I still can’t decide if the planned X-Files comeback with creator and cast is a really good thing or a bad idea with traction. You? Finally, your Netflix tip; the family crime drama set in the Florida Keys, “Bloodlines,” is a good slow burn. Sometimes it feels like the implosion of a family in slow motion but the scenery is fabulous, and the nuances are a welcome contrast to the smugness of “House of Cards.” See you next time.
Which #ensw pieces of merit did I miss? Let us know in the comments.
Most Enterprise hits and misses articles are selected from my curated @jonerpnewsfeed. ìmyPOVî is borrowed with reluctant permission from the ubiquitous Ray Wang.

Image credits: Cheerful Chubby Man © RA Studio, Happy Children © Anna Omelchenko, Waiter Suggesting Bottle © Minerva Studiom, Overworked Businessman © Bloomua, Loser and Winner © ispstock – all from Fotolia.com
Disclosure: SAP, Unit4, Plex, FinancialForce and Salesforce are diginomica premier partners as of this writing.

Read more on: Best of archivesHits and misses 