
diginomica hit: Zenefits – after the crash will it burn or rise like a phoenix? by Brian, Den, and Phil
quotage: “Time will tell if Zenefits has already peaked.Few tech companies get second chances. They peak and then they fade away. Sure, they can try to re-invent themselves but the original magic or spark is often gone.“
myPOV: Now that the smoke has cleared from the last round of Zenefits rulings, leadership changes and shenanigans, it’s time for our crack team to brave the fumes and see what’s left standing. A common theme: a startup in a high growth pressure cooker runs smack into regulatory obstacles; shortcuts ensued, and a steep karmic price has been paid.
After a timeline review that includes the ADP dispute, Phil, Den and Brian all weigh in on where Zenefits goes from here. They each raise different issues, from leadership to code quality to the problem of pressure-to-grow. Each take is worth reading but let’s just say their collective views do not make me want in on the next (hypothetical) funding round.
diginomica five: my completely subjective “top five” stories on diginomica this week,

Data, data everywhere…but barely a drop of insight – Janine with a nifty use case on shared services firm Tanfeeth, which went from data everywhere and insights nowhere to a better place, addressing Excel chaos and input from ten key data sources.
Bosch makes IoT Cloud play to tap into digital transformation – Stuart assesses the latest example of a company making its own proprietary IoT play: “The advantage for companies like Bosch – and GE, Caterpillar and so on – is of course their proximity to the devices. Unlike the likes of Amazon and Google, they own the commodity kit that’s going to be doing the talking.” Interesting…
Field service clouds and the problem of the human touch – Maxwell raises some potent questions in Field service organizations – the human touch, examining how automation and cloud-based field tech has advanced the industry and cut costs. But has it solved the service experience by cutting humans out of the loop?
Digital Hijackers – the rising threat of ransomware – Ransomware makers are diabolical digital leeches. Still, Ransomware is no joke – especially when you’re unprepared. Kurt explains which organizations are most vulnerable, and what to do about it.
Urban Outfitters – death of the retail store greatly exaggerated – Stuart’s got an omni-channel surprise for you, kind of. The CEO of Urban Outfitters is convinced that the good ol’ “retail shopping experience” isn’t going away, even as Urban Outfitters doubles down on omni-channel spend.

Vendor analysis, diginomica style. Here’s my top choices from our vendor coverage:

City Year puts usability and process front and center with cloud financials – Den files an instructive Workday Financials use case.
Recruiter SThree replatforms business apps to Salesforce – Phil’s got a replatforming use case from SThree, which moved its business apps from on-premise Siebel CRM (and an Oracle database) to Salesforce’s Force.com, along with a full helping of Heroku cloud PaaS.
Salesforce Wave and the future of enterprise analytics – Phil picks up on an analytics theme also raised in Den’s Workday use case: “No quick wins here, but a big prize in the long haul for whoever figures out the best way to deliver enterprise analytics.”

A few more vendor picks:

Will the IoT will be the second coming of the Time-And-Motion-Man? (SAP) – Derek
Aaron Levie – boxing clever with who you know, as well as what you do – Stuart
A tale of two HPs – the CEO progress reports – Stuart
NetSuite buys IQity for manufacturing data smarts – Phil

Jon’s grab bag – Time with Google AI’s much-hyped faceoffs with a GO master, Phil’s got your robotic ruminations in I, Human – our robo-enhanced future starts now, and his outlook is optimistic (“augmented imaginations” – yikes!). Den crunched some diginomica analytics on two very different stories in When the data might be misleading – a Facebook tale. Finally, Derek adds to our recent pieces on diversity in business with GDS director bans staff from speaking at events that aren’t diverse enough.
Best of the rest
 I’m not singling out a piece for special kudos this week. You know what that means: get busy blogging people! If you spotted a good one I missed while on the road, do tell me. My feeds are painstaking but not perfect. Here’s a slew of honorable mentions: 

News Analysis – Hewlett Packard Enterprise Announces New Machine Learning as a Service Offering – Haven to Azure – Always enjoy the Holger Mueller press release blow-by blow, breathing life and, yes, the occasional whiff of insight into these tired promo vehicles.
Thoughts on Gender and Radical Candor – Another worthwhile long-former from First Round Review, with some much-needed frank talk on loaded topics such as telling women they are “too aggressive.” (By the way, I got the skinny on First Round Review at Influitive’s Advocamp show, you can check that out in First Round Review and the vindication of long-form content).
Services world is fun again – Vijay Vijayasnakar found services/consulting getting stale, but now it’s fresh again. He credits discerning customers: “they are pushing vendors harder, and rightfully so.” But he questions the travel burden of face time when virtual technology is so effective. Betting there is an “amen!” out there from you weary road warriors out there.
Productivity, Enterprise Software, and The Economics of Digital Disruption – I’m not an “inflection points” fanboy, and found this wildly optimistic at points, but still – thoughtful stuff.
Cisco’s CliQr cloud purchase is bad news for enterprises – I always enjoy a good whine about innovation-by-acquisition.
Bitcoin and diversity – I’m not sure the two threads (Bitcoin and diversity) got tied together properly, but still an interesting read.
Virtual Reality Will Change Business as We Know It – More dopey utopianism, but I liked the industry-by-industry contributions. Note the article was careful to say business would change – not that any of us would make more money.
Facebook is eating the world – If you’re looking for a sober, heavy-handed piece on how Facebook is doing a number on journalism, this is your next stop.

Whiffs
The facts behind this story are inconclusive, but I sooo want to believe it: WV lawmakers suffer stomach illness after drinking raw milk to celebrate legalizing raw milk. Dunno about you, but I enjoyed Google’s self-driving car crashing into a bus (no one was hurt), but my buzz was ruined by this ominous defense: “The firm admitted the crash would not be its last – while humans were allowed on the roads.”
So do you think it’s a whiff when NBA sharp shooter Steph Curry does his signature thing and runs back before he knows if his shot is going in? The sports blogosphere gloats in this show of “disrespect” to Curry’s opponents, but isn’t the real disrespect to his teammates, who may lose a possession if Curry misses and he’s not there for the rebound? Curry is the best shooter I’ve ever seen in my decades watching basketball, so we may be best off enjoying the spectacle.
Oh, and I just found this tweet I never sent, about my pals at United Airlines: “This is the 10th time United has said “this is a very full flight.” Is that a criticism, an apology or an excuse?”
I enjoy fivethirtyeight.com, the Nate Silver-run blog that is owned by ESPN. But the fact remains that they recently got Bernie Sanders’ Michigan victory completely wrong. Now, they were not the only ones to miss – pretty much every pollster did. But they should not be comfortable they were part of the groupthink either. The anatomy of failure was entitled Why The Polls Missed Bernie Sanders’s Michigan Upset.
This was a golden chance to earn credibility by simply saying “Why WE missed Bernie Sanders’ Michigan Upset.” When you’re trying to be the best, you should take no solace that others made similar mistakes. Own the pain. Nate Silver wouldn’t even have a web site (at least, not one he sold to ESPN for FU money) if he hadn’t been incredibly accurate regarding Obama’s win. If you accept the credit, you must take the blame. Do it head on – without the tap dancing please.
Polling doesn’t matter to me. If anything, it does harm by encouraging passivity. But none of us should take comfort that we jumped off the same cliff at the same time. We need to ask how we can deviate enough to come to a different stance, and then own it whether it’s right or wrong. Then you get up and try again. The ones I worry about are the ones who can’t do a ruthless anatomy of their missteps. FiveThirtyEight tiptoed near the truth. I can only hope behind the scenes they attack their own sacred algorithms – err, I mean cows.
Which #ensw pieces of merit did I miss? Let us know in the comments.
Most Enterprise hits and misses articles are selected from my curated @jonerpnewsfeed. ‘myPOV’ is borrowed with reluctant permission from the ubiquitous Ray Wang.
Updated evening, 3/15/2016 with no altered meaning but added color to the Zenefits, randomware and polling whiffs sections.
Image credit -  Cheerful Chubby Man © RA Studio, Happy Children © Anna Omelchenko, Waiter Suggesting Bottle © Minerva Studiom, Overworked Businessman © Bloomua, King Checkmate © mystock88photo - all from Fotolia.com.Disclosure - SAP, Workday, Oracle, NetSuite and Salesforce are diginomica premier partners as of this writing.Read more on: Hits and misses 