
diginomica hit: Privacy and surveillance on both sides of the pond – needed reforms or swamp pit? by Martin, Den, and Derek
quotage: “Acknowledging the increasingly accepted wisdom that some security breaches are inevitable, he recommended that users make sure they know the minimum level of key data that their business requires to stay in operation, and then defend that really well.”
myPOV: In a series of privacy/security run downs, the diginomica team looked at some hard questions under the current news.  On the UK side, Martin culled some practical bits at the InfoSecurity conference from “the GCHQ’s main man,” as in the quote above (Cyber-security mission briefing from the spook-in-chief). Derek takes the legislative angle in Rushed UK surveillance laws face legal challenge by rogue MPs  – a story that is sure to need a follow up given that this legislation was rushed in a manner that does a disservice to needed debate.
Derek then contrasts with the revised Patriot Act  “USA Freedom Act.” It’s not often that I see the U.S. debate on privacy described as transparent, but I get the point. Den takes the U.S predicaments a bit further in Post USA Freedom Act, what next for privacy and surveillance? wherein he asks a key question about the business models of Facebook and Google, an arguably diabolical exchange of “free services” in exchange for personal data monetization (Facebook fanboy Robert Scoble disagrees, though his argument about opting into personalized services is worth a skirmish).
Den then shifts to the mounting concerns of SaaS providers on data privacy issues, and other enterprise reverberations. These issues are volatile to say the least, so expect further updates.
diginomica four: my completely subjective “top four” stories on diginomica this week

Another terrific two-fer from Jessica Twentyman – let’s start with a frank, exclusive chat with the CEO of social shopping tools company Bazaarvoice, now that the US Department of Justice case is behind them (Bazaarvoice CEO Gene Austin – “We shouldn’t be here, but we are here, so let’s move forward.”). Then Jessica turns her attention to Port Coquitlam, where a decision to move from “legacy ERP” to cloud ERP, Unit4 style, is the topic du jour.
Cloud procurement: a use case analysis from Phil Wainewright – While at the Coupa Inspire user conference, Phil surfaced this interesting use case (Avalon Health Care controls costs with cloud procurement). Alas, not all use cases bring hard numbers, but this one did – to the tune of a claimed $5.5m annual savings from putting all its spending through Coupa’s cloud procurement system. As Matt Damon once said, How do you like them apples?
Gartner issues its top ten trends for government, Stuart deconstructs – So Gartner just published its Top 10 Strategic Technology Trends for Government in 2015 briefing, and I can think of no one better than digital government advocate/critic/instigator Stuart Lauchlan to slice and dice it. Stuart offers a snarky cold shower trenchant take on each finding (I’ve now used “trenchant” in two straight columns, I’ll go for three next week). I get the sense Stuart appreciates Gartner’s optimism, but when it comes to daunting obstacles such as financing the digital renovation of archaic buildings and breaching the digital divide to underserved populations, I can understand why Stuart’s views are cautionary at times.

Vendor analysis, diginomica style – The Autodesk/NetSuite partnership gives the #ensw market a bit of a stir; Martin ponders the possibilities in Autodesk, NetSuite – chaos theory in action? Meanwhile, Derek took in DocuSign’s London event and offers his keynote analysis in DocuSign’s EMEA chief talks scaling, making industry friends and why DTM is a no-brainer.
If you’re wondering about DTM, it’s yet another buzzword heading to an analyst briefing near you – Digital Transformation Management is the purported name of this new game. Basically it’s the move from e-document signing to the end-to-end digital workflow process. Phil wraps this week’s vendor coverage with a Coupa news breakdown in Coupa pushes mobile and machine learning in new release.
Jon’s grab bag: Janine hooked me from the get-go with “Employees worldwide are increasingly fed up with their experience of work and need to be given the right HR tools.” Sounds about right, but what to do? Find out in her piece, Employee work satisfaction levels need new HR engagement tools. Bonus points to Janine for problematizing the word “engagement”.  If you want another HR fix, Stuart parses some new data in Digital platforms offer a talent for GDP growth, says McKinsey (he’s right to raise the question of the disruptive “Uberization” temp workforce).
Phil profiles an innovative B2B startup in Viewpost turns paper checks digital to speed B2B payments (yep, Viewpoint is trying to ensure you never have to write a paper check again in the U.S. – a noble pursuit indeed). Charlie Bess rounds out the grab bag with the field-tested An introduction to architecting the digital enterprise. As Bess urges: resolve those iterative paradoxes!


Best of the rest
 The future of work is… jobless or autonomous? by A few forward thinkers
quotage: “Workers of a certain age may recall that long ago, people once divided their waking hours into two parts: work and life. At quitting time, Fred Flintstone would slide down the tail of his dinosaur with a “Yabba dabba doo!” That was before technology put the office on vibrate inside everyone’s pocket, and before economic upheaval decoupled work from the security of a full-time job. Today, an estimated one-third of the labor market is made up of “contingent” workers—freelancers, contractors, and the self-employed.” – Andrew Rice
myPOV: I’m sick of writing about robots; you’re (probably) sick of me ranting about robots. But the future of work seems to pry stellar content from the blogosphere; witness this outstanding piece of long-form, Is This The Office of the Future or a $5 Billion Waste of Space? Quoted above, this piece is about the author’s trial run with WeWork. But it’s the first piece I’ve read that looks at the shared space movement not from an economic view, but a cultural one. If workers become contractors, wouldn’t a different freelance culture be part of the bargain?
It was only a couple weeks ago I urged someone to make the optimistic case for robots and jobs. Job done, by Steve Denning, in The ‘Jobless Future’ Is A Myth. Denning doesn’t appreciate the “apocryphal vision of a ‘jobless future;”, so he systematically skewers one recent doomsday book. Denning thinks our job problems, while serious, are solvable, and he’s armed with stats to prove that things are not as bleak as the end times shills would have us believe. I’m not sure I agree, but this is as strong a counter-argument as I’ve seen, summed up by the view that technological advances allow humans to elevate into higher forms of value-creation.
For the long-form trifecta, check out The Good, The Bad and The Robot: Experts Are Trying to Make Machines Be “Moral”, which argues that our well-tested body of ethics is inadequate in the AI age. And for the enterprise bent on the future of HR tech, Holger Mueller just posted part two of a worthwhile (and, happily, concise) series, Musings – Speed matters for HR – how to accelerate – Part II.
Other standouts

Holger isn’t done yet; weighs in on the MongoDB and the IBM-Blue Box acquisition – it was just another week for the reigning king of the enterprise tarmac, including a measured take on the MongoDB World user conference, and a view of why IBM’s Blue Box purchase marks a shift from marking public cloud territory to private cloud and other variations that will put cloud purists in padded rooms for the duration.
The palpable impact of SaaS on services and ERP – Two different angles on the impact of SaaS, the first from Eric Kimberling of Panorama, who just released his 2015 ERP Report. Amongst the key findings? “This year 33% of organizations implemented a SaaS solution, compared to just 4% last year.” That’s not a trifle, eh? Oh, and ERP failure rates are up five percent also. Somehow that seems like a related stat… On the SaaS services side, fellow Enterprise Irregular and SaaSy dude Jason Lemkin posted a revealing interview with Andy Wilson, CEO of Logikcull: 8 Things Learned Going from a Services Business to a SaaS Business. It’s one angle on services re-invention, a pressing topic for many in the field today.

Honorable mention
Perspectives on Hadoop Part Two: Pausing Plans – Another worthwhile entry in the “concise blog series” category, with bits of Gartner’s own data.
Seven Signs of Corporate Innovation Culture – What, no mention of omelet bars and free zipcars?
What modern CRM looks like in a natively-digital world – “Quick – try to envision Uber or AirBnB using a traditional CRM system where someone is judiciously entering opportunities and leads into the system.” You got me there – I can’t (though I can’t picture AirBnB providing housing for an enterprise show either – yet).
Mark Zuckerberg, Let Me Pay for Facebook – Why would you want to pay when we are doing perfectly fine having our personal lives strip-mined for data nuggets? Oh yeah…
New York Public Library CTO Aboyoun on cloud, storage, future of the library – Cool, though I miss poring over microfiche in search of some obscure clipping.
The Funnel Framework – In which Microsoft’s history is microscoped in an effort to dismantle stale notions of platforms and ecosystems. Not sure I buy the idea that quality of user experience is winning over platform/ecosystem, but made me think harder than most blogs do.
Future of IT Sales Forecast: Cloudy Today, Brighter Tomorrow – A validation for some, a wake up call for others.
Whiffs
Is there such a thing as a whiff that cuts both ways? Exhibit A: a failed Kickstarter film director goes off on Kickstarter and other crowdfunding sites, with some vintage (though NSFW and not PC) ranting. On the other hand, if so few people want see your shitty-sounding sequel, maybe that’s a “you” problem?
Speaking of cuts both ways, wouldn’t the indignities of TSA be more tolerable if we had some assurance they were actually catching somebody? News that the TSA failed 67 out of 70 undercover tests – including fake explosives and banned weapons – adds a layer of misery to the awareness that we’re not much safer (at least not on the TSA side) – just rudely handled.  Also, the Homeland Security Chief, who did re-assign the head of TSA after this report, actually said, and I quote, “The numbers in these reports never look good out of context.” To which I would ask: in which context do these numbers look good?
Finally, I’m not going to waste much time skewering Robert Scoble’s 22 Tips for Attempting to Bend Facebook’s Algorithm to Your Needs (my title, not his). First because Den already took Scoble behind the intellectual woodshed and rather thoroughly at that. Second, Scoble is a fringe-worthy early adopter who does manage to surface ideas about manipulating things like Facebook most of us would never think of.
But when I read this:  “Unfriend people who do not post to Facebook or engage with anyone else. You’ll find your posts start getting reach they never did before. Why? Facebook only releases your posts to a few people at first and watches what they do with it. If you have friends who never like, never share, never comment, and never post their own things, THEY HURT YOU.”
Two thoughts for Scoble: first, Facebook’s algorithm has got to be pretty pathetically primitive if it can’t disregard inactive members when it comes to calculating your own reach. Which leads me to wonder – why bother with 22 steps if I’m dancing with a dodorithm? Second, and this is coming from someone who types in front of his computer quite a heck of a lot, dude – you have to GET OUT MORE.
Officially off-topic
So this investment banker was fired for writing this scathing/hilarious and, okay, probably inappropriate email to new summer interns. But he’s the first person I’ve run into to lose two jobs for the same mistake (his next employer caught wind of it and rescinded the offer also – darn, he was going to be such an asset to the summer intern program).
So the Pandora CEO isn’t worried about Apple’s streaming music plans? Why would he be when iTunes is the crappiest software south of Skype? The better side of Apple shows up here, with Tim Cook making a surprise speaking appearance at the WWDC scholarship program for young students, where he made some more incisive comments on the tech industry’s lack of diversity.
Also did you know about Clickhole, the Onion spinoff designed to spoof Buzzfeed-type virality? I just clicked on it today for the first time and saw, 7 Weightlifting Poems that Will Get You Pumpedk. LOLZ. (Here’s some context on Clickhole).  See you next time…
Which #ensw pieces of merit did I miss? Let us know in the comments.
Most Enterprise hits and misses articles are selected from my curated @jonerpnewsfeed. ìmyPOVî is borrowed with reluctant permission from the ubiquitous Ray Wang.

Image credits: Cheerful Chubby Man © RA Studio, Happy Children © Anna Omelchenko, Waiter Suggesting Bottle © Minerva Studiom, Overworked Businessman © Bloomua, Loser and Winner © ispstock (keyword search: loser or winner) – all from Fotolia.com
Disclosure: SAP, Salesforce, NetSuite and Unit4 are diginomica premier partners as of this writing.

Read more on: Best of archivesHits and misses 