
diginomica hit: Buyouts, acquisitions, and whistleblowers, what a week! – by Phil and Den
quotage: “This is a landmark acquisition for Salesforce, bringing transactional capabilities into its ambit for the first time — potentially a gamechanging move. Of course it’s not the same as buying an ERP vendor and it’s still not adding full financials capabilities into the platform. But in an increasingly digital world, once you have digital commerce capabilities in the mix then there are a substantial number of businesses that can run their entire operations on the Salesforce platform.” – Phil, Salesforce acquires Demandware to add Commerce Cloud
myPOV: Ever notice that enterprise software vendors have a knack for ruining vacation schedules with wacky newsweeks? That was certainly the case last week, with the above-quoted Salesforce acquisition looming large not only in the price ($2.8 billion)), but in the implications, alluded to by Phil above, earning the rare “gamechanging” monicker we try not to overflog.
Two companies made noise heading in the private direction, headlined by Marketo’s $1.9 billion private equity buyout. Phil was on the case again in $1.79bn deal buys Marketo time to develop enterprise platform. Phil notes some concerns around the acquirer (Vista), but sees an advantage in Marketo’s platform-building intentions – a project fickle/impatient day traders public investors might not have had the patience with. Qlik is also doing the private acquisition dance, but it’s proving more awkward than a bad prom date. Den has the story in Qlik dives on lower than expected buyout approach – no surprise.
And in a story that may be a big deal or may wither in the legal system, a whistleblower is challenging Oracle’s cloud sales reporting in Oracle hit with whistleblower suit – does it matter?. At the far extreme is the possibility of punishable misdeeds under Sarbanes-Oxley, but we’re far from that verdict, nothing has been proven or settled. A bigger issue is not so much legal but a common vendor practice of taking full advantage of non-GAAP reporting. That may or may not be in play here, but it’s something on Den’s mind in general based on the SEC’s non-GAAP tightening – for more on that, read on.
diginomica four – my top four stories on diginomica this week:

7 CxO tips for winning investment in procure-to-pay – Phil’s got some super project tips from Coupa Inspire, all from CxOs who have navigated the procure-to-pay nuances, Coupa -style. Kickass CxO quote: “I set the spreadsheet aside and [say], ‘Look me in the eye and tell me your career is worth making this happen.’”
Future of payments – Visa CEO gives his take on Paypal, Apple Pay and Blockchain – Learned some things from Derek’s review, such as: Paypal may be on thin Visa ice, and Visa’s CEO understands the pros and cons of blockchain a lot better than most.
Reality check – is virtual reality going to make it in the enterprise? – Cath brings cold water to the VR hype festival, but she notes that Augmented Reality (where Google Glass went to tide) may have more immediate use cases. Looks like a proof of concept kind of year.
The 3 critical faultlines in retail transformation – Phil strikes again with a piece on the urgency of retail change given high profile failures/job losses: “Failure to transform isn’t a viable option.” Unfortunately for retail shops this goes well beyond e-commerce.

Vendor analysis, diginomica style. Here’s my top choices from our vendor coverage:

Workday beats on Q1 FY2017 but some days you just can’t win – investors gave Workday a price haircut, which makes for an interesting earnings call, but Den still likes what he sees, as he hits on profitability, employee ownership and market maturity.
Cornerstone – much more than an LMS Vendor – Cornerstone is growing up before our eyes, says school guidance counselor analyst Brian Sommer, who analyzes their biggest release ever and assesses their chances of becoming a dominant HRMS suite vendor.

A few more vendor picks, without my running asides:
Short seller’s wet dreams coming true as Box gets hammered for a beat – Den
Understanding Mana – a platform for proactive and automated asset management – Den
TomTom beats a path to Workday – use case by Janine
Jon’s grab bag – Yup, Den’s got a bee in his bonnet about non-GAAP earnings. Best learn why before we get stung: Is the end of non-GAAP measures in sight? Maybe. And that’s a good thing. For those tracking European cloud, open source and regulatory hurdles, Derek posted a pair of good reads, Open data in government remains “frustratingly siloed”, warns ODI and Is the European Commission about to embrace the sharing economy? (Wherein Derek examines the possibility of a lift on bans on Uber, Lyft, etc). But will Uber choose to operate in areas where its drivers must be considered employees? I’m gonna say no on behalf of their high-priced legal team. “It’s going to be interesting…” says Derek – indeed. 

Finally, in our ongoing quest to provide you with a ridonkulous amount of ways to consume diginomica content, you can now get your diginomica in your Slack. Den’s got the deets and five cool ways you can use it in: 5 ways to be a hotshot Slacker with diginomica. You may want to check out my reader comment on channel-based notification control to avoid excessive pings; let us know you fare. And yes – you can also use that page as an easy way to grab topic-based RSS for any newsreader (I’m a Newsblur junkie myself).
Best of the rest
Agile, rethinking open source, and the “myth of the brilliant @sshole” programmer
quotage: “Jacob Kaplan-Moss, a core contributor to Django, and self-proclaimed average programmer, talked about the destructiveness of the 10x programmer idea in his 2015 PyCon address, calling it “the myth of the brilliant asshole.” The programmer who thinks he is so good at his job that people have to work with him even though his behavior is toxic.” TC Currie, Are you a 10x programmer? Or just a jerk?
myPOV: Several tech pieces reframed issues and juiced talk on my Twitter feed, in particular the above-linked 10x programmer piece above. Across the board, it seems that mercenaries are out and team players are in, perhaps because modern IT projects require collaboration to have any shot at success. Glen Alleman’s tweets sum it up:

@jonerp I inherited a 10K line FORTRAN program w/ no comments. Then received resume from that person a few years later. same result
— Glen B. Alleman (@galleman) June 5, 2016

@jonerp it’s the transformation issues that trump all the technical and processes issues for our Agile at Scale work
— Glen B. Alleman (@galleman) June 5, 2016
Sidenote: I do think learning how to incorporate eccentric talent is part of smart management, but in general the critical eye towards “jerks” is a good thing. Alleman’s tweets bring us to another piece of note, Scaling Agile: When to Build a Scrum of Scrums, It’s commonly accepted that agile has a scale limitation; this piece does a good job rounding up a debate on whether a “scrum of scrums” is possible. The short answer I derive from these practitioners is: yes, at least to 3-4 teams, but management itself may be a barrier in pushing the agile limits.
We wrap the feature picks with Stephen O’Grady’s The Future of Open Source, which is a combination of a “we called this open source enterprise thing” self-pat on the back, and a warning sign that the public cloud poses new challenges for open source players, creating, as O’Grady puts it , strange bedfellows: “Several open source vendors admitted at OSCON that the best cloud partner in their experience was Microsoft.”
Other standouts

Salesforce makes a big e-commerce play – more analysis – a couple more angles on Salesforce’s big move. Larry Dignan weighs in with Why Salesforce had to buy Demandware: E-commerce everywhere, and Ray Wang uses the occasion for an old school “MyPOV” blow-by-blow. Highlight: “Salesforce outbid many competitors to win over Demandware. The acquisition gives Salesforce.com ammo to fend off IBM Smarter Commerce and Hybris deals, despite Hybris mostly being on-premises based.”
Whose Team Is It Anyway? The 90 Day Rule. – Dave Kellogg’s trenchant tips for executives joining a new company and inheriting a new team. Keeper quote: ” In the beginning, you might boast about the stars you’ve inherited and gripe about the clowns. But at some point they’re not your predecessor’s clowns any more. They’re your clowns. You own them.” Yikes!

Honorable mention
Diane Greene wants to put the enterprise front and center of Google Cloud strategy – Google kinda sucks at the enterprise. Here’s the story of a woman determined to change that.
Selling Up In #SaaS. Not What It’s Cracked Up To Be – Some sharp/contrarian sentiments, with a feel-good-IF-you-do-this-message: “Not knowing exactly the right rung on the corporate ladder that happens to be your sweet spot is lethal. Incredibly strong products went nowhere simply for this single reason.”
Robotic Process Automation has now penetrated a third of enterprises – Yup. Robots.
Researchers Are Developing Robots That Can Feel Your Pain – They don’t just want your job; they want your feelings.
SuccessFactors President Mike Ettling on S/4HANA Public Cloud, the Intersection of Financials and HR – And I thought our article titles were bloated. Still, useful insights from a key player in SAP’s S/4HANA future from the HR side.
On enterprise UX – the best from diginomica and across the web – This roundup by yours truly features standouts from diginomica’s curated Enterprise UX and mobile app design section, but it also showcases some spiffy UX pieces from the interwebs for your reading enjoyment.
Whiffs
So Burger King’s white coat lab techs are working overtime to change the world with a… Whopperito (pictured right). If this wrap of yeck succeeds, that whiff will be on us.
Fun-with-Facebook comes through again, first up: maybe don’t post racist diatribes on Facebook if you like your job (at Bank of America in this case). What’s up with these nutjobs who seem oblivious that their social media brain dumps might be linked back to their employers?
Mark Zuckerberg got a whiff of that this week himself: his Twitter, LinkedIn and Pinterest accounts were hacked. I’d never hack someone’s account, but I would have loved to post on Zuck’s LinkedIn something like: “Looking for a new gig, really want to start over with a company whose terms and conditions fit on one page. Preferably offline where Facebook’s drones can’t find me.” This Redditor summed it up well:
So Zuckerberg is reusing passwords instead of using a password manager and random passwords but his password is also shitty. Nice.
Finally, Microsoft’s been playing its cards well lately. Azure keeps cropping up in cool places (e.g. O’Grady above). Hololens has been getting nice buzz. Brian Sommer even wrote a diginomica piece about how Microsoft is cropping up as a savvy/unlikely partner across cloud ERP shows. By all accounts, Windows 10 is a vastly better OS than Windows 8.
That’s why I’m baffled by Microsoft’s strong-arm Windows 10 upgrade tactics, as in Microsoft makes blocking Windows 10 ‘Recommended’ update near impossible: Report. While the situation is not as dire as the article title implies (see updates in the post which admit the same), the forced march desperation is confusing. Whenever you have a cottage industry of tips and tools that spring up to protect your own customers from doing an involuntary upgrade, that’s not a good look.
Lots of customers love Windows 7. They don’t know if all their programs are compatible. They’ll take their time, perhaps buy new Windows 10 laptops first. The comment thread is loaded with ticked off readers who were automatically upgraded – or nearly so – without their consent. This comment is a keeper:
I have a few clients, who got upgraded to W 10 and their computers were bricked as a result. I am happy to make some money on this Microsoft screw-up, yet on the other hand I am sad for the people, who actually have to pay for something they didn’t ask for.
Tips for Microsoft: next time, just take out a massive “Give Apple another shot!” billboard in Times Square.
Which #ensw pieces of merit did I miss? Let us know in the comments.
Most Enterprise hits and misses articles are selected from my curated @jonerpnewsfeed. ‘myPOV’ is borrowed with reluctant permission from the ubiquitous Ray Wang.
Image credits – Cheerful Chubby Man © RA Studio, Happy Children © Anna Omelchenko, Waiter Suggesting Bottle © Minerva Studiom, Overworked Businessman © Bloomua, Businessman Choosing Success or Failure Road © Creativa, Loser and winner – Loser and Winner © ispstock – Fotolia – all from Fotolia.com.
SAP, Oracle, Workday and Salesforce are diginomica premier partners as of this writing.
Cheerful Chubby Man © RA Studio, Happy Children © Anna Omelchenko, Waiter Suggesting Bottle © Minerva Studiom, Overworked Businessman © Bloomua, Businessman Choosing Success or Failure Road © Creativa – all from Fotolia.com.
Image credit - Cheerful Chubby Man © RA Studio, Happy Children © Anna Omelchenko, Waiter Suggesting Bottle © Minerva Studiom, Overworked Businessman © Bloomua, Businessman Choosing Success or Failure Road © Creativa - all from Fotolia.com.Disclosure - SAP, Oracle, Workday, Marketo and Salesforce are diginomica premier partners as of this writing. Coupa is a partner.Read more on: Hits and misses 