

Last week I caught up with James Norwood, EVP strategy and chief of staff at episerver, a CMS and digital experience software firm. It’s been a while since we last spoke and in the interim, a lot has happened. For the financially nosy, episerver changed hands last year from Accel-KKR to Insight Venture Partners at a handy $1.1bn valuation. That’s far from shabby considering Accel-KKR dropped $140 million on the company in 2014. More to the point, Insight wants growth and, according to Norwood, is prepared to spend to prime the pump:
What you’ll see next is big investments in brand awareness and marketing, which is something we’ve always needed to do more of, but also we’re going to increase our R&D headcount by 20% this year.
As a marketing guy myself to be given a 60% increase year over year in marketing spend is unheard of.
Norwood was coy on exactly what that R&D spend means in terms of product. For that, we’ll have to wait and hear the customer events coming later in the year.
On Brexit, Norwood gave me some hints on how this is playing out. In common with many other vendors, episerver felt the hesitancy among buyers, nervous about the uncertainty surrounding a never-ending Brexit. To that end, episerver has inked deals with Microsoft so that if necessary, the company can quickly move data locations for cloud services to UK based servers.
During our conversation, Norwood was keen to discuss progress in the US. Software vendors that were born in Europe often have a very difficult time breaking into the North American market. Attractive though it appears, the fact remains it is very expensive to establish a foothold in what is a vast country. Episerver overcame some of the more obvious obstacles through acquisition in 2015 when Accel-KKR merged it with Ektron. At the time, analyst sentiment was at best tepid but according to Norwood, that is working out just fine.
All our regions are doing well. You’d think as a Nordic founded company we’d done it all but no. In Asia-Pacific we’re seeing more demand than we perhaps anticipated. North America has moved from being our weakest to our strongest market with 25% of all employees now in that region. We’ve also picked up some good logos along the way but perhaps more important, we are regularly landing greenfield customers. So it’s not as though we’re simply adding to existing. If anything, the biggest challenge for us, like just about everyone else, is finding the right talent to support the growth we’re experiencing. It’s tough.
Episerver has been talking about personalization for a while. In 2015, I attended the company’s first merged customer event and was impressed by the practical approach that episerver takes to the razzle-dazzle of personalization. At the time, I saw nascent work on individualized experiences in the baby retail space but as I noted: 
If the intention is to use loyalty as the foundation for repeat business then you need a relationship with the buyer well beyond the transaction. That means the development of community, which in turn takes time and effort. But that discussion is for another day.
Three plus years on and episerver has made significant progress, deploying more than 120 ML algorithms to assist customers in moving their customers along the buyer journey. These range from retail to public sector through to B2B. I was interested in discovering two things: how is retail responding to the need for digital channels and how this fits to B2B:
At the time (2015) it was very conceptual but really what we’ve been doing is to use the intelligence elements to help our customers get closer to theirs but in a non-creepy way. So it’s not just about being a clever commerce engine but about delivering the right kinds of digital experience at all potential touchpoints. The harder part is in getting customers to understand that digital doesn’t just mean online where they say they only see 5% of their business but the ability to augment the customer experience in the store as well. On B2B – it’s really more B2B2C – there is a huge opportunity for our customers to lift revenues, it’s an easy one to prove out. It’s about making recommendations and preparing pre-orders so that customer friction is reduced But the key is to keep the solution laser-focused on outcomes.
Norwood gave the example of Heineken which found its business being undermined by the growth in microbreweries.
Rather than fight them, Heineken created a platform using our technology that serves as a marketplace. They provide the huge distribution channel the microbrewer needs and takes a cut for the service. So yes, this all started with retail and what retailers saw at places like Amazon and Walmart but has quickly moved to other verticals like distribution, travel, hospitality and so on. There’s a long way to go.
My take
Episerver doesn’t always get the credit it deserves but then as we know, that’s hard to achieve when your marketing spend is constrained and when your presence at important shows is minimal.
Norwood tells me that is changing quickly. At the same time, adding logos as diverse as Chick-Fil-A, Hornby Hobbies, Metropolitan Police Services UK, New Brunswick Liquor, Canada and American Airlines Federal Credit Union across both CMS and commerce needs does no harm. Ramping R&D while also expanding marketing in a meaningful way should yield the kind of growth that helps episerver stand out.
Having said that, there’s plenty of heavyweight competition, the obvious example being Adobe which held its CX Summit last week, showcasing a variety of good CX use cases. The other obvious example is Oracle which also held a recent analyst event, again showcasing solid customer stories.
Image credit - Featured image © photon_photo - Fotolia.comRead more on: CRM and customer experienceMachine intelligence and AIRetail e-commerce and the omni-channel 