
Glue
A collaboration partnership between the interconnection and datacenter hosting services company Equinix and social media mega-maestro Facebook, brings the latter’s Wedge switching technology, which has already been donated to the Open Compute Project, into play in the former’s International Business Exchange (IBX).
Put like that it doesn’t sound particularly exciting, but according to Equinix CTO Ihab Tarazi, the goals underpinning the partnership are anything, but humble:
There are two use cases we are targeting with this. One is that there is currently no good way to provide seamless multi-cloud operations running across multi-networks. When somebody implements hybrid cloud today it involves the CIO in a lot of work to make sure everything works at the application layer. The second is the coming need to integrate different Internet of Things (IoT) platforms and effectively centralise them with associated applications in the datacenter.
Each of these are, in their own rights, major goals for most businesses, so by approaching them together with the same technological development, then making it available through the Equinix network covering 40 global markets and embracing the services of 1,100 network providers and 500-plus cloud service providers, the company is pitching this at as big a target it is possible to imagine.
In essence, building multi-network/multi-cloud/IoT ecosystems can be achieved using different service providers all in the same datacenter, all running on the same environment.
Multi-cloud service capabilities are becoming the next hurdle business IT environments have to jump. It is in the nature of the cloud that different applications and services will be available on different cloud platforms. Yet the users need to be able to maximise their own available resources by moving workloads around the datacenter and have those applications and services run on different environments. This particularly so where users need to move applications and services between private and public cloud services, depending upon the tasks being run.
Users currently have the option of either waiting for cloud applications and service vendors to realise that utilizing different platforms for their offerings is silo-generating and counter-productive in the long term, or try to engineer them now into an ecosystem of their own devising. Adding in any fondness for a particular network service only compounds the problems that the business IT department needs to resolve:
What we will be able to offer now is to simplify that multi-cloud and allow them to exchange applications at the container level. This scales significantly and also improves the performance for the applications itself. Users can have multiple clouds from multiple providers. This is particularly useful for any business implementing microservices architectures because that will need a container architecture. Now we are making that architecture available. Users can now divide applications between private and public cloud without developers having to do anything. We make it possible to move containers between these clouds with high quality and security.
There hasn’t been a container architecture management system like this that is multi-cloud and multi-network. All the other container architectures are for single clouds, so only Microsoft, AWS or Google.
This will be available as part of Equinix’s Mesosphere Datacenter Operating System (DCOS). This is based on the open source Mesos architecture from Apache. It is already widely used in large-scale production environments, and according to the company, DCOS has the capability to aggregate all datacenter resources into a single pool where it can automatically schedule workloads for appropriate available resources.
This includes automated policy-based management of where applications run so that, for example, business-sensitive applications are always run in private clouds as a matter of policy. The policies are user-definable.
The ability to centralise different IoT platforms uses the same architecture. It is, however, being made available in advance of the majority of businesses even realising that the need will be there to pull different IoT technologies together into a coherent business management environment, and then integrate them with business management services:
Businesses are just starting to realise that not only is it important to manage applications and services across multi-cloud environment but also to get to all the IoT platforms and all the end user devices.
This is open source and to OCP standards, so is readily available to all comers but, as Tarazi suggested, this would mean users getting seriously hands-on with how environments are built and set up. He claims that Equinix is way ahead of anyone else in the ability to deliver working multi-cloud and multi-network environments:
The point is, this is not valuable unless you have all of the ecosystems and we have more than 1,000 networks and more than 1,000 clouds in our datacenters. And if businesses want to be able to leverage all the different services they will want them all in the datacenter. This is about getting centralization at the right level. What we are doing in unlocking the next exchange opportunity for IoT, SDN, containers and multi-cloud.
This also allows SaaS-delivered services to be connected in as part of such an eco-system, with the one proviso that any such SaaS provider has engineered an appropriate API to connect in to the right layer of the architecture. One of the keys here is that such vendors move to use container architectures in their own right.
According to Tarazi, many SaaS vendors already are making that move, as are a growing number of IoT vendors. He sees this as a two-year development plan starting from now, as more businesses realise just how interconnected these applications and services need to be.
Equinix is also starting exploratory conversations with software vendors in the artificial intelligence and machine learning areas as to how such services can be integrated in as value-add resources to provide real functional muscle to the overall ecosystem. Tarazi declined to comment on the names of possible contributors, but some well-known names can be expected to feature in the not too distant future.
My take
It is early days, obviously, but this partnership seems to have created something with real potential to be the ‘glue’ that pulls together the various strings of what constitutes a business. From a Line of Business Manager’s point of view this can be seen as offering them an automobile rather than a DIY kit car, moving them up the chain of integration and collaboration to a more business-focused level.
Read more on: Cloud platforms - infrastructure and architectureInternet of ThingsSocial 