

Digital transformation has been a clarion call for enterprises of all types and sizes for a while now, but as a growing number of them adopt it the changes in the underlying profile of the Internet are showing through, with private data exchange between businesses growing at nearly twice the rate of the public Internet. One estimate reckons it will be around six times the volume of global IP traffic by 2020.
That estimate comes from Equinix, which specialises in providing global interconnect services for major enterprises. It is a prediction that forms a small part of the company’s new Global Interconnection Index, a new market study that analyzes the adoption profile of thousands of carrier-neutral colocation datacentre providers and global ecosystem participants.
According to Tony Bishop, Equinix Vice President of Global Vertical Strategy and Marketing, this is the first of what is planned to be an annual data source that has a primary goal of giving enterprise C-suites and boardrooms the tools and data they need to identify what resources they need to start, or continue, their digital transformation programmes.
Further out, Bishop sees it providing the possibility that each company can build its own set of business benchmarks that will allow it to measure the performance and capabilities of the services and service providers they wish to employ. That could be one of the most important, game-changing developments for companies looking to start using, or further exploit, cloud and internet services.
Where the growth comes from
The rate of interconnection growth in the peer-to-peer network is growing fast, and the complexity of what is in play, with websites, ecommerce engines, and content engines of all types playing a part, have proliferated. Then came electronic trading, the most digitalised business in the world with many components that all exchange data in as near real time as possible, in a secure manner.
Now all the major cloud infrastructure providers have latched onto the need to bring copies of workloads etc ever-closer to the users, says Bishop:
So the cloud providers are now saying to users, ‘You can connect to me privately the same way, physically or virtually like two switches and a piece of fibre, and make the cloud an extension of your platform. So now there is private internet connection, web connection for information and ecommerce, trading-like functionality for real-time transactions and cloud for on-demand scale. And all of these are going to be needed for digital business to be able to scale.
So logically, whatever the service type required it can all be defined as part of a user’s `business platform’. One issue Bishop points out, however, is that to work effectively there is the issue of proximity to where the users are. And to get it to scale, they need to be able to exchange data between the parties relevant to any transaction privately and directly before anything happens publicly.
It is this private, intra-participant connectivity required by any and every transaction that is now seen by Equinix as the most important connectivity measurement and management issue facing any business. Enterprises now need to understand that the parties range from carriers, through cloud service providers, on through the individual enterprises participating in a transaction, the applications they are using to process the transaction, and the servers and client devices that are used by the participants. Then the nature of the size and complexity of the many-to-many connections that have to be considered can start to be seen by business managers.
in addition, enterprises have to consider these requirements in some detail. It is, first and foremost, a question of the bandwidth required. This is one of the factors, with any internet service but especially so with the cloud, which service providers seek to pin down as part of any service contract. They need to have some handle on what they need to provision.
But increasingly, users also need to understand the complexity of the many-to-many connections that their transactions workloads will involve, warns Bishop:
This is a many-to-many problem that users must solve when they have density of users, regulation and compliance requirements, choice of infrastructure such as multiple carriers, clouds, applications providers, or hosting services. They have to build that digital supply chain for wherever they need to have a business presence.
Building the business benchmark
This is the point where that important benchmark question arises. The best way for enterprises to answer those questions is to pose them as business processes and services, for that is what will drive the actual numbers. From that it becomes possible for individual enterprises to derive their own set of business benchmarks with which to measure service provision and providers.
But it also becomes possible for Equinix, or its partners, to derive a standard, industry benchmark which would allow any enterprise to at least get a handle on the real, operational capabilities of any set of service providers, says Bishop:
That is where we are going, but this is a precursor to that. What you talk about is where the world needs to get to because everything will be services, and should be based on consumption and need. This is absolutely where the world is going. People haven’t figured it out completely yet but at least we are giving the industry a critical building block, and we need to work with our partners to rally the industry around this dialogue.
What we have been able to do is provide a unit of measurement for interconnection bandwidth – the capacity provisioned to enable private data traffic exchange between counter-parties. This needs enterprises to understand what services are to be used, who are the users, and where are the users.
The Equinix research here has highlighted quantifiable relationships between key business KPIs and the interconnection bandwidth each requires as it grows. These are enterprise revenue, number of employees, the number of countries operated in, the number of discrete sites operated, the number of distributed IT services employed and the amount spent on each, and the number of SaaS providers.
Other inputs will come from the inter-relationships between a number of factors that broadly sit under the banner of ‘usage’. For example, there is digital technology use, and here the key underlying factor is the need to support real-time interactions between applications, services and users. According to Accenture, this alone is likely to be worth a $1.36 Trillion kicker to overall economic output by the top 10 economies, by 2020, which has just over three years to run to its end.
Then comes urbanisation, which Bishop defines as the need for proximity. This is certainly a requirement once end-to-end latency becomes an issue for transactions, but he pointed to a study on population migration – ‘Connectography’ by Parag Khanna – which predicts that over 2 billion people will be heading towards even bigger `metro-centres’ than we have already. These will become the centres of business, investment, skills and everything else.
This is an interesting viewpoint because there is an argument that the next mobile generation, 5G, will help to stall or even reverse that trend, allowing far greater geographic dispersal of human talent, and even aid the need for proximity of resources by having them dispersed as well. Bishop, on the other hand, feels such thinking should be inverted, as he sees 5G simply as a tool to help service providers keep up with demand.
Data sovereignty will grow as a problem here because wanting to keep data `local’ may clash with the locations of the major data exchange points, because in business it will be the speed and ease of data exchange that will in the end be the more important factor. Users may have to tailor their business management regimes accordingly.
Similar reworking may come from handling cybersecurity, where the growth in available connectivity may lead enterprises to exploit more private data exchange traffic rather than the public internet.
The final one on his list is digital trade, where digital business overtakes physical trade. Here, business processes will no longer be point to point transactions but will involve contributions from many participating businesses working in multi-step workflows.
Taking all these together, Bishop claims that Equinix can now pretty much predict the bandwidth requirements any business is going to need, and do it in the form of metrics that enterprise board rooms can – or should be able to – understand.
My take
Underpinning this research is a set of statistics that should help enterprises map out, and measure, their own relationship with the growing complexity of interconnections, resources and, above all, bandwidth requirements that meet their needs. From that, comes the costing, the budget planning and business-goal setting that is the lifeblood of business management.
And perhaps most important of all, those statistics can form the basis of new digitalisation benchmarks. Here, enterprises can build unique benchmarks that map out the interconnection, bandwidth and latency needs of their business. At the same time, the coming annual Equinix statistics-fest can be used by service provider industry to build generalised benchmarks – and indeed a whole range of support tools – to bridge the gap between the range of services the industry can offer, and the types of services individual enterprises need.
Image credit - Free for commercial use Read more on: Cloud platforms - infrastructure and architectureInfrastructure 