

Peter Sheppard
When we look at what we expect to provide our learners, we have to think differently, because they are behaving differently.
While the chalk-and-talk style of learning still thrives, Peter Sheppard, global head of learning excellence at Ericsson, points out that it now stands shoulder to shoulder with e-learning, peer-based learning, webinars, conferences, apps and other channels. Ericsson needed to adapt to the ‘new normal’ and increase its learning channels.
Ericsson is best known as a mobile infrastructure provider. What’s less well known about the 100,000-strong company is that it’s the fifth largest software company in the world, and is involved, among other things, in TV and media delivery.
Given its interests, the organization is well aware that the way people use media and the channels they choose are changing rapidly, with on-demand video, for example, accounting for half of mobile traffic.
Understanding these changes is important, Sheppard believes, because:
There are so many more learning methods around now. This means we have to do more and more in providing these different forms of learning.
At Ericsson that has meant adding video and webinar platforms to its learning portfolio. This is all part of a wider initiative to centralize learning, as Sheppard explains:
We are at the extreme of being a decentralized learning organisation and the pendulum is swinging back to becoming more centralized and we’re keeping more of our content centrally.
This shift involves producing more global programs and ways of working and to cut out the inefficiencies of replicating work.
As a result, last year, it introduced the Ericsson Academy Virtual Campus webinar platform, and Ericsson Play, its mobile video sharing and learning platform, or what Sheppard calls “our corporate YouTube”.
Ericsson Play is split into three areas:

An open area where any employee can create videos which can be accessed by anyone in the company.
The comms area, used by the internal comms team to put any formal Ericsson videos.
The learning area, implemented October 2014.

Play is used for a variety of things such as team meetings, quick guides on how to do something (rather than a boring, long-winded pdf), simple training in areas such as data protection and troubleshooting, recorded by engineers at the point of dealing with a problem. Play can also be used to advertise more traditional e-learning.
Sheppard notes that the video content in Play does not to be glossy, professional-looking:
Variable content is actually a good thing. Because polished videos are not necessarily the best videos to learn from.
What’s important is that there’s a good range of videos and that they are generated by the people at ground level.
Altogether there are 10,261 videos on Play and a high proportion of these, 3,752, are learning videos. The average video length is just 7.32 minutes, indicative of a trend towards small, bite-sized learning, says Sheppard:
People generally like using video and using quick snippets of video and I think this is a lesson for us in learning that we need to look at different types of methods and different types of learning. What we want people to do is create as many videos for themselves and user-generated content by themselves.
Virtual Campus was also introduced at the end of last year. Sheppard has found that it is more successful and gains more traction when it is linked to specific events, which have included international women’s day and a R&D event.
Lessons learned
Sheppard is pleased with the way both Play and Virtual Campus have been embraced by staff, and has learned some useful lessons along the way.
First up, Sheppard points out, it’s important to get key stakeholders, such as internal comms and IT involved quickly and to encourage early adopters to spread the word. This happened with Play but not with Campus, and the result was that Play was taken up and accepted by employees far faster.
Another key lesson was that to get buy-in, particularly from a tech-savvy workforce, means that there’s little room for trial and error:
I think there’s a certain level of expectation particularly in a technology company like Ericsson that when you launch a particular platform it’s going to be of a certain quality and I think that was something to learn for us: when you launch, it has to have reasonable functionality and it has to be intuitive.
Acknowledging that this is the best way to go, Sheppard notes that sometimes you have to “act now and ask for forgiveness later”, which is what happened with the launch of Virtual Campus:
We’ve got it out there being used by now we’re having to a little bit of backtracking with IT and getting IT involved.
Sheppard also notes that it’s important to walk the talk within the learning team:
Within Learning we’re now saying you’re doing that long presentation in that meeting is that really the best way to get over that information? Why not do a Play video and get people to look at in their own time and then come to you with questions. That, for example, is how we did a session recently on learning reporting.
Wish list
As a result of these changes, the learning department come up with a wish list of what the learning team need from IT over the next five years.
Top of that list is the ability to have social learning and collaboration as part of the Ericsson learning platform and for there to be greater personalization, along the lines of Amazon recommendations for books or music people might like based on their previous buying habits. Sheppard asks:
Why aren’t we doing the same thing in learning?
Together with a more personal approach, learning also needs to be interactive and make better use of the gaming techniques becoming more popular.
From a technical standpoint, how the challenge is to be able integrate and unify all these different inputs to create a coherent picture. He explains:
We now have lots of platforms and systems all going into one LMS [learning management system] that needs to report and that is a big challenge for us.
And this isn’t the only challenge, notes Sheppard:
We’re always for more for less and I think it’s quite positive here. Because as we get more and more different platforms and the average lent of learning activity reduces, then actually we can start to save money and produce more learning for less. The interesting change here I think is the number of activities people are doing now, not the amount of hours in learning.
The final key challenge is to find a way of ensuring that all this range of learning activities is matched to the business. Says Sheppard:
As our learners become more and more thirsty for different sorts of learning methods, how the hell do we make sure we connect to the business and demonstrate the business impact?
My take
Learning is no longer a just classroom affair. And that’s a good thing. But multiple channels present an organizational challenge for companies as Sheppard outlines.
Two key trends come out of Ericsson’s experience for me: first that people want their learning in small chunks and second this is often best delivered by their co-workers, the experts in the field doing the job, rather than a trainer.
diginomica supports


Read more on: Future of workHCM and the digital future of work 