
At Coindesk’s Consensus 2016 show, my first job was to get an overall enterprise view of the blockchain. Next up? Industry startups and blockchain in blockchain in developing economies. Another pressing issue: how do big institutions perceive the blockchain’s credibility and market opportunities?
I got that view during an afternoon chat with Ernst & Young’s Angus Champion de Crespigny (for simplicity, I will call him Angus). His job title is worthy of his name: Angus is currently Ernst & Young’s Financial Services Blockchain and Distributed Infrastructure Strategy Leader. He was a very good sport as I pursued specifics on Ernst & Young’s blockchain commitment. He gave me a big picture well beyond financial services, raising concerns along the way.
Angus defied my expectations; for one thing, he’s got technical chops, which go back to roots as a software engineer with finance savvy. For his master’s degree, Angus developed a real-time voice encryption system for. After graduation, he became a “white hat” hacker. Moving from white hat hacking to regulatory compliance is an unusual career path, but it’s a perfect combo for grasping Bitcoin nuances.
Blockchain’s impact will spread across sectors
Others push the impact of blockchain on finance. Angus thinks that’s just the beginning:
Our view with that is that blockchain has the ability to transform finance, but not necessarily just in the way that people are talking about… A bigger step is the ability to embed finance into other sectors, which otherwise have not had that opportunity.
So how do you “embed finance”? Fresh off on an Internet of Things (IoT) panel, that was Angus’ first example:
You can start integrating finance in machine-to-machine payments. You can create new ecosystems that enable sharing economies in ways that you couldn’t previously. You can allow finance to secure assets in new ways, improving risk models. You can improve banks’ abilities to lend to customers.
That could lead to a more radical re-imagining, such as a device-managed car:
You can track the distance that they’re driving. You can track the maintenance of that car. That can feed into an actuarial model that can say: this car is a worthwhile investment to loan money to. If they stop paying, you can disable the car.
Angus is thinking blockchain across sectors:
The real big winners are when you start going cross-sector: combining power and utilities with finance. Combining government sector with finance. Combining transport and other sectors. There’s a big move at the moment to bring together financial institutions onto a single distributed ledger. Financial institutions and others should be looking at bringing in other players. Bringing in tech firms. Bringing in logistics companies.
How are enterprise blockchain projects progressing?
Angus Champion de Crespigny
Most enterprise blockchain projects seem to be in proof of concept stages. What is Angus’ team seeing?
There are a lot of proofs of concept going on. We’re also seeing a lot of POCs that don’t leverage all of the power of blockchain technology. That’s not necessarily a bad thing. With our clients, we help them think through, “Where do you want to be in five years time, and how do you get there?” Some of that is putting together proofs of concept that may not be in themselves beneficial, but get you on that path.
What other questions should companies be asking?
We encourage companies to abstract away from the technology, and ask: in a world where value can move as easily as data, what does your business look like? What products and services could you offer in that environment? That’s a real opportunity, how do we get there?
Ernst & Young asks their clients to step back from the tech, and think about use cases first:
When you look at all of the business processes that have built up around current technology, it’s the processes that have to change for the blockchain. That’s the hard bit. Compared to that, resolving the technology is comparatively easy.
Naming blockchain obstacles is a necessary, hype-busting exercise. Angus raised the ecosystem issue:
There’s a lot of parts of the blockchain ecosystem that need to build up. The technology is scalable for certain applications, and isn’t for others – or at least hasn’t proven to be scalable for others. Will one flavor of the technology be suitable for all of the various applications that people are looking at?
Another pitfall: for now, complex use cases should be avoided. Angus:
You can create very complex networks using this technology. The thing is, if anything goes wrong, you’ve now got to roll out giant changes across to everyone who’s in that network. The more complex it gets, the whole consensus system between everyone may be at risk… Simplicity is key for a lot of this. Until you can build up proper processes around it.
Responding to blockchain critics – it’s more than just a slow, distributed database
But when I raised the criticism that blockchains are just slow, distributed databases, Angus countered:
The public blockchains have a lot of power. That shouldn’t be discounted. If you want to prove beyond all reasonable doubt that you possess something digitally at some point in time, sticking it on the Bitcoin blockchain is the most robust way of proving that… This no small thing. For example, can that be used to address trust between various international government agencies? It could be a neutral arbiter of all of that.
Then there are the implications of disintermediation:
Blockchains can also be done in a way that there is no one party that controls it, or has the administrative access over it. Trade finance is the common one people talk about… There is some value in that.
As for the challenge of scale, that is being tackled. One project frequently cited at the show was Ethereum, which has supported enterprise blockchain environments live for the last 9 months. Angus advises companies not to get hung up on scalability:
Here’s our baseline: if you have an environment which you can trust, without needing to trust the various participants, what does that do to your business? What do your products and services look like in that environment? There are enough protocols out there, enough different flavors, and enough smart people that if you need to tweak the technology, you’ll be able to sort that out, but you’ve got to ask the right questions.
How serious is Ernst & Young about blockchain?
We all want to know if big companies are flirting with blockchains or sinking real money in. Angus made clear he wasn’t speaking for Ernst & Young in precise numbers, but he did give some clear impressions:
Jon: Is it you and a couple other people in a broom closet? Or is there a whole floor in Manhattan dedicated to it?
Angus: (joking) It would need to be a pretty big broom closet.
Ernst & Young has spread their blockchain pursuits across a global network:
We see a lot of applications around capital markets. There’s applications around payments we are talking about, around transaction banking. Around insurance. Around government. Around health. We have a globally coordinated network that basically works on a cross-sector strategy. But in each of those sectors, they’re the ones that drive the solutions.
Jon: Do you think Ernst & Young views this as somewhat of an experimental practice still?
Angus: No. We’re very seriously looking at this. On the financial services side, it’s one of our top priorities.
Final thoughts
We also talked about why the big financial institutions weren’t at the Consensus 2016 show. The presence of IBM, Microsoft, Deloitte, Ernst & Young etc. gave the blockchain a different level of credibility, but the financial institutions were notably absent. Angus thinks that’s because this show is more technology-focused. Perhaps.
At any rate, a focus on financial back office efficiencies is a limited view of blockchain’s potential. There, Angus and I are in agreement:
If you can tweak your operational process, tweak your business process in a new way that this technology allows, then you may be able to get some of that efficiency you’re talking about. For us, blockchain is about the Internet of Things and creating new markets, new products that you couldn’t before.
Image credit - Network. © BillionPhotos.com - Fotolia.com. Photo of Angus Champion de Crespigny on-site by Jon Reed.Disclosure - Coindesk provided me with press access to Collission 2016; diginomica covered travel expenses.Read more on: Digital transformation - frictionless enterpriseFinancial services and fintechFintechInternet of Things 