
Estée Lauder
Last year we noted that cosmetics giant Estée Lauder is a two decades veteran of digital, a strategic direction that has served it well. As 2018 gets underway, CEO Fabrizio Freda is doubling down on that early leader status as the market sector gets ever more competitive, arguing: .
Estée Lauder is a prime example of a heritage brand benefiting from continued consumer loyalty, as it successfully innovates around its core products and engages consumers in modern ways. Although we continue to face strong competition or trial from upstart enemy brands, we believe many of them won’t have the same power and the repurchase rate of our established brands and core products.
Estée Lauder’s success is, he adds:
due in part to executing a digital-first mindset and emphasizing social media strategy which has helped it reach more consumers, especially younger ones.
This is underpinned by technology investments and experiments to keep ahead of the rival providers, says Freda, pointing to work with the likes of Google as an exemplar:
Staying ahead of the curve, our brands are exploring new technologies to enhance the consumer experience. Estée Lauder collaborated with Google to offer voice-activated night time skin care advice over Google Assistant, extending High-Touch into their home. We are also bringing breakthrough technology into skin care and foundation products. Our innovations are accelerating and we are excited about scientific advances in new products that we believe will help fuel our momentum and continue our share gains.
He adds:
We are also investing in technologies which are driving our business drivers. We are investing in reinforcing our analytics, which are driving our ability to make choices on the business that…are becoming sharper and sharper every time…we will continue to invest online where we see strong growth both in the area of our brand dotcom and in the retailer dotcom with all our partners.
Online investment pays off, he argues:
The strongest categories are skin care and makeup, and the business has a slightly higher percentage of replenishment and repurchase than bricks-and-mortar, which means that the growth on online of hero products or franchises that have good loyalty is very important, is very strong. Said in our way, a strong position online allows better loyalty and better repurchase, so allows brand to be stronger and more profitable over time.
Global platform
It’s an ongoing project, explains Freda, fuelling international expansion:
We continue to roll out more brands online internationally. Our products are now available online in 38 countries, which approximately is one quarter of the market where we have brick-and-mortar presence, giving us plenty of opportunity for expansion and future growth.
And the results are showing, he says:
Our online business rose sharply in every region, led by Asia-Pacific where sales nearly doubled. Tmall now accounts for the majority of our e-commerce in China and our sales on the platform surged. This was MAC’s first Holiday season on Tmall, which helped lift its online sales in Asia sharply. And La Mer successfully attracted many new consumers on Tmall on Singles’ Day. We expect to launch more brands on Tmall this fiscal year.
Online is opening up the Chinese market particularly well, notes Freda, leading him to query whether the model there is “leapfrogging” established operations such as North America:
In which sense? In the sense that the department store, the brick-and-mortar is still very focused in high-traffic areas. For example, we are only in 170 cities. Today we serve consumers from 650 cities because the remaining cities we serve via online. That’s why in China online is already 27% of our sales…which is making the growth in China pretty productive and the ability to make it sustainable in my opinion better.
That’s not to say that business is not healthy in the likes of North America:
The key periods encompassing Black Friday and Cyber Monday were important drivers of our online business, and sales on our brand sites and on retailer sites grew strongly. Mobile continue to be a key component, with sales rising more than 70%, and usage of mobile live chats was 5x greater than last year. With this key shopping period becoming a global event, our online teams in each market created locally relevant offers to drive growth.
A key platform for communicating these offers is social media, where Freda points to continuing innovation:
Social media has become the most effective and significant vehicle for our brands to communicate with consumers. We are skilled at working with relevant global and local influencers to generate engaging content and drive traffic. Tom Ford, for example, launched a popular lipstick collection in Shanghai with an event for celebrities and influencers.
This approach drove significant growth on the brand’s digital channels, generated millions of engagements, and was featured on Vogue China online. These sorts of activities across our brands have helped the Company to continue to lead in social media. For the quarter, we were again the top company among prestige beauty brands in earned media value in the US.
My take
Estée Lauder is up there alongside Starbucks as an ongoing exemplar of the benefits of early investment in digital.
Image credit - Estée Lauder Read more on: Digital and content marketingDigital enterprise in the real worlde-commerceRetail e-commerce and the omni-channel 