
Estée Lauder
When we last cast an eye over Estée Lauder, the make-up and cosmetics behemoth had just finished a seven year project to roll out a single SAP Supplier Managed Inventory (SMI) across 38 different countries, replacing 50 legacy order processing systems.
That came on top of the firm’s ongoing digital makeover that continues to contribute to the bottom line, according to CEO Fabrizio Freda. Freda argues that digital investment enables the company to spread its bets:
We are not over-reliant of any one category, channel or country, which [has] helped cushion us somewhat from regional slowdowns or political strife.
What’s been key to this is a drilling-down on e-commerce and online business, he adds:
Seeing a growing demand in our direct-to-consumer business, we accelerated development of e-commerce sites and freestanding stores in several markets. Our strategy is to invest dynamically in our strengths, which added fuel to our momentum and helped us driving terrific results.
By intentionally accelerating investment in selected winning areas, we generated a stronger results in our makeup and luxury brands, direct-to-consumer channels and the Europe, Middle East and Africa region, where we gained significant share.
Overall, Freda boasts that Estée Lauder has been ahead of the curve and is reaping the rewards:
We anticipated many of the major trends driving global prestige beauty today. We are able to leverage the increasing growth the industry is experiencing in direct-to-consumer channels, such as online and retail stores, as well as travel retail and specialty stores category into a growing numbers of beauty consumers. We were a pioneer in online beauty, recognizing early on that the channel would be increasingly important for marketing, communication and shopping convenience.
Today, we are among the largest and most established player in online prestige beauty and have enjoyed extraordinary growth. Our digital success comes from having a diverse entrepreneurial team, more than half of whom are millennials. And they quickly adapt to business, to changing landscapes. Our websites offer a desirable luxury experience and have become major contributors to brand growth.
That’s all delivering significant benefits in terms of revenues with online sales this fiscal year set to top $1 billion for the first time. For the holiday season quarter, e-ecommerce generated nearly 30% growth, while Cyber Monday brand site sales were 50% up year-on-year.
Other stats of note include a 27% year-on-year rise in the number of orders, while mobile now accounts for 36% of online transactions.
Estée Lauder is also adding increasing numbers of third party retailers and sites worldwide, explains Freda:
Linking our brand sites to our freestanding store is key to enabling an omni-channel experience, which is an important evolving trend in retailing. We have launched numerous pilot programs and are building omni-channel capability to begin to seamlessly connect consumers across our brand sites and our freestanding stores globally.
We are exploring many different approaches and learning what’s successful. For example, we launched online booking for makeup services in the UK and the US and are finding that over half of the appointments at M•A•C new makeup studio in Manhattan have been made online. In the UK, several of our brands offer cross channel gift cards that can be redeemed online and in our freestanding stores.
Social push
Social media is also being leveraged increasingly effectively. Last October, the Bobbi Brown brand aired an interactive beauty class that scored more than 1.1 million social media impressions. All eyes are now on the Estée Edit initiative, a brand pitched firmly at the millennial audience. With Kendall Jenner and beauty blogger Irene Kim as the public faces, the brand has produced more than 50 videos, ranging from how-tos to aspirational pieces, which are being aggressively pushed out via social channels, including a dedicated Instagram account. Consumers are also invited to add content of their own.
Freda explains:
Inspired by today’s young consumers, the Estée Edit line delivers instant visible benefits centered on the theme beauty is an attitude aimed directly at millennials and promoted on social media. The Estée Edit is part of a strategic effort to modernize the Estée Lauder brand for long-term growth and seed the next generation of consumer while continuing to appeal to its core consumers.
All told, the underlying strategy remains based firmly around innovation to transform digitally an established retail business. Freda says:
Our strategy of having multiple engines of growth extends to our innovation program, which develops desirable technologies and concepts across our product category and brands. Our innovation isn’t just about creating big blockbusters and our success isn’t based solely on the newness product for each brand. Instead, an important impact of our launches is to pull consumers into stores, build traffic and drive sales.
My take
A canny use of social and digital technologies and channels to re-invent a retail behemoth.
Read more on: Analytics planning and data analysisCRM and customer experienceDigital and content marketinge-commerceRetail e-commerce and the omni-channelSocial 