
Etsy, an online marketplace for arts, crafts and small businesses, is a fairly unique company. It’s one of only two companies in the US (by my last count) that has gone public and is attempting to remain a socially responsible B-corp certified organisation.
There are over 1,000 companies in America that have gained B-corp certification, but most of them choose to remain privately owned. And that’s because B-corp companies commit to balancing corporate responsibility and the drive for profits. However, when you’ve got public shareholders and investors to answer to, this becomes somewhat trickier.
When Etsy IPO’d back in April, I wrote a story with the headline: ‘Etsy IPO – can it balance social responsibility with new profits pressures?‘. I said:
[Etsy] has publicly committed to a rigorous framework that requires a certain level of social responsibility. And it should be applauded for making that work in conjunction with growing its business. If more companies did that, less people may have a problem with capitalism in 2015. And remember, this isn’t a PR stunt, if Etsy isn’t fulfilling its social responsibilities, it potentially opens itself up to legal challenges.
However, I do have some concerns. Namely that apart from Rally Software, this is largely an untested model on the public market. There has to be a reason that almost all B-corps are private.
Will Etsy be able to pursue its social goals alongside the need to satisfy investors? I really hope so. Will that be as easy as it is making out? I doubt it.
At the time Etsy CEO Chad Dickerson dismissed any concerns about the largely untested model of a public B-corp, stating that he had spoken to investors and they ‘understood and respected’ the company’s philosophy.
 However, just a few months down the line and Etsy is now facing its first challenge in proving that it can be a profitable company that pleases investors needs and one that doesn’t stray from its rigorous framework for social responsibility.
The challenge comes from Americans for Tax Fairness – a campaign and policy group backed by foundations and unions – that have published a letter that calls into question Etsy’s new tax structure, claiming that it allows the company to “avoid taxes”.
We have also written previously about other large technology companies, such as Facebook and Google, that use Ireland to pay significantly lower tax rates. Legislators in the UK have described the practices as “devious, calculated and…unethical”, for example.
Americans for Tax Fairness have written to the founders of B Lab, the organisation that supports and certifies B-corps, and have heavily criticised Etsy for the move. The letter reads:
B Corp status is an important standard that a lot of consumers use when making decisions about which companies to buy products and services from. It is important that this standard not be weakened by a previously certified B Corp that has changed its behavior and is now using unethical business practices.
Unfortunately, this is what has happened to Etsy, the Brooklyn-based online craft seller. The company recently changed the structure of its subsidiary in Ireland, a tax haven, so that it doesn’t have to publicly report certain financial data, making it easier to avoid taxes. In using the Emerald Isle to dodge paying its fair share of taxes, Etsy joins other infamous offshore corporate tax-avoiders like Apple, Google and Microsoft.
Etsy is currently going through the process of getting reclassified as a B-corp, which was made necessary after it went public. The letter calls for B-Lab to make Etsy’s reclassification contingent upon reversing the changes to its tax structures. It states:
Etsy is now one of those corporations ducking out on its obligations to the nation that made its success possible. When corporations do not contribute their fair share of taxes, other businesses and individual taxpayers have to make up the difference. Etsy’s tax dodge is standard operating procedure among our country’s giant multinational corporations.
We hope it will not be acceptable as a B Corp standard. Therefore, we respectfully ask that B Lab make Etsy’s B Corp designation contingent upon its elimination of the use of its subsidiary in Ireland to dodge taxes.
However, Etsy CEO Chad Dickerson has hit back at the claims put forward, and the media reports that have
Etsy CEO, Chad Dickerson
followed, and has written a blog post that aims to “set the record straight”. He states that whilst he welcomes the increased scrutiny, Dickerson believes that some of the reporting off the back of the claims have been “grossly inaccurate and misleading”.
Dickerson argues that Etsy has changed its global tax structure to better reflect the “reality” of Etsy as a global company. He believes that the choice has been made because it is a tax structure that is the “most straightforward and in line with our value of transparency”.
In the blog, Dickerson outlines what he believes are a number of ‘myths’ around the tax revelations and argues why they are not true. He wrote:
1. Myth:  That the change in our global tax structure was made secretly or with secretive intent.
Truth: The press did not uncover anything we were trying to hide. On the contrary, we disclosed information about this in our  S-1  (p.33) at the time of our IPO in March and also in each of our 10-Q filings for our first quarter earnings in  May  (p.14) and second quarter earnings in  August  (p.15) this year.
2. Myth:  That Etsy’s new tax structure and Irish entity means we are dodging taxes we should be rightly paying.
Truth: At least one article grouped us with companies that “conceal how profits are shifted to zero-tax locales.” We don’t do that and didn’t consider doing it for a second. We pay taxes at the local rate in the US, Canada, Ireland, UK, France, Germany and Australia. We’re not offshoring or using a Double Irish structure or any other elaborate tax scheme that is out there. This is a simple structure.
3. Myth:  That by not filing our Irish annual financial statements publicly, we are not being transparent.
Truth: We file our tax returns and pay our taxes in many states and countries, but we don’t publish those filings for everyone to read. This is a standard business practice and not unique to Etsy. Ireland is just one of many countries where we pay taxes. Our  public financial filings  with the SEC are the best source of information about the revenues we generate and the taxes we pay globally. Every year we break out the revenues and taxes we pay in the US and internationally, so that everyone can see them (refer to page F-37 within the  Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements section  of our S-1).
4. Myth:  That the structure violates our values as a company and, in particular, our commitment to transparency.
Truth: If myths one, two and three were true, we would be violating our values. However, our global tax structure is straightforward, and we pay taxes around the world and make all the required filings wherever we operate. Our tax planning is done consistently with Etsy’s values: we care about Etsy sellers and are transparent about our actions. In fact, we intentionally avoided some of the more complex tax structures that perhaps are more frequently associated with tech companies because those structures are not aligned with our values.
My take
Etsy’s offices: A different way of working
I’m not going to pretend that I know the ins-and-outs of complex tax structures. And its worth pointing out that what Etsy is doing is by no means daring or particularly calculated – loads of companies use Ireland as a base for tax reasons.
However, as Etsy goes through its B-corp reclassification, it will be interesting to see whether or not being ‘tax efficient’ fits with its obligations to be morally responsible. This is exactly one of those areas where maximising revenues and ‘doing the right thing’ conflict somewhat.
It’s also worth remembering that this is all somewhat theoretical at the moment, given that Etsy is yet to report any profits. But as it grows, it’s tax decisions aren’t surprising. It will, however, be interesting to see if the company listens to the community’s concerns and makes any changes following the backlash.
Read more on: e-commerceFuture of work 