
 
When it comes to an IPO, technology companies can seem to do no wrong in the eyes of investors. As we have seen in the past year or two, money has been thrown at digital companies regardless of whether or not they have actually turned a profit. And in this sense, Etsy is no different.
On Wednesday the online marketplace for arts, crafts and small businesses, which was started by a couple of guys in Brooklyn who needed a place to sell handmade wooden computers ten years ago, saw its share price close at $30, an impressive 86% up on its initial offering of $16 on the Nasdaq marketplace.
However, like many other successful ‘online’ businesses in 2015, despite having almost 20 million active buyers, sales of close to $200 million, last year it still booked a loss of close to $15 million. And as noted by the surge in interest on its public debut, this doesn’t seem to bother investors – yet.
However, what’s most interesting about Etsy’s IPO is not whether or not investors will forgive its losses going forward, at the cost of growing and scaling the business, but whether or not they will forgive losses because of its investments in continuing to be a socially responsible corporation.
Etsy is one of over 1,000 US companies that has gained B-corp certification, which aims to balance both corporate responsibility and the drive for profits. ‘Benefit corporations’ are certified by non-profit organisation B Lab and have to adhere to strict social and environmental guidelines to maintain their status.
Not only this, but B-corps now operate under a separate legal framework in certain US states, including Delaware where Etsy is registered, which means that shareholders and stakeholders can pose legal challenges to a benefit corporation that isn’t thought to be balancing its drive for profit with its quest for social responsibility. Historically, all that has mattered under US law previously has been whether or not company directors are doing all they can to grow a business and deliver returns on investment.
When Etsy announced it’s B-corp status back in 2012, it said:

Why did we become B Corp certified? We believe that business has a higher social purposebeyond simply profit. The B Corp assessment gives us a framework to measure Etsy’s success against rigorous values and responsible practices as we scale as a company. Albert Wenger of Union Square Ventures, a longtime Etsy investor and advisor, puts it this way: “We believe that the best long-term stewards of Internet-based networks and marketplaces will focus on value creation for all participants instead of solely on shareholders. B Corporations provide a legal foundation perfectly supporting this much more comprehensive outlook.”

Etsy CEO, Chad Dickerson
However, B-corps have traditionally remained private. In fact, there is only one other B-corp that has gone public – Colorado’s Rally Software, which raised over $80 million about two years ago. Despite Rally’s claims that shareholders had yet not raised any complaints about the company’s mission to be socially responsible since going public, this is still very much considered an untested and untried model.
Will Etsy be able to balance the pressures of investors wanting to get a return and make a profit with its own ethos of ‘doing the right thing’? If it gets the balance wrong and puts too much focus on either goal, it potentially opens itself up to legal challenges.
Etsy CEO Chad Dickerson doesn’t predict it being a problem and has said that the Etsy IPO has attracted investors that understand that the company is about more than just profits. For example, he reserved 15% of the shares sold to a ‘participation program’, which aims to let the Etsy community of sellers get their own piece of the company, limiting each person involved in to $2,500 of stock. The idea being that plenty of small businesses in the community could take part.
Dickerson also keenly outlined in a blog that the move towards a public offering does not infringe upon or negate the company’s values. He said:

Today marks a significant expansion of the Etsy community as we welcome new investors to the Etsy community. Over the past two weeks, I, along with our Chief Financial Officer Kristina Salen, had the opportunity to meet and speak with these investors about Etsy and how we think about our community and our business, particularly our commitments to running a values-led company and a business that focuses on shared success. They understand and respect that we intend to keep our operating philosophy now that we are a public company, and they share our values and vision.

And just in case there was any confusion, Dickerson adds:

As we’ve grown, Etsy has become a touchpoint of debate for larger issues, including whether the
Etsy’s offices: A different way of working
human-centered craftsmanship that we exist to support is compatible with being a public company, which requires a new set of responsibilities to shareholders. We understand the concern, but reject the premise that there is a choice to make between the two. Etsy’s strength as a business and community comes from its uniqueness in the world and we intend to preserve it. We don’t believe that people and profit are mutually exclusive.
We believe that Etsy can be a model for other public companies by operating a values-driven and human-centered business while benefiting people. Financial success is important for the company, because that is what allows us to reinvest in our platform and grow our business sustainably — just like the businesses who have a home on Etsy. When our sellers succeed, our business succeeds, which leads to value for our shareholders. That will be our enduring philosophy and we are committed to running our business in a responsible way that combines our vision with strong execution and discipline, and with faithfulness to our values and conviction.

My take
I’ve got a lot of admiration for Etsy and its ambitions. Unlike some other ‘platform’ technology companies out there, which essentially bring a bunch of buyers and sellers together, create a business model based on increasing demand with pushed down prices, take a cut of the cash exchanged, and offer no real protection in return – Etsy is trying to do something different.
SHOW ME THE MONEY!!
It has publicly committed to a rigorous framework that requires a certain level of social responsibility. And it should be applauded for making that work in conjunction with growing its business. If more companies did that, less people may have a problem with capitalism in 2015. And remember, this isn’t a PR stunt, if Etsy isn’t fulfilling its social responsibilities, it potentially opens itself up to legal challenges.
However, I do have some concerns. Namely that apart from Rally Software, this is largely an untested model on the public market. There has to be a reason that almost all B-corps are private.
Will Etsy be able to pursue its social goals alongside the need to satisfy investors? I really hope so. Will that be as easy as it is making out? I doubt it.
Image Credit Wall Street Journal: Etsy IPO shot

Read more on: e-commerceFuture of work 