
Zach Nelson, CEO NetSuite
While the overall ‘death of Safe Harbor’ is generically bad news for the US cloud industry’s prospects in Europe, there is one company that’s having a good time – PR-wise at any rate – on the back of it and that’s NetSuite.
We noted earlier this month the irony of Safe Harbor being struck down by the European Court of Justice on the same morning that NetSuite announced the opening of two European data centers.
This left CEO Zach Nelson almost obliged to take a position on the matter in front of media and analysts in London that day.
Fortunately, the NetSuite strategy here has been to seize the day and comment on the implications around data transfer and data residency, while others in the cloud industry have chosen to maintain a leadership silence on the matter.
It was the same yesterday when NetSuite announced its third quarter numbers. These were strong enough to keep Wall Street happy. Revenues were up 34% year on year to $192.8 million, bolstered by the Bronto acquisition. Net loss was $37.3 million.
But it was Europe on which Nelson chose to lead on the conference call after the results were announced, saying:
We continue to invest in our opportunity globally and nowhere is that clear that what we and our customers are doing in Europe. In Q3, EMEA continued its streak as being our strongest region. And during the quarter, we doubled down on our investment there.
Our more-than-700 employees on the European continent continued over the products, services, and operational capabilities to enable European companies to compete anywhere in the world with a modern, cloud native infrastructure.
Among those companies, he cited Deliveroo and Pret-a-Manger as prime examples of the kind of European momentum the firm is seeing:
From companies with innovative business models like Deliveroo to large multinationals like Pret-a-Manger, the make-up of these customers shows that the disruptive startups and large enterprises that will change the world in the future will do so on NetSuite.
Our product innovations provide the backbone for innovative companies to make their business visions a reality. While some companies approach to the cloud as just to take old stale product models from the 80s with names like Financials and HCM.
And Nelson was quick to play up the new on-region data centers as well:
We announced the opening of our data centers in Europe, one in Amsterdam and one in Dublin to support our customers in EMEA, as well as to support the changing requirements of European data privacy.
While opening a data center in Europe sounds easy. It requires not only a significant financial resources, but also a significant technical investment to manage our common code base globally. Today, we have five NetSuite data centers around the world, all running a single version of our business management software. This capability has a significant piece of intellectual property that have been replicated by very few of our competitors.
Bronto boost
As for that $200 million Bronto acquisition, Nelson state he is pleased with progress to date:
Bronto continues to be going as we expected and better than expected from my perspective. I think, at their size, they’re doing things that were very similar to what happened to NetSuite at their size. If you look at the number of customers they are adding, their growth in average selling price, all those things are very similar to NetSuite.
We have seen traction within the NetSuite installed base, but they’re also doing very well in their traditional base, [where they] are selling to the Magento installed base and the Demandware installed base.
So we’re pretty happy with what we’re seeing, both within our own SuiteCommerce strategy, as well as within the existing strategy that Bronto had prior to the acquisition to support other B2C platforms with a strong marketing automation.
He adds:
Our acquisitions always have challenges, as you bring two companies together, no matter, how closely aligned their visions are. But it’s a great team down there, there’s a great synergy between what we’re doing on the SuiteCommerce side in particular and obviously their omni-channel marketing machine.
So I think it’s all good as far as we’re consider really going as expected.
My take
NetSuite’s European expansion emphasis continues to deliver results. What’s needed now is a bit more brand profile in the region, but I suspect there will be some interesting developments to come there in the near future.
Disclosure – at time of writing, NetSuite is a premier partner of diginomica. 
Read more on: Cloud platforms - infrastructure and architectureCRM and customer experienceData privacyDigital and content marketinge-commerceRegulationSecuritySocial 