
Events are a huge part of every B2B marketer’s marketing strategy. They attend industry events, and some run their own events for customers and prospective customers. It doesn’t matter how big or important digital gets, there really is no replacement for in-person engagement. Kind of.
Event marketing is a growing tactic
Certain, an event automation software provider, recently did a survey of 1,000 marketers to find out how important event marketing is and what kind of value they get out of holding events.
Here are a few of the findings:

57% spend 25% or more of their annual marketing budget on events and almost three-quarters plan to increase that spending in 2018. It is the second most important tactic after direct marketing.
8% gave their events four or five stars (out of five) for driving demand generation.
The top measurement metrics include attendance (66.9%), revenue generation (55.6%), audience engagement (54.3%) and registration (52.3%). Pipeline influenced is last on the list at 31.8%.

That all sounds good, but the survey also found the biggest challenges related to event marketing is following up with leads. It takes four days or more for 60% of respondents to follow up with leads generated at an event. Almost all didn’t follow up within one day. It seems like there is a lot of work going into creating the event and getting people to attend, but the plan for what happens after falls flat.
Just because you go to an event, doesn’t mean you’ll come away with value, like new contacts or opportunities and you may wonder if the event was worth the time and cost. And just because you hold an event, doesn’t mean you’re going to win a new customer or improve or renew an existing customer relationship. There is more to event marketing than most marketers realize.
Does that mean events aren’t worth the effort? No, but it does mean you have to rethink how you leverage them to drive revenue.
Make the connection easier
Brian Friedman is the Product Director, Mobile, Data & Engagement at eTouches, an event software company. He came to eTouches when his company Loopd was acquired in December of 2016. The Loopd offering was what initially caught my attention. It provides some tools that make connecting with event participants easier – like a mobile app and bluetooth badges, worn as either a necklace or a clip.
But it is Friedman’s perspective on events, engaging attendees and how you get the best value from the event that is even more interesting. And it’s all about focusing on value for the attendee.
Let’s pause for a minute and think about the last conference you attended. You signed in, got your badge and your program, and proceeded to find your way around the conference to sit in on the sessions you picked, networked (or try to network) with people you wanted to meet or people you just happened to meet. You shared business cards, took notes, cursed when you had to walk a million miles between session rooms, and then you were done. It wasn’t bad, you came away with some good information and made a few contacts
If you are the event host, then you planned the event as best possible, picked up your list of attendees that signed in, presented sign in registration sheets at the door to the every session, and networked the conference as best possible. You may also have offered a mobile app for your conference to track sessions people signed up for and to provide some level of communications. When it’s over, you have a list of attendees (multiple lists if you do the session sign ins). Now you have to do something with those lists.
But ask yourself these questions:

If you were an attendee, how likely are you going to follow up with those contacts? Can you even remember where you met them and what you talked about?
If you were the event host, does your mobile app help you with follow up and engagement after the event? Do the leads you just entered in Salesforce from your lists tell you what the person did at the event or how engaged they were? Are you able to differentiate the most viable leads from the others?

What if could create a better event? One that focused on the attendee and ensuring it’s worth their time, and in return created a strong lead list for your company? That’s what Friedman and eTouches want to do.
Building a better event experience for everyone
You know how it works for a normal event. Now think about it this way. Before you attend your event, you download the event app, set up your profile and privacy preferences, and pick your sessions. Then you show up for an event and get your bluetooth badge, sync it up with your mobile app, and you’re off.
As you meet people you want to exchange contact info with, you use your badge to share contact information. The contact info also includes where you were at the event when you share the contact info, giving you context on the contact info. Your mobile app notifies you that a session you registered for is soon starting and gives you directions to the room. When you walk into a session, instead of signing a registration sheet, your badge is automatically read to record you were there. The app can also notify you if another attendee is close by that you indicated you’d like to meet.
You can also share your opinions of each session and the event on your mobile app, join the conference committee and get access to recordings and other materials after the event.
For the event host, there’s a lot of benefit to making creating an event that focuses on giving such high value to the attendees. You have access to the full event journey for each attendee.
Instead of having one list of attendees with no context on what each one did, you now know who attended the most sessions, who contributed more to the community and was the most engaged.
This improved perspective helps you understand how good your event was and how you can improve it, and also helps you decide which attendees you should focus the most attendee on after the event. Who have the potential to be great advocates for your brand, who you can convert quicker or upsell/cross-sell to.
All of this is what etouches (with the Loopd technology) helps you do. Most companies focus their event analytics on the company. It’s Friedman’s view that focusing on the experience of the attendee helps create a better experience for everyone. Companies can create focused campaigns for the event because they know what the attendees have signed up for. They can create better campaigns after the event because they know what sessions the attendees actually attended, what booths they visited, who they talked to and more.
My take
I don’t attend a lot of events, but when I do, I expect to come away with valuable information and contacts. But that’s hard to do. I’m not the most outgoing networker, and there are too many sessions that overlap that I’d like to attend.
The idea of a badge and a mobile app that makes it easier for me to find people at an event I’d like to meet, to exchange contact information and have immediate context recorded that tells me when and where I met that person. To provide me with access to event and session materials after the event and to receive appropriate contact from the event host after the event sounds great. I would willingly share my details on a mobile app if I knew I would get an improved and contextual experience.
Etouches is one vendor providing these capabilities. Friedman is focused on ensuring there are tools and techniques that build better attendee experiences. Certain also has a mobile app that does similar things, although I didn’t see the bluetooth badge that adds that value I would love to use.
My big takeaway is this. If you are planning an event, you have to focus on how to create the best experience for your attendees. An experience that runs before the event, during and after.  Even if you don’t invest in event software that can do this, you should be thinking about the attendee and their experience. It will reflect well on your company, and it will improve your ability to engage influencers and advocates and increase conversions.
Image credit - Build your business team . Mixed media © Sergey Nivens - Fotolia.comDisclosure - Salesforce is a diginomica premier partner.Read more on: Analytics planning and data analysisDigital and content marketing 