
 
Tony Singleton OBE, G-Cloud director
Where do we start? Grab a coffee and settle down for an exclusive two part insight into plans around G-Cloud, Digital Services Framework and the Digital Services Marketplace. There’s a lot to talk about and think about.
It has after all been an incredibly tumultuous few weeks for the G-Cloud team, with a large amount of pressure in particular placed on the UK government’s Digital Commercial Programme Director, Tony Singleton.
Last month Singleton faced a community backlash over one of the key frameworks that is intended to be used to drive digital transformation across government – the Digital Services Framework (DSF).
Following some strong words of warning from the supplier community, which claimed that the framework reduced digital agencies to nothing more than cheap body-shops for government departments, Singleton was forced to admit that things had gone wrong and that he and his team were going to reassess DSF’s structure.
And I applauded him for the U-turn. It highlighted that GDS is living up to its word of listening to its stakeholders, failing fast and iterating as it goes along.
Nonetheless I think that it’s fair to say that there is some trepidation in the air amongst those buying and supplying services about the direction of DSF, as well as the G-Cloud, and the frameworks’ overarching shop window – the Digital Marketplace.
Which is why I was pleased to sit down with Singleton and hash out some of the issues and discuss what the strategy is and where we can expect digital procurement to be headed over the next 18 months.
And what an interesting conversation it was…
The DSF problem
It seems sensible to start with DSF, given that it is the area of most concern for many out there in the community. The central problem with DSF2, the second and most recent iteration of the framework, was that Singleton’s team intended to make it the sole place for government to buy specialist ‘agile’ services, once it went live. Previously buyers had typically been going to the more established Lot 4 on the G-Cloud to buy these services – which is evidently a popular choice, given that Lot 4 accounts for nearly 75% of all G-Cloud spend.
However, when GDS started making noises about stripping ‘agile’ from the G-Cloud, forcing buyers to use the less than adequate DSF, that’s when things truly kicked off. As I said, this decision has now been reversed, and the services will remain on the G-Cloud 5 framework until things are figured out, but it still raises questions about the future of DSF, given that this will eventually be the place to buy the highly sought after ‘agile’ capabilities.
Singleton began by explaining that he didn’t want to just completely ditch the problematic DSF2, given that over 280 suppliers had already signed up to the framework and had invested time and money in going through the procurement process. And he claims that DSF2 did in fact build in some improvements on the previous version. But he insists that the next iteration, DSF3, will bear little resemblance to the first two frameworks. He says:

DSF3 was always going to be the revolution, the complete revamp of the entire thing. Until we come out of discovery, we don’t know what changes there will be. [We have a] discovery kick off session this week and we have done some user research already. I wouldn’t want to say we are going to tear it up, but that’s actually what we are going to do. Go right back to basics and ask: what is the problem we are trying to solve? It’s about providing capability and teams to people trying to transform services and do bespoke builds.
It’s really a matter of listening to everyone. We are talking to digital leaders, tech leaders across government to get their input. I am committed to blogging regularly about what we are doing; so everyone knows what’s coming out of discovery, where we are thinking about going and so on. What I don’t want to do is get to the end of the two months discovery, publish something, and then everyone says no that’s wrong.

The discovery phase will last approximately three months and a full procurement will then follow. Singleton says, however, that he would like to see the framework live by the end of the year – but this does very much depend on how long the OJEU process takes.
He also says that DSF3 shouldn’t be about body-shopping, it should be about getting in the right team to do a piece of digital work that is required by government. Singleton also claims that this time round, GDS will spend time wooing the digital agencies sector through a number of workshops and by coordinating with the likes of EuroCloud and TechUK, which will please many of the suppliers trying to get on the framework.
GDS vs. CCS
One of the other main concerns that rose to the surface during the DSF debacle, was the way in which the Government Digital Service and the Crown Commercial Service worked together. Whilst Singleton is in charge of the programme’s direction, Sarah Hurrell, the Commercial Director of Technology at CCS, and her team, also play a role in setting the agenda.
It has been perceived by some – including G-Cloud founder Christ Chant – that CCS retains too much of the ‘old school’ Whitehall approach to procurement and technology, with some calling for its involvement in digital to be put to a stop. This is because CCS is largely charged with keeping GDS in-line with EU procurement regulations and is often seen as the ‘no’ person.
However, Singleton was keen to relay that the relationship between himself and Hurrell is a good one, and that the dynamic between GDS and CCS is working well. When I ask whether or not he thought that the two organisation’s priorities were not properly aligned, he says:

No not at all. There has been a lot out in the press about CCS/GDS rifts and so on. But we do
Singleton claims there is little boxing going on between CCS and GDS
work together, very, very closely. We are in the same building, Sarah Hurrell is up here, I go up to Norwich a couple of times a month, they are down here a couple of times a week. I would describe the working relationship between us as a ‘creative tension’.
There’s things that we want to do, but it’s always useful with CCS’s commercial background to be there and say: stop, have you thought about this? And in the same ways, they will say to us: have you considered the changes to EU procurement law around dynamic purchasing? We do talk a lot.

When I ask whether or not he believes CCS retains an ‘old world’ view or things and whether or not he agrees with Chant on effectively getting rid of it and rebuilding it from the ground up, he says:

I think it’s difficult to talk about an entire organisation of however many thousand people, but within the technology team, within Sarah’s team, we do work very closely together. Even something over the issue of Lot 4 and agile on G-Cloud, I know that was reported as ‘GDS steps in’, but that was actually a joint decision that Sarah and I made at the time.”
It’s really interesting having somebody there that makes you think twice.

Redefining ‘agile’ (or ‘Agile’)
One final point to make about DSF 3 and G-Cloud, with regards to the agile services, is that Singleton and CCS are currently approaching suppliers to actually find out what sort of agile services they are providing, so that they can understand which framework they should be sitting on.
The main reason for this is that GDS don’t want to be left in a position whereby G-Cloud 5 gets turned off and DSF 3 is not yet live – it wants to understand what agile services it can keep on the G-Cloud going forward. CCS is trying to establish what is in scope.
Essentially it boils down to this – if you are working in an agile way to provide support to a greater transformation programme, then you’ll likely be allowed on the G-Cloud. However, if you are an agile team that is providing and building a bespoke digital service, then you will need to be on the next DSF.

CCS are coming up with a plan – we don’t want to be in a position when all of a sudden, for those particular services, the public sector has nowhere to buy and suppliers have got nowhere to sell. So we want to look at DSF2 and what comes after that, what suppliers are on that. What’s more important is actually getting that service description right.
So, if its clearly a supplier providing people with a bespoke build of a new digital service – no, that should not be on G-Cloud, that should be on DSF. If it’s someone saying I work in an agile way, and I can do the configuration, give you the support you need, then that’s fine.
So what we are doing now, with CCS, is contacting suppliers and asking them to describe their service a bit better than what it is. And if you’re using ‘agile’ as a verb, that’s fine, but it’s only agile with a capital ‘A’ we are worried about [laughs]. Whatever the service is, it’s a matter of defining what services are in scope and what services are out of scope. I don’t really want to use the word ‘agile’, because it’s more about the bespoke software development builds – they will be moved over DSF or somewhere else.

Singleton also says that he truly believes that there is a need for a DSF framework – although it might not be branded that next time around. He says:

Whether we call it DSF or not, I don’t know. The whole thing doesn’t sound right, thinking from a GDS style guide point of view – you’re not buying a digital service, you’re buying the capability to build the digital service. But it really depends what comes out of discovery. My personal view is that there does need to be something separate.

Part Two – To understand how Tony Singleton plans to deal with G-Cloud engagement across the public sector and the broader plans for the Digital Marketplace, click here to read the second part of our exclusive interview.
[mailmunch-form id=”14637″]
Read more on: G-Cloud and the Digital Marketplace

