
Vishal Sikka, CEO Infosys
When Vishal Sikka was appointed CEO Infosys, many colleagues were skeptical about his ability to successfully lead a services business. The most common critique was that he had no services background so how could he possibly make a good go of running a services business of that scale?
At the six month mark, I noted in a conversation we had that Sikka’s vision included:
Getting away from simply being a low cost outsourcing provider to one where value gets added. “The mechanism to make all this happen is education…we’re training people in artificial intelligence.” As an aside, I was reminded that education isn’t limited to the training schools Infosys operates. Immediately before we recorded this session, Sikka opened a package which included a book about design thinking.
Seven months on from that last check in, I was privileged to attend the company’s internal US sales kick off. This was a unique experience because I have never been allowed to get inside a client company in this way. My role as a media person is regarded as too much of a risk. I get that.
I was allowed to attend any session of my choosing. I made clear that I would not share any confidential information or disclose client names and would remain in listen only mode during sessions. I wanted to understand how a technology services company goes about the business of transferring its vision to its sales people. I especially wanted to understand how the Infosys leadership is turning vision into executable delivery.
A few things I learned that I can share.
Anyone who has seen Sikka in action knows that his delivery and passion are infectious. His willingness to talk about how certain things don’t work or are sub-optimal and then turn those tidbits into a humorous anecdote are endearing and sincere.
An example: When on stage in front of a big audience, Sikka uses a large scale tablet on which he draws out his thinking against a few background slides. It’s a form of whiteboarding that works well as a device through which to communicate.
This time he said and I am paraphrasing to a certain extent:
You might notice I don’t use PowerPoint, I wonder if the name came about because it had something to do with power and making a point. I use this tablet…You can’t use an iPad for this kind of presentation and these are incredible devices. But have you noticed they need a proper computer to drive them and there’s no wireless connection? That’s why I’ve got this big Mac next to me. You know we still live in the Dark Ages, right?
I’ve always known that Sikka has a degree of humility few technology CEOs demonstrate. This was encapsulated in an expression he used a couple of times:
We should have the confidence to know that we are the best in our class but not talk about it in an arrogant way. That would be wrong.
Sanjay Purohit, EVP Infosys
How real is that? A session orchestrated by Sanjay Purohit, EVP and global head of consulting was the best I attended.
The company brought on stage five pairs of lead consultants who manage some of Infosys larger accounts. Regular readers would have recognized every name on the deck. They each had eight minutes to communicate their story and in only one slide.
While each story was unique, there was an enthusiasm and vibrancy I have never seen from consultants. They talked in animated fashion about the value they are delivering, how that translates to deals done and how those accounts have been grown. It was 40 minutes of encouragement for those that have ears to hear and who are willing to kick over the traces of Infosys being perceived as a low cost ‘body shop.’
Then there was the collection of videos from multiple customers representing business around the world. Each was either a CIO or senior head of technology in a company that anyone would recognize. They were asked two questions: what they like about Infosys and what they wish of Infosys. None of the videos were scripted, there was no fancy production, just people talking. The responses were varied and full of warmth. But on the wish side, many want Infosys to help them innovate. Should that be a shock? Yes.
Infosys is often painted as a low cost India based outsourcer.  That is not the Infosys I heard.
There is, of course, much to be done. Or put in Sikka’s terms which I am paraphrasing:
There is no-one going to come down from the mountain and weave some magic over us. We have to do it.
I came away from the two days having learned a great deal. All of those I met, many for the first time, spoke with candor and an enthusiasm that is both unusual and encouraging.
At any conference, I can readily find my share of people willing to tell me how tough things are, how broken this and that are or how badly the company sucks. People I met were willing to share their issues but with a mind to work through solutions. That is a different experience.
In a piece I wrote about transformation I said that:
Great inspirational leaders are not enough; leadership isn’t a one person sport. Steve Jobs needed Tim Cook and many others.
Infosys gets that. I lost count of the number of people that were called out for the things they do that take the business forward. Those are very good signs for customers and for the future of a company that is transforming much more quickly than I imagined and which has value delivery at its core.
While all this sounds encouraging – and it should – we cannot forget that the market has certain expectations. The degree to which Infosys is successful will only be evidenced as reality in the financial statements. The company’s next quarter ends in just over a month’s time.
If you have not already heard it, check out the audio recording I made with Abdul Razack, EVP platforms Infosys on open source. Look out for the recording I made with Purohit, which is coming soon.
Disclosure: Infosys is a premier partner at time of writing and is a personal client.
Read more on: The new professional and IT as a service 