
 
Tony Singleton
In the first part of our two-part interview with GDS’s Tony Singleton, we took a look at how the G-Cloud and Digital Commercial Director is dealing with the problem of the Digital Services Framework, which has come under fire of late.
This second part of the interview sees Singleton explain his plans for the Digital Marketplace, which includes bringing a number of additional frameworks into the fold.
Singleton also addresses the concerns that have been circulating about GDS’s G-Cloud engagement and highlights plans to improve the buying process on the digital frameworks.
Digital Marketplace Strategy
Interestingly, Singleton and his team also have plans to integrate a wider variety of frameworks into the Digital Marketplace – with the aim that buyers will be able to purchase what they need, without worrying, or even knowing, which framework they are buying from. The aim is that a buyer will be able to go to the Digital Marketplace, search for what they need and then purchase it in a way that is much quicker and easier than was previously possible.
This all forms part of the GDS’s new Digital Marketplace Strategy document, which diginomica was given overview of prior to publication today. The document is clear and intends to recreate much of the successful principles of the G-Cloud, across a number of other frameworks, all within the Digital Marketplace. For example, compliant-by-default will be key.
You can view the whole document here, it is certainly worth a read. Singleton says:

Part of that is looking at what frameworks should be on there. We need to work through with CCS about which ones are best suited to sit on the Marketplace, but certainly the frameworks that GDS looks after, they are very much contenders. I am speaking to Liam Maxwell’s team now about how we move PSN across, how we move across the Crown Hosting Service, the assisted digital framework. and so on.
When we talk about measures of success, one of mine is that buyers don’t care anymore about which framework they are buying from. Unfortunately, at the moment, they still do. So what we want to do with the Marketplace is make it compliant by default. We know from all the user research that one of the big things that scares buyers is ending up in court for what they’ve done. So whatever comes out of DSF3, we will know we have a legally compliant solution. It’s getting that stamp on the whole of the Marketplace. It’s a safe place to buy what you need, you’re not going to get into trouble.

Singleton wants to take this further though, by making the Digital Marketplace more of an ‘end-to-end’ experience. A complaint that is often thrown at the front-end online store for the G-Cloud, is that once you have found what solution you want, you then still have to take your processes offline and revert back to Word documents and Excel spreadsheets. Singleton says:

One of the things that has come out clearly from user research is that once you have done that initial search, buyers need to be able to save that somehow so that they’ve got an audit trail. Why not press a button to generate the call-off agreement? Why would you go off into word documents? That seems daft. It almost seems then that that could automatically talk to Contracts Finder, so that it’s automatically publishing those call-off agreements and contracts. So there’s a lot of joining up to do.

Building on the success of the G-Cloud
Whilst GDS has had some trouble with DSF, it has had much greater success with the initial project that sparked change in how Whitehall buys technology – G-Cloud. G-Cloud is now a brand and is regarded internationally as a gold standard for how government departments, agencies and the wider public sector should be buying off-the-shelf commodity software in the cloud.
However, despite the fact that over £30 million is being spent via G-Cloud every month, Singleton wants to improve on how the message of G-Cloud is communicated to government. GDS now wants G-Cloud to be seen as a tool that enables wider transformational change. Singleton says:

It has been an incredible success story. Yes we could do more for local authorities. But to go from nothing three years ago to £467m now is incredible. We continue to iterate to meet user need, but what I really want to do now is to start building on that success. Cloud first, that is all taken care of. But there is a much bigger story that we can start talking about now, where G-Cloud fits in within the entire transformation programme. Start bringing out those benefits, where real transformations occur.

However, one of the main criticisms of G-Cloud over the past year has been GDS’s commitment to wider engagement with buyers across the public sector. diginomica ran a special report looking at the engagement ‘problem’, which resonated well with the community. For example, it emerged that just 1% of Singleton’s G-Cloud budget was being spent on engagement – a figure that is often cited.
However, Singleton is upbeat his efforts in communicating the G-Cloud message – referencing a number of regional events, work with SOCITM and a claim that everyone in his team works on engagement. He also dismissed concerns over the 1% figure. He says:

The 1% figure is the money we set aside to hire venues when we do various events. Last year we did four or five events with TechUK, they’re brilliant at driving down prices, so we didn’t even need to use that much.
The entire team is involved with engagement, plus I’ve got a team of four people that are dedicated to engagement full-time. The other team who do all the commissioning and procurement side of things, they are continuing to talk to teams across departments about how they use G-Cloud and DSF.
It’s almost like the hard-sell around G-Cloud, that’s been done, so what we want to do now is put more emphasis on the big transformations that G-Cloud can deliver. That’s what you can do if you use G-Cloud – it’s getting that message across.

One other point I wanted to raise with Singleton, with regards to the G-Cloud, was about the much discussed Lot 4 (the lot in which agile consultancy services is currently placed and where most of the spend is directed). It has been highlighted by many that because most of the spend has been on Lot 4, not much of it has actually gone on ‘true’ cloud products e.g. SaaS, PaaS, IaaS.
Some claim that this isn’t too much of an issue, given that many are likely to be using Lot 4 to transition to true cloud products later, as part of wider transformation programmes. Whilst others insist that it is indicative of the failings of the government’s Cloud First policy.
But the point I was most interested in, was to find out whether or not Singleton was worried about G-Cloud spend dropping drastically once those all important agile services are removed from the framework and put on to DSF3. However, Singleton isn’t concerned, as long as the spend is going through the Digital Marketplace in one way or another. He says:

I’m not worried, I think we need to look at the overall impact of the Digital Marketplace – the other frameworks on there, any SME spend going through there. We do need to get the message across though that it is the total spend that matters. What I would get worried about is G-Cloud spend going down and the others not going up. It’s a matter of looking at what other frameworks sit alongside the G-Cloud, it’s about looking at the total spend. That’s when you get the much better success story as well.

My take
There’s lots of detail in here that is useful for those following the G-Cloud team and the evolving Digital Marketplace. This is the first time that I’ve had a proper conversation with Singleton on the record, and it’s clear to me that he is determined to make this work.
DSF3 will be a deal breaker in many ways though – if GDS is insisting on taking agile services off of G-Cloud, they need to get DSF right. Ripping it up and starting again is absolutely the right approach; but let’s hope Singleton, his team and the community come up with a solution that makes it easy to buy those
If they don’t, and if they’re not available on G-Cloud anymore, that’s a fast thttp://diginomica.com/wp-admin/post.php?post=724482&action=edit&message=1#rack route back to the old way of doing things.
My final question to Singleton was: is there anything that worries you about the current strategy? His response:

There’s things that worry me every week, but it’s mostly the enormity of the task ahead. My wanting to go faster than actually possible. The strategy is an 18 month to two year strategy, whereas I’d like to see it done in six months.

The next 18 months are going to be critical to the future success of this pioneering and innovative approach to technology procurement in government.
Let’s hope GDS keeps up its approach of being open and transparent – because it can’t do this alone. Involving the community throughout the process will be the key ingredient to success.
[mailmunch-form id=”14637″]
 
Read more on: G-Cloud and the Digital Marketplace

