
Clothing retailer Express has been hit by a major offline issue. Can IT and digital spend put that right? That’s the dice being rolled by CEO David Kornberg, who attributes year-on-year sales decline of 8% to having too much choice in-store and confusing the customer. 
There was, he says: 

a lack of clarity in our assortment caused by too many choices and this was compounded by skewing too young… We found that the increased choice count resulted in a lack of clarity across the store particularly in women and ultimately led to lower sales and added mark down pressure. 
In an effort to acquire younger customers to our brand, we expanded our merchandising reach and shifted our marketing projection. While our fashion attracted more customers at the lower end of our target demographic age group, this was more than offset by a decline at the upper end.

But it’s all fixable, he reckons, on the back of investment in new back-office tech as well as an overhauled focus omni-channel digital capabilities and outreach.  The IT roll out has gone well, he says, replacing core systems that were a quarter of a century old in some cases: 

We successfully launched several major IT systems in May and at the beginning of August. With the investment and focus of these implementations behind us, we can now start to take advantage of the new system capabilities as we head into 2017. As it relates to top line growth, we are confident that we’ve identified the necessary actions to move past the issues we faced in the quarter.
We implemented a new order management system early in the second quarter. Subsequently, at the start of Q3 our new retail management and Enterprise Resource Planning system went live. 

What Express managment is counting on here is that the four years of spend will enable them now to plan at a more granular level – by channel, by retail stores, by e-comp outlets. There have been some teething issues, but the priority now is on stabilization of the finished systems and a degree of internal process overhaul. But Kornberg belivees the ‘heavy lifting’ is over:

The good news is that these complex implementations are behind us. All of the systems are up and running and we can now focus on leveraging our new capabilities. Over time these systems will allow us to quicken decision making, increase speed to market and conduct planning and allocation to a more precise level. This effort should enable us at the right inventory across channel leading to lower clearance and therefore driving more profitable sales. We’ve now modernized approximately 95% of our portfolio of systems over the past four years with most of the investment behind us.

Strategic digital
With those new systems positioned as the foundation for the retailer’s omni-channel thinking, the firm is also focusing on a number of key initiatives to expand and exploit that, beginning with an emphasis on increasing the number of customer touch points and revamping the loyalty program, The theory is that as the number of direct touch points is increased, the firm is better able to market its Express Next scheme. 
This is something of a reversal as Express had previously reduced the touchpoint total, as Kornberg notes: 

Last year we conducted testing that showed we had room to reduce in-home mailing to certain customer segments and also reduce other marketing tactics, such as customer bounce back programs. In isolation, each of these decisions looked to be appropriate. 
But in aggregate, touch points in some customer segments dropped significantly over the spring season. We are increasing these customer touch points back to last year’s level ,starting with the September in-home direct mailer and will ensure we maintain optimum touches with each customer segment going forward. To be clear, we are not increasing the depth of our direct mail promotions; we are increasing the breadth of the audience.

This is necessary to breath new life into the loyalty program, he adds: 

Our data shows that our fully enrolled Express Next customers shop with us four times more often than the non-Next customer. To maximize enrollment in our program, we are set to re-launch Express Next in September with enhancements that make it easier for customers to activate and shop. 
We will introduce the program in two phases with an initial marketing push to communicate the benefits of the program. These benefits will include enticing experiential event in our top 50 stores, such as blow-dry and styling bars for women among others.
This will be followed by updated visual presentation of our next loyalty program in store and online. We expect these events and our marketing push to increase sign ups ahead of the all important holiday season. A second phase will begin in mid January and will include integration and social media with a full program refresh set to begin in the February to March timeframe.

There will also be a push to improve the targeting of email marketing through increased personalisation and segmentation in what Kornberg calls a “more strategic approach “ than previously. 
E-commerce investment will continue with enhancements to functionality being rolled out in the coming months. Kornberg says the firm has been active in driving improvements particularly around product presentation and search capabilities on the web site: 

We implemented a new search capability that provides visual recommendation immediately to users which is increasing conversion rate. In addition, the improvements we’ve made to our product pages are resulting in better product presentation, greater engagement in reviews and improvement in some of our poor conversion metrics.
Beginning in August, we rolled out substantial new improvement in how we help customers filter our product assortment by trend that we believe will connect our product better to customer needs.

There’s also a lot more focus on the actual content and how it’s presented: 

We’ve recently launched the edit on our website which will better showcase our content and story telling to engage new customers in ways to connect to their life to our product. Our goal is to showcase our different shades in fashion with high emotional content to drive sales, while creating royalty through making the purchase experience as easy as possible. 

Finally there’s to be a bigger push in social media and using brand ambassadors in the blogo-sphere. This is already starting to pay off in the form of sales spikes around particular items, says Kornberg, citing 25,000 subscribers to the Express Men channel on Instagram since its launch three months ago:

We have thrilled to have Karlie Kloss return to Express this time for longer engagement as a brand ambassador for core Express campaign. We are looking forward continuing association with us as a way to build and extend our brand reach as well as provide differentiation in our stores as we present an assortment curated in collaboration with Karlie next spring. On the men’s side, athletes have proven appeal to our core male demographic and we continue to be equally enthusiastic with the work we are doing with Kris Bryant, the Cubs third base and 2016 All-Star.
We are also launching and ExpressLife campaign where we engage with people doing meaningful work within their communities. We know that real people resonate with our core demographic and we are more closely aligning Express with these consumers by working with influencers who have excelled in their field of expertise.

Overall, Kornberg clearly hopes that digital and IT will be the twin solutions to the problems that the firm has experienced offline in recent times: 

Looking forward, the constant is the product and execution remains at the heard of our business. We are committed to providing our customers with a curated collection of fashion that represents what’s now, along with the great customer experience. The new initiatives that we’ve implemented in brand building and IT will enable us to increase our speed to market thereby allowing us to bring new trends to our customers more often. 

My take
Express has been spending wisely over the past four years on overhauling its 25 year old IT systems, although why it waited 21 years to do so is another question. That said, Kornberg 4-point digital strategy all makes perfect sense in theory. As he himself says though, the trick now is the execution of that theory in a hugely-competitive fashion retail market. 
Image credit - ExpressRead more on: Retail e-commerce and the omni-channel 