
In the literary world, Faber & Faber enjoys a heavyweight reputation as the publisher of works by William Golding, Sylvia Plath, Philip Larkin and Kazuo Ishiguro, among many others. T.S. Eliot was once an editor at the company and its backlist features books by no less than twelve Nobel Laureates and six Booker prize winners.
But despite the prestige attached to its 86-year old name, Faber isn’t afraid to modernise. In 2008 it introduced its print-on-demand Faber Finds imprint, which publishes out-of-print classics. The following year, it unveiled Faber Digital, which produces book-related apps for the iPhone and iPad.
And more recently, it’s undertaken a complete revamp of its content storage and collaboration infrastructure, using Box’s cloud-based service internally to manage author manuscripts from first draft through to final approval and onwards, through the design and production process.
This move was prompted by the need to replace antiquated file servers sitting on a elderly storage area network, as Jim Lindsay, a freelance integration specialist who regularly works for Faber, explains:
This ageing infrastructure was out of manufacturer’s support and hadn’t been updated for many years. It was creaking, really, both in terms of performance and capacity.
The cost of replacing that infrastructure, like-for-like, looked likely to approach £100,000, he says. But age wasn’t the only problem associated with this set-up, he says. The need for greater mobility among Faber’s workforce was another issue, with editors sometimes choosing to work from home on manuscripts and salespeople often out on the road, attending international book fairs.
Lindsay was called in to Faber in order to weigh up the options. He realised quite quickly that a cloud approach would be a better choice for a company that needed to enable remote access to documents and wasn’t keen on running in-house IT infrastructure, in any case. First off, he considered Dropbox’s Enterprise offering – but the company fell down on two fronts, he says.
In terms of technology, [Dropbox] didn’t have the offering I wanted in terms of very fine control of content and ease of administration for users. Neither of these things worked for me. And the other issue was that I thought they were arrogant. [Dropbox] wasn’t particularly interested in talking to us and they didn’t put much effort into winning our business. I know Faber & Faber’s not a big company, but when you’re buying a service, you want to feel like that business matters to the provider. That was a shame.
So Lindsay moved on. His next stop was Storage Made Easy, a UK-based cloud file share and sync provider. Again, he ran up against two concerns:
[Storage Made Easy] is a lovely bunch of people with a good product – but the interface was clunky and quite difficult to use. I thought it was a bit old-fashioned and they weren’t willing to update it unless we paid a lot of money. Also, they’re a small company and I just wondered how long they’d be around before they got snapped up by a bigger vendor.
In June 2014, he started speaking with Box. Throughout July and August he tested its product. By September, he’d embarked on a four- to five-month rollout:
This was the first time I’d worked with Box, although I’ve worked with file servers and data storage for quite a long time. One thing I immediately liked about Box is its use of folders, users and groups. It’s quite intuitive and I found it pretty easy to get it to fit Faber’s required workflow.
The roll-out began with Faber’s poetry editorial department – a team of just two people. There were several good reasons for picking this area of the business as the starting point, as Lindsay explains:
They’d got fed up with the performance and lack of reliability [of the previous infrastructure] and had gone their own way using Dropbox. We wanted to get that data back. Also, a tiny team was a good way for us to use them as guinea pigs. So we did that and got good feedback.
Next up were Faber’s other editorial teams, before Lindsay moved on to what he anticipated would be the most difficult area of the business to address: design and production:
Here, there was the issue of quite complicated workflows and amendments – but also there’s the sheer size of files to consider. [This department is] frequently shipping around whacking great Photoshop and InDesign files, print-ready PDFs and so on.
But in the end, the process turned out to be quite trouble-free, thanks in part to the cooperation and contributions made by Faber’s studio manager, Paddy Fox. Says Lindsay:
He took the whole thing on board and led from the top, taking control. He had a strong interest in making sure we got it right and was enthusiastic about replacing what he thoughts was an inefficient workflow with something that would work better for the department as a whole. With his assistance, we handled the whole of design and production in about three weeks, which was quicker and less problematic than I thought it would be.
Last to be tackled was the sales team, but good reports of early successes elsewhere in the business helped to ease the transition here, says Lindsay. The implementation was completed by early 2015.
Next year, he’s planning to add Box Capture to the service, so that Faber employees can start integrating photos captured on their mobile phones into internal workflows:
I see this as an ongoing process. Having made the leap, it makes perfect sense to us to work out what else we can do to extend our usage of the system.
Read more on: Best of archivesCollaboration sharing and digital productivityCRM and customer experienceUse cases 