
The last couple of days have seen a slew of articles talking about the fact that Facebook has surpassed Google as a prime source of traffic referrals for publishers. If you take the view that all businesses are media businesses (and we do) then you might be forgiven for rushing to sign checks for what amount to Facebook Ads rather than Google’s AdWords. The reality is more nuanced.
This from Parse.ly:
But, although Facebook is acquiring new traffic faster than Google, Parse.ly’s data shows that Google referral traffic is not necessarily decreasing. As a matter of fact, Google’s share remains relatively stable…
Mashable’s JP Mangalindan elaborates: “Facebook has not disclosed how Instant Articles are performing so far with users, or whether any money is changing hands yet. But third-party data like that from Parse.ly is further ammunition in Facebook’s campaign suggesting that, like it or not, online publishers need the social network if they want to reach the greatest possible number of eyeballs.”
I find this kind of verbiage frustrating. It paints a wholly one sided view of the world that isn’t true. Parse.ly hedges its bets but doesn’t provide a great deal of additional insight other than stating the obvious.
MarketingLand.com quoted Parse.ly Algorithms Lead, Martin Laprise, in saying: “There’s no denying that Facebook has come up the ranks of referrers — and editors and marketers alike can’t ignore it. However, network-wide trends do not apply to every site, nor to every post. The biggest recommendation that Parse.ly can give to any marketer is to not make assumptions about your audience, but to make sure you have the actual data on where your audience comes from.”
Getting the kind of data to which Laprise refers means what? Getting referral data is only one sliver of a much more complex puzzle.
In our world which, very, very broadly is business to business and not consumer we ask questions like: Who are these ‘readers?’ Where are they located? What exit pages did they use? This is all part of an exercise to better understand what people want. Equally important, we want to understand how patterns of activity evolve and how they change over time.
Anecdotally, I often see Facebook messages that say things like “Twitter is dead” (or is dying), “Facebook is the only place I come these days” or “Facebook is where I get all my news.” I’m not buying that and have the numbers to back it up.
We understand that audiences are fragmented and that the network with the highest pulling power should show the greatest potential for traffic building. But the reality is that you can only make that assessment in the light of many other data points.
In our case, we see referrals from a clutch of sources but by far and away the most important one is Google Search. This fits in well with what some partners have told us about customer acquisition. We see some Facebook traffic but not enough to justify the likely investment needed to make a break out difference. And we absolutely would not consider dumping content onto Facebook at this time unless we can find a good way of gaming it in our favor. That is because Facebook is a publishing vampire squid.
Instead, we are considering raising our investments in LinkedIn as a publishing medium because that’s where we see the most valuable engagement. Again, that fits well with our market and the way people inside the market tend to behave.
There is one caveat. Nothing is forever and things change rapidly. We therefore make no assumptions on this topic and advise others to do the same.
Read more on: Social 