
With over a billion daily active users, most of them on a smartphone, Facebook has long ceased being just a place for socializing and turned into an important platform for business. As with Google, the company’s core product remains advertising, but also like its Silicon Valley neighbor, Facebook has grand ambitions of becoming people’s one-stop shop for online activities, including, as I profiled earlier, work collaboration and soon commerce from Slack.
While most of the news coverage from Facebook’s recent F8 developer conference focused on its VR and AR projects, these remain long-term propositions and years from widespread commercial significance.
Lost in the noise about 3D camera arrays and immersive virtual environments were enhancements to Facebook Messenger and associated bot services that build on features announced last year and continue its evolution from a simple IM app to a business application platform.
For a growing number of customers, portended by the half of teens that use Messenger daily, it will become their default interface to online services with such penetration it provides businesses that exploit the platform with a competitive advantage.
Facebook’s ambitions for Messenger, which attracts 1.2 billion users every month, are bold. As David Marcus, VP of Messenger puts it in announcing new features at F8,
We think of Messenger as being like the new social living room for the world, where people can hang out, share, chat, play games or buy things, while still being able to reach nearly everyone, wherever they are. We now think we are combining two tools of the past — the telephone directory (the way we used to find people) with the Yellow Pages (the way we used to find businesses).
Messenger bots, of which there are already 100,000 in regular use, are the vehicle for connecting businesses, currently 60 million and growing, and services with users. During last year’s beta release, Facebook described how it sees bots turning Messenger into an application platform for mobile business,
Think of a message thread as the place where you connect and interact with your users. Build just one bot, and your experience is available on all platforms where Messenger exists, including iOS, Android, and web. It also removes the friction of your users having to download one more app, on top of all the apps they already have and may not use…
What’s new?
Messenger platform 1.0 provided the application framework, including a communication API, generic message templates, rudimentary business discovery tools, a bot engine and customizable welcome screen. While useful for proving the concept, this year’s platform 2.0 enables bots to deliver more sophisticated conversational, visual and social features via the following enhancements:

A browsable business directory called Discover that showcases popular bots and businesses that offer bot services like ordering or customer support.
Parametric Messenger codes that can be dynamically generated for individual users or to deliver different services. For example, a retailer could create different codes depending upon a customer’s location that provide ads or promotions relevant to thwnat particular department. While Discover allows users to find businesses in the online world, parametric QR codes improve service discovery in the physical one.
Chat Extensions that enable richer interactions between users and bots such as content sharing, document collaboration and individual or group ordering. Facebook’s vision here is that users will share bots, thereby enabling viral marketing. The feature is already supported by Spotify, OpenTable, Kayak, the Food Network, TheScore and the NBA.
An intra-bot communication mechanism, aka hand-over protocol that allows multiple development teams to create distinct features, such as shopping and support services, that while operated separately are integrated into a single bot user experience.
An improved identity management API that allows connecting a Facebook login and Messenger ID to enable omnichannel customer experiences that can freely transition from a Facebook app to Messenger bot.
Smart Replies that can automatically respond to FAQs such as business hours, directions and contact details.

Facebook also made the M virtual assistant generally available. When it was introduced last year, M was a human-powered experiment in providing Messenger users context-dependent suggestions.
It has since been automated using predictive analytics against Facebook’s trove of user interaction data to discern user intent and greatly increase the situations in which it’s useful. For example, if people are chatting about where to eat, the software can suggest local businesses that take online orders.
Likewise, when the topic turns to money, M can offer to transfer cash between parties or connect them with their bank or credit card.
Turning Messenger into a general-purpose app platform is happening faster than you might think. Mastercard used F8 to announce support for Messenger bots that use its Masterpass digital wallet for secure payments.
The bots work with all Masterpass-enabled wallets from at least a dozen major banks. Early examples include Subway, FreshDirect and the CheeseCake Factory, which have introduced Messenger bots for mobile ordering and payment. Indeed, FreshDirect is exploiting new Messenger 2.0 features to allow families and friends to collaborate on shopping carts and pay in a single transaction.
My take
Although Messenger is more than just an IM client, carrying at least 10% of all VoIP calls worldwide, the bot strategy is based on text. As I wrote last winter, conversational UIs, exemplified by Amazon Alexa, Apple Siri and Google Assistant, are set to disrupt application design, however these services led with voice (although Google also supports text conversations). While talking gadgets like Echo and Google Home capture the imagination, the real power behind all of these products is the backend data analysis and machine learning algorithms and where there’s a technology arms race among the major cloud players.
The market and technology are so new and dynamic that it’s hard to handicap, but each vendor has strengths to exploit.

Amazon has the first-mover advantage, including the early wisdom to see that an extensible infrastructure that allows developers to add ‘skills’ (in Alexa-speak) is key to building an expanding ecosystem that provides more features and competitive differentiation.
As I wrote last week, Microsoft Azure has an army of developers with expertise in its tools and APIs, along with services like LogicApps that enable non-developers to incorporate bot features in business apps
Apple has the largest deployment and variety of bot-enabled devices available everywhere from your wrist to living room. Although its cloud services, including Siri, aren’t as polished and AI responses as accurate as Google’s, Apple has the resources and corps of committed users to make up any deficiencies.
Google has arguably the most sophisticated and complete AI services that are backed by the unimaginable amount of data that it uses to continually improve both the breadth and depth of its services. Like Apple, it can expose these services where it’s most convenient for users on a variety of devices.
Facebook has perhaps the largest base of obsessively active users that have made services like Messenger part of their daily lives. As F8 demonstrates, the company has an expansive vision that moves Messenger from its origins as a simple IM client to being a platform for real-time business interactions and transactions. F8, where attendance increases year after year, also demonstrated that Facebook can attract committed developers including those from large enterprises making strategic bets on bots as the next vehicle for business interactions.

It’s a confusing landscape for organizations deciding where and how to make strategic bets on conversational, bot-powered services, however with every major technology company vigorously competing for mind- and market-share, it means a continued stream of rapid innovation.
Those most successful at turning conversational technology into business opportunity will find ways of designing and building services that can easily be repurposed to different platforms.
While the field is still young and maturing, this is the time organizations should use to build bot expertise and identify areas where conversational interfaces can enhance sales, improve service and win new customers.
Alongside the technology, smart marketers will need to ensure that in offering us conversational bots, they don’t fall foul of the tendency to annoy potential customers with inane phrases and sugary platitudes. Getting that right may well be the biggest challenge.
In the meantime, I’ll be following the development of cross-platform APIs and federated backend cloud services that can bootstrap such hybrid deployments. I encourage you to check back to see what I discover and add nuance with comments that share your experience.
Image credit - story image via Facebook screenshot, featured image © aleutie - Fotolia.comRead more on: Best of UX and application designProductivityRobotics 