
All good things come to an end – and for Facebook, that’s going to happen in 2017 when, according to the firm’s CFO, ad revenues are going to slow “meaningfully”.
That’s the reason why Facebook’s stock fell 8% last night despite turning in overall third quarter revenue up 56% to $7 billion, mobile advertising revenue up 70% to $5.7 billion and profit up by an astonishing 170% to $2.4 billion.
And the big numbers keep on coming:

Nearly 1.8 billion people now use Facebook every month.
Around 1.2 billion people use it every day.
Over 4 million active advertisers on Facebook.
Over 500,000 active advertisers on Instagram
Instagram has more than 500 million monthly actives and more than 300 million daily actives.
There are 60 million small business pages on Facebook.
There are 33,000 bots live on Messenger.
More than 1,000 organizations are using Workplace, including Starbucks, Royal Bank of Scotland, and Danone.
270 million people created 1.5 billion interactions during the Rio Olympics.
As of the end of September, 109 million people on Facebook in the US had generated over 5.3 billion posts, comments, and likes and shares related to the Presidential Election.
A Register to Vote link at the top of the Facebook app helped more than 2 million people register to vote.

But despite that tsunami of big numbers, it was CFO David Wehner’s cautionary remarks about a slowdown in ad revenue that spooked Wall Street:
We continue to expect that ad load will play a less significant factor driving revenue growth after mid-2017. Over the past few years, we have averaged about 50% revenue growth in advertising. Ad load has been one of the three primary factors fueling that growth. With a much smaller contribution from this important factor going forward, we expect to see ad revenue growth rates come down meaningfully.
The challenge then for Facebook is how to manage expectations if there is to be a slowdown, assuring investors that there is a clear and coherent strategy in place. Wehner himself had a stab at this, stating:
We’re developing a number of new ad products as well as enhancing the ad products that we have out in the market today. So we’re taking what is a great mobile ad product on Facebook and Instagram and making it even better. And I think the investments that we’re doing there will continue to enable us to drive advertiser demand.
He added:
We’ve built up a large base of advertiser demand. We’ve got 4 million advertisers on Facebook; 0.5 million advertisers on Instagram. We continue to innovate on the products to make them more effective and make this a great gateway for businesses to come onto Facebook and come into mobile and spend. We expect we’ve got a lot of great opportunities to continue to innovate on that front. But we’ve also been innovating over the past several years. So demand has been a big factor in what’s been driving our growth to date. On top of that, we’ve grown users and time spent, and then we’ve also grown ad load.
So I do think as we look into 2017, we do expect that as you get to mid-2017, ad load will be a less significant factor contributing. We’ll continue to get benefits of being able to grow our revenue with advertiser demand and continuing to innovate there. But I do think that as we slow ad load growth, we’re going to have a slowing in revenue as well. So that’s our expectation, but obviously we’re going to continue to work hard to innovate in the ad product space.
Managing the message
That’s dotting ‘i’s and crossing ’t’s from a CFO perspective. It was left to COO Sheryl Sandberg to step in with a simpler set of messages, noting that mobile ad revenue in particular is still booming, now accounting for 84% of the total number.  Sandberg breaks the Facebook ad thinking into three priorities – capitalizing on the shift to mobile; growing the number of marketers using Facebook’s various ad products; and making Facebook ads more relevant and effective.
On the shift to mobile, she makes the point that generational shifts in advertising models inevitably take time and need to become more sophisticated in their approaches:
The first TV ads showed people standing in front of microphones reading their radio ads. Similarly, many of the first mobile video ads were TV ads dropped into mobile. Ads optimized for each platform often perform better, so marketers are increasingly tailoring their creative for mobile.
A case in point is Proctor & Gamble, she argues, which is drilling down on creating mobile video ads that grab consumer attention within seconds. So, with washing powder Tide, for example, Sandberg observes:
In a typical TV ad, they start with a clean dress or shirt, show it getting stained, and then cleaned it with Tide. On mobile, they need to communicate the product’s value more quickly, so they start by showing Tide cleaning a stained garment.
It’s also necessary to think in terms of simplification of delivery in order to encourage greater adoption among marketers, hence the introduction of new offerings such as Promoted Posts on Instagram. This is particularly important when 85% of business pages on Facebook are active on mobile, says Sandberg:
We’re making it easier for advertisers to manage campaigns from their phones. In Q3, we added a feature that shows marketers a preview of a potential ad in News Feed, just as their customers would see it. They can then run the ad with just a few taps from their mobile device.
Making it easy to advertise from a mobile phone is especially important in emerging markets. For businesses operating in areas with weak network connections, we continue to build advertising tools into Facebook Lite, our low bandwidth app, and are making more of them available offline.
There’s also a co-existence emerging between TV and mobile advertising, says Sandberg, with clients using both media:
We’ve done studies that show with Nielsen that our ads can be a really big complement to TV, particularly enabling you to reach people who really aren’t on TV and you can’t reach.
She cites the example of a campaign by Nestlé Purina PetCare in Germany as a case in point:
They defined five distinct cat owner personality types and created different creatives for each group. So that’s a big brand thing. The cat food category is big and they want brand awareness. But rather than just run one ad, they were able to run five based on the interest base and personality targeting that really only we can do. And the results were amazing. They got an 89% increase in brand awareness and a 20% lift in sales. So we think what we offer is the power of the broad reach of TV, but an ability to target much more efficiently.
My take
Those levels of meteroic ad revenue growth couldn’t go on forever. There’s also a limit to how many ads we’re going to put up with in our news feeds or on our Instagram accounts. But put this in context – between them, Google and Facebook essentially have the mobile advertising market carved up. And it’s not as though that market is going to go into decline – barring a global recession or some such crisis. Wall Street’s going to need to learn when it’s reached the top – and Facebook’s management is going to have to help them to do that. Meanwhile the innovation drivers within the company still have a lot of stuff ahead of them that can act as new revenue streams.
Image credit - Freeimages.com Read more on: Collaboration sharing and digital productivityCRM and customer experienceDigital and content marketingRetail e-commerce and the omni-channelUX and application design 