
A crowded session at the Dreamforce Government Keynote
I remember being at Dreamforce about three or four years ago and attending one Salesforce’s main government sessions, which was held in a small room in the depths of the Marriott Hotel. The session was very interesting, but it was filled with approximately 50 people. If that.
Fast forward to 2015 and Salesforce’s government keynote is being held in one of the huge ballroom’s in the Palace Hotel. When I turned up this morning to attend the session there was a queue of people eager to get in and the room was so full that plenty that were forced to stand at the back and around the edges.
This tells me that Salesforce is playing an increasingly important role in this area. And that’s probably been helped by the hire of Vivek Kundra into a senior position – whom was previously CIO at the White House and is extremely knowledgable on both cloud and public sector IT. I’m interviewing Kundra later on this week, but in the lead up to that I thought it would be useful to highlight some of the interesting customer stories that Salesforce put on stage during the government keynote.
Attendees had the opportunity to hear from two federal government departments – the US Department of Agriculture and the US International Trade Administration – as well as the LA Metro.
Here are their stories.
L.A. Metro
 Robin O’Hara, Deputy Executive Officer, L.A.Metro, took to the stage to talk about how the city of Los Angeles is looking to better integrate its services across a number of networks and also work with new on-demand companies, such as Uber and Lyft. She explained:
We have a pretty robust network in Las Angeles. It’s growing by leaps and bounds. Our rail system is growing. We have a network of 26 agencies that are on one smart card and we just recently converted our entire customer relationship management system onto Salesforce.
We actually want to integrate with those types of entities (such as Uber). It’s the last mile that people have a problem with in transit. So if you are going to take a bus somewhere and it only gets you six blocks away from where you want to go, you do have trouble getting to that last piece and so people won’t take transit because of that.
But now because there is a connected world we are working with those entities to cover that last mile and maybe use your tap card or your phone to be able to do that last piece – jump on an Uber and have it there waiting for you. You still don’t have to worry about waiting in the rain, you can still take your nice transit to as close as you can get and then jump in an Uber or your Lyft and get there.
We have a lot of exciting things going on in Metro. We are integrating with parking, with express lanes, we are building freeways, our Metro is one of the biggest job producers in Los Angeles county, so we work with all the different transportation modes. And we hope to integrate those so that it becomes easy to go across modes. So we need a big system to be able to do that and we are hoping that Salesforce can get that done for us.
US Department of Agriculture
Jonathan Alboum, US Department of Agriculture’s Chief Information Officer, spoke extensively about how the department is trying to better standardise on its services and is trying to use Salesforce to connect a common understanding of the customer across all of the disparate areas of the organisation.. He said:
USDA is comprised of 17 different agencies, 17 independent offices, so we have 34 different organisations doing related, but different things. We have a $210 billion portfolio that supports housing, community development, we build hospitals, we build schools, we are focused on building utilities, broadband in rural utilities. We also fight fires, I don’t mean the IT fires, we literally fight fires. It sort of hits home that the role that we have in IT, if we do a good job we can create and provide resources that help our services. We can help to save lives.
USDA is a large organisation, it’s complex, there’s 100,000 people. All that variety in missions sometimes leads to thinking that we are very individual, which creates challenges. But we are taking a corporate enterprise approach to IT now and that helps us as we try to think about our work in more common ways.
We do touch all of you, every American. Somehow USDA is touching you, that’s the commonality. All of the different programmes have this real citizen component to them. Sometimes you have common customers. The agencies all support people that are often the very same person, but they’re different customers in each of those organisations. When you think about them as different customers it really reinforces the idea that we are all unique, we are all different and we all need our own system.
We know that doesn’t work and it’s not the best way to approach our work. So we want to drive towards much more common solutions. One of the ways that we are doing this is by taking a new approach to government. We have an executive level board comprised of our deputy secretary, the under secretaries of the agencies, where any investments that touch these customers, we look at that and ask ourselves if multiple agencies use the same system? Sometimes its very difficult for us to get our mind around the fact that our requirements at this agency and that agency, whilst a little different, have a lot of common natures to them. We have to have better governance, we have to have open minded agency CIOs. We have to think about our work a little differently, we are doing that. It’s not without its challenges but we have some real tangible signs of success.
I think it’s less about what technologies you are using, everybody has example of how they have been able to make some technology work in a particular environment, the real opportunity is around change management. Whatever you are using, it’s not about the product necessarily, it’s more about whether you have the right executive support, the right alignment in the organisation, the right focus on change management. Change management from my perspective is a lot of communication, understanding what is motivating people to act a certain way or resist a change – focusing on that.
US International Trade Administration
Joe Paiva, CIO at the US International Trade Administration, proved to be quite a hit at the session, where he made jokes about his department being different to other government departments in that it is simply trying to make money – it doesn’t really have any higher ambitions (this prompted a huge round of applause from the crowd). However, where his department is similar to its peers, is that it is attempting to grapple with how it can modernise relationship management across a very dispersed structure. He said:
I feel completely out of place because I’m not an IT guy or a government person. The ITA is not a typical government agency, we don’t have any high moral ground, we are all about capitalism and making money. In order for us to help American companies compete, we’ve traditionally done trade promotion. Essentially that comes down to us spending time helping companies, especially small and medium sized companies, build the resources to go out and find partners and do deals overseas. The other part of our organisation helps negotiate and help enforce trade agreements to keep it at a level playing field.
If you look across our staff, they’re primarily lawyers and business people. My bosses and I are serial entrepreneurs and M&A guys. So this is kind of what we do. When we got there we found we had a big problem, which is both an opportunity and a problem. At first we were really focused on what we called the standard work, the old fashioned work – we have over 100 offices here in the US, we have over 100 offices in 75 plus countries overseas – and we compete on the basis of market intimacy. We know who the dealers are overseas, we know who’s fake, we know who’s real.
But some large percentage of all global trade now is full spectrum e-commerce. Not the old fashioned e-commerce where you did the deal in the back room and then just did the transactions online. But literally full spectrum e-commerce, with customer acquisition, all the way to fulfilment, to service. And that opens up this whole world of opportunity to the United States.
The challenge is that if we compete on the basis of customer intimacy, how do we suddenly support 10X? We literally have to support ten times more customers than we do now. If there’s not customer intimacy there’s no valuable service. It’s kind of like the Google thing, how do you do mass customisation? The first part has been using case management to improve how we collaborate between our people in the field.
In the old days there was no clear way for someone with an opportunity overseas to translate that back. First off they didn’t know which of the 100 offices here in the United States would be interested, other than by word of mouth. Now with our CRM implementation and Chatter, literally every morning I get a list and everyone knows there is an opportunity. So we get this improved closure rate, we get speed of service and it’s all about how we become more efficient providing the same services we provide today in that same business business model.
Uncategorized 