
FedEx CEO Fred Smith has had some interesting things to say on the subject of e-commerce over the past few years.
In 2016, he predicted no ‘Uberization’ in FedEx’s market and he was of the view that:
E-commerce is fantastic and its going to continue to grow and we intend to be a major player in that space. But it’s not going to, in our opinion and in the research from very credible sources, not going to eliminate retail. What it may do is change the character of retail.
All retail e-commerce is now about 10%, growing fast, taking share, but it’s going to be a long time before retail is threatened. And B2B – meaning the underpinnings of the business world, medical production, automotive, and things like that – that in the main is not going to be diverted to e-commerce anytime soon and that is the backbone of the FedEx networks.
All of which has been read as indirect Amazon commentary by the FedEx boss, but Smith isn’t keen on that idea:
We look at Amazon as a wonderful company in service, and they are good customer of ours. We don’t see them as a peer competitor. At this point in time for many reasons, we think it is doubtful that will be the case. We have very strong strategies, well understood by management team, the addressable markets that we deal with are growing. And as we’ve said over and over again, we’ve grown market share and particularly in the sectors we want to grow. There have been some sectors that we’ve chosen not to attack for a number of reasons and that can change from time to time…I think the prospects of this company is going to be “disrupted”, which just occurs over and over again to quote a previous statement is fantastical.
But there’s definitely money to be made out of tapping into the boom in online retail which is why yesterday the firm announced FedEx Extra Hours. This allows e-commerce orders to be fulfilled in the evening as well as to receive late pickups by FedEx Express.
The pitch is by using the new service US shoppers will get local delivery the following day after placing an order, with deliveries to anywhere else in the country fulfiled within 2 days. Meanwhile retailers using FedEx will be able to extend order cut-off times by anything up to 8 hours.
According to Brie Carere, Chief Marketing Officer for FedEx:
Demand trends and consumer expectations in e-commerce are shifting, and the size, scale, reliability and flexibility of the FedEx networks uniquely position us to offer this new service that answers a clear consumer need: evening shopping with next-day local delivery and two-day shipping within the continental United States. The majority of online orders are placed after 4pm., and 64% of online shoppers expect orders placed by 5pm to qualify for next-day shipping. FedEx Extra Hours aligns with the needs of online shoppers, while offering retailers a way to balance inventory and reduce transportation costs. The scale and flexibility of the FedEx networks align perfectly with the ‘always-on’ mentality and expectations of shoppers. We can flex our networks to provide new e-commerce offerings with fast, reliable service even during the busiest weeks of the year.
Infrastructure
Early adopters of the new service include BestBuy and AutoZone, but Raj Subramaniam, CEO of FedEx Express, is quick to emphasise that the firm wants to support businesses of all sizes:
FedEx delivers to millions of small and medium-sized businesses everyday and we want to support these customers as e-commerce continues to grow and become a major part of their business. And that is just one of the many reasons we are doing very well in the small and medium customer segment.
We are extremely proud of this excellent service levels that we achieved this peak season, especially given the increasing volumes. The last three Mondays were some of the busiest days in the history of FedEx, including Cyber Monday where our volume crossed 32 million packages, more than double our average daily volume. We were able to deliver all of that volume with record service levels.
He adds:
The global infrastructure, the technology, the capabilities, the knowledge that we have to compete in this business is quite extraordinary as we leverage off our base to build this…When you combine the store infrastructure retailers with our logistics infrastructure it allows retailers to offer a compelling value proposition for orders received late in the day and the launch of our FedEx Extra Hours is clearly a very, very positive step in this regard.
It’s a flagship year for FedEx as it marks the final stages of the firm’s tech modernization program, Renewal, which kicked off 8 years ago to move IT into the cloud. Smith says:
Legacy mainframe applications are now being rapidly retired. This is one of the largest such transitions in the history of business. Once concluded Renewal will have vastly reduced the number of FedEx IT systems, while dramatically improving security, value, liability, flexibility, productivity and provide new automation opportunities for our customers and many FedEx operations.
The upgrades have also assisted in the integration of TNT into the FedEx operations, a process that has gone well, apart from a highly-public cyber-security breach. But that in itself accelerated integration efforts, says Chief Operating Officer Dave Bronczek:
We accelerated investments in our IT systems and infrastructure to strengthen and enhance and protect the systems we use to run our daily business…Our businesses are heavily dependent on IT solutions for the integration. For example, these require harmonizations of our services and then corresponding redesign of our multiple customer platforms, including of course, fedex.com and our customer automation tools. Our original integration planning contemplated the long lead time required to build these IT solutions and accordingly the benefits of these efforts would occur towards the end of the integration.
My take
Smith is a blunt speaker, which I like. Take this, on the subject of macro-economic issues:
Most of the issues that we are dealing with today are induced by bad political choices. Making a bad decision about a new tax, creating tremendously difficult situation with Brexit, the immigration crisis in Germany, the mercantilism and state owned enterprise initiatives in China, the tariffs that the United States put in unilaterally. So you just go down the list and they are all things that have created macro-economic slowdown. The good news is with a change in policy, they could turn it around pretty quick too.
That might be an overly-optimistic view, but hey, it’s nearly the end of 2018, so a bit of rose-tinted thinking is permissible…
Image credit - FedExRead more on: e-commerceRetail e-commerce and the omni-channel 