
John Cooper
Sony Professional Europe sees the Internet of Things (IoT) as a three-pronged opportunity – to cut costs, facilitate staff training and create new service-related revenue streams.
The company, which provides audio-visual and broadcast equipment to sectors such as the media, healthcare and retail, is seeing its technology go increasingly digital.
This scenario, combined with miniturisation and more efficient production processes, mean that systems such as high-end cameras cost a fraction of what they used to. But this situation, in turn, has implications for what customers are prepared to pay out for service contracts.
A second challenge relates to skills. Sony Professional Europe, which uses ServiceMax’s field service management software to manage its operations, is yet to experience a shortage. But many of its service technicians are now in their late 40s and 50s so as John Cooper, head of professional and managed services, points out:
In the next two to three years, it’ll start impacting us, but in five years it’ll be a real problem – and one that affects not just us, but our customers too.
A key issue here is that the training available for broadcast engineers has been “dire” over the last few years. So the organisation has now started recruiting from the IT world in order to cross-train suitable candidates and build up hybrid skill sets. As Cooper says:
If one day someone’s working on a dry corporate network and the next they get a chance to help out with cutting-edge films, there’s a big appeal there to drag people across.
This convergence between broadcast technology and IT is happening not only with the big, complex workflow systems employed by major broadcasters, but also the digital projectors used by smaller cinemas.
As a result, quite high levels of remote diagnostics are already being adopted in both scenarios – while highly-skilled engineers are still generally employed on site in the first instance though, less expert technicians tend to be called in as and when in the second, making it possible to cut costs. Cooper explains:
You can take away some of the pain by doing this stuff remotely and sending in a cheaper person when they’re needed. So you can have more people who are closer to the customer and provide faster service, but your real brains will be at the back end dealing with things remotely.
However, Sony also has a whole range of products that are not yet connected to the internet. But as they start to move online, the aim is to provide customers with status updates such as alerts when equipment is due for a service or a component is about to fail. Not only should this make the support process more efficient, but it could act as a means of retaining highly skilled workers for a bit longer before they retire.
Changing the model
Cooper says:
That’s where we see a real opportunity to change the model – the idea is to focus our expertise in a few regional or central hubs and use different types of engineers for different situations. That chimes nicely with the growing complexity of technology.
For example, if you look at professional camcorders, they’re quite complex to take to pieces let alone service. So there’s been this paradox of experienced engineers needing to carry around truckloads of equipment. But if we shift the model and let them work remotely and the less skilled staff do local site visits, that might be more attractive to Baby Boomers of a certain age who don’t want to be on the road all the time.
Into the longer-term, however, Cooper expects the skills balance required to shift quite drastically. Not only would there be fewer field technicians, but engineers with remote diagnostics and data analysis and interpretation skills would make up the bulk of the service team. He says:
Some very high-end systems will continue to need highly skilled people, but costs for customers such as TV stations will be covered by high-end service contracts for high-value people who take between 18 months and two years to train. In the case of high quality camcorders though, the shift will be towards a lower cost model, where expertise is accessed through a different route.
There are several advantages to this approach. On the one hand, IoT systems can feed other parts of the business such as research and development with useful information. Cooper explains:
Engineers don’t always make the greatest communicators, but with IoT systems, you can build a picture of what people are doing with their products and feed it back to sales and marketing. There’s often a perception that products are used in one way, but they might actually be used in anger for something else.
On the other hand, the deployment of IoT systems also opens up new staff training opportunities. Cooper explains:
People don’t always like it if you’re blooding new resources on their system, particularly if they’re big broadcasters. But if the support is being done remotely, no one knows who’s involved, which makes it much easier to pass on knowledge. So IoT gives both cost savings and training opportunities.
But this ongoing need to cut costs is also being experienced by customers just as much as Sony. As a result, the firm sees IoT technology as a means of expanding its existing managed services business. By gathering and analysing increasing amounts of data from both its own and third party products installed in customer sites, it expects to be in much better position to predict customer problems as time goes on. Cooper concludes:
The ability to just be one step ahead and do things before they happen is great. The IoT gives us a special view into the world and anyone seizing on that is seizing on a bright future.
Read more on: Internet of ThingsIoT robotics and AITalent management 