
A combination of skills shortages and increased automation will lead to a big shake-up in the required skills and likely career paths of field service technicians over the next five years or so.
According to a poll conducted by industry body The Service Council at the end of 2015, although 68% of organizations said they had enough staff to meet current workloads, unfilled positions were a reality at 46%.
A previous survey, meanwhile, indicated that as many as 32% of companies were experiencing a skills shortage today. But a further 38% also expected to do so over the next five to 10 years as the pace of Baby Boomer retirement continued to pick up and schools and universities proved increasingly unable to fill the gap.
Luminex, an Austin, Texas-based company that sells biological testing systems to the clinical diagnostic and life science sectors and uses ServiceMax’s field service management software to help run its service organisation, is a case in point. Although staffing levels are fine at the moment, Steve Nava, senior director of field service for the Americas, acknowledges that the workforce is ageing. Therefore, he expects it to become “a challenge” to hire service technicians in future. He says:
Current curriculums are not geared towards producing service technicians. Instead students learn technical skills that prepare them to perform in a ‘fix-it’ role as opposed to a customer-facing one. The challenge will be finding technically proficient individuals that understand, and can be taught, the skills needed to succeed in front of a customer. I expect within the next five years, we will begin to see a shortage of experienced field service technicians.
On a more positive note, increased automation, an upswing in the deployment of technology such as the Internet of Things (IoT) and a growth in outsourcing are all anticipated to at least partially offset jobs lost to natural wastage.
Indeed it is those positions where people undertake transactional tasks such as replacement, repair and fix that will disappear first. But this will only make those customer-oriented skills even more at a premium.
This means that technicians able to develop a relationship with clients and use that knowledge to gain useful information and/or cross- and up-sell additional products or services, will find themselves in increasing demand.
Customer solution specialists
Nava explains:
IoT will require service technicians to become more focused on successful customer outcomes, in addition to being a highly proficient technical resource. It will lead to a decrease in the volume of human interactions, but the need to build relationships with customers never diminishes. Relationship-building is key to building customer loyalty, which results in recurring revenue. Fewer opportunities to build relationships will require the post-IoT service technician to be an accomplished customer solution specialist.
In fact, Nava expects service organisations to progressively represent “the voice of the customer” to the rest of the business as time goes on. This is because technicians will increasingly be expected to take responsibility for customer’s problems, whether they relate to billing, shipping, ordering or whatever. He says:
It’s not possible for technicians to have every solution on the spot, but it is expected that they reach out to whomever they need to provide a solution. It may be said that today’s service technicians specialise in customer service and dabble in hardware.
This statement is backed up by yet another survey from The Service Council, which shows that the five most desired attributes employers will look for in their field service technicians over the next five years, are:

the ability to interact positively with customers
interpersonal skills and being able to communicate effectively with customers and colleagues
technical knowhow
being able to use mobile applications and devices to help provide better services to customers.

So pure technical knowledge, although still important, will not be viewed as critical going forward, not least as people with good customer skills can always be given technical product training in-house.
But the increasing use of the Internet of Things is also expected to have a significant impact on the kind of work that service technicians do too. Data feeds from products and devices are often used today to help them become more efficient by indicating where potential problems lie.
But as more and more data becomes available, the easier it will become for companies to analyse it in order to see patterns and therefore predict where things are likely to go wrong. Sumair Dutta, chief customer service officer at the Service Council, explains:
This means that field technicians can potentially avoid a dispatch. You’re not going to eliminate all site visits, but it should help get rid of redundancy so that they can be preventative rather than reactive.
Shifting career paths
Once again, this approach should reduce the need for personnel in the field, but Dutta believes that such change will only happen gradually over the next five to 10 years. He says:
Companies won’t necessarily slash their workforce – they just may not replace every single person that’s retired on a one-for-one basis. Some field technicians will also be trained to do more back office technical support. This move will be presented as a promotion as they’ll be working in an office environment and can reduce the amount of travel they do. Their role will be to support people in the field with Internet of Things data and, because they’ve got lots of knowledge and experience, they’ll be able to walk technicians through problems.
While such technical support roles already exist in many organisations, these workers have traditionally had an engineering or IT background rather than a field service one. Other career options in future will include roles such as data analysis and, if technicians show any talent, sales, as well as the more traditional management positions. As Dutta says:
There’ll definitely be more of a tiered structure.
But offering clear career paths will become an increasing necessary activity for service organisations, particularly if they wish to attract Millennials to the business. Dutta explains:
The transactional nature of a lot of service technicians’ work means they’ve not traditionally been viewed as an asset. Service has been seen as an operational problem and something to be done to minimise costs. So investment in labour has just been to make them as efficient as possible rather than thinking about their needs. Only about 43% of companies provide any kind of career path today, but being able to show that will be pretty important to attract Millennials and so we’ll see a lot more of it.
A final dynamic, meanwhile, relates to the changing face of the outsourcing market in this space. While third party service providers typically handle about 20% of all incoming field service work in any given year, they have traditionally focused on filling skills gaps or providing expertise in new areas.
But as a currently nascent move to an “on-demand” economy takes hold and better tools for finding, managing and evaluating the work of contractors continue to emerge, Dutta expects the dynamics to change quite radically. He explains:
It might not be outsourcing in the traditional sense, but there’ll be more use of a flexible workforce where numbers go up or down depending on demand. We’re already seeing it happening in certain companies, but it’s all still very much in the early stages.
 
Disclosure - At time of writing, ServiceMax is a premier partner of diginomica. Read more on: Customer service managementInternet of ThingsIoT robotics and AI 