
Salesforce-native financials vendor FinancialForce today rounds out the billing functionality in its cloud ERP suite to add subscription and usage billing. The new offering will allow businesses to automatically produce a single invoice that consolidates all types of billing, from traditional one-time product sales and annual service contracts to periodical subscriptions and usage-based billing. For example, an invoice might combine the one-time sale of an equipment item with an annual service contract and a monthly subscription for consumables.
The company quotes research showing that 70% of CFOs say more than half their revenue now comes from services of various types, while 28% say all their revenues are service-related — a segment that FinancialForce specifically targets. From the blurbs:
Modern businesses are increasingly shifting from product and single transaction sales to service and subscription models …
FinancialForce Billing Central is a direct response to these changing business models and takes control of multiple sources of revenue streams to help organizations manage it in one closed-looped billing process.
Opportunity-to-renewal
Raphael Bres, general manager of financial management at the vendor, says there’s already a high level of interest from its customers in the new product. The first early adopter is already implementing, ready to go live on December 1st. Most businesses currently rely on a mix of spreadsheets and manual workflows to track what needs to be billed, and then manually create the invoices, he says. This limits the flexibility they have to introduce new billing cycles that may be more convenient for their customers:
You would not believe how many companies are doing it manually and it’s so much work, they can only invoice annually.
FinancialForce is emphasizing the product’s ability to deliver what it calls “complete customer lifecycle visibility, from opportunity through to renewal.” The vendor argues that the traditional emphasis on opportunity-to-cash has ignored the ongoing nature of customer relationships. As organizations move away from one-off product billing to more continuous contracts, then automating subscription billing is more than just an administrative tool. If it’s tied into the wider CRM system then it becomes easier to proactively manage renewal issues and build customer loyalty, says Bres.
When we are more centered on customer service, we should think more about opportunity-to-renewal.
This positioning plays on the vendor’s Salesforce-native credentials, which means that its billing functionality shares the same platform used across sales, services, customer support and customer success functions. “We have all the major objects around the customer,” says Bres. That in turn means billing becomes part of a single platform for real-time reporting and audit controls.
‘Less integration drama’
The new functionality competes with several existing Salesforce partners, including Steelbrick, the cash-to-quote vendor acquired late last year by Salesforce, and which therefore is becoming part of the native platform. But Bres says Steelbrick’s billing engine doesn’t have multi-currency support, and claims Salesforce itself is introducing prospects to FinancialForce that want this option.
The other big player in subscription billing in the Salesforce ecosystem is Zuora, although enterprise quote-to-cash vendor Apttus also has billing capabilities. But neither has financials capabilities, and Bres believes the full ERP offering that FinancialForce offers is a major plus for the vendor.
Apttus and Zuora together will not cut through the solution we have.
We are going after customers that are looking for a solution with less drama when it comes to integration.
The new product will also strengthen FinancialForce’s hand against other cloud ERP contenders for midmarket accounts, of which NetSuite is the largest player. Bres says the company has replaced NetSuite at several names in the most recent quarter, and expects the impending Oracle acquisition of NetSuite will help its cause. However FinancialForce does not currently offer the full revenue recognition capabilities that NetSuite claims.
My take
The ability to offer flexible subscription billing is a mainstay of the digital economy, but support for this from financials vendors has been lagging demand. Businesses today need to be able to offer unified, automated billing to be competitive and so there’s a growing market need to satisfy. This announcement from FinancialForce is well timed.
Image credit - Composite by @philww of FinancialForce screenshot with dollar notes background image © sirikorn_t - Fotolia.comDisclosure - FinancialForce, NetSuite and Salesforce are diginomica premier partners. FinancialForce is a current consulting client, and will contribute to my travel costs to attend Dreamforce in San Francisco next month.  Read more on: e-commerceFinancials 