
Financial Times CIO, Christina Scott
There are few brands in publishing that have successfully managed to introduce subscriptions and pay-walls, without it effectively killing off their digital business. The only ones that have really managed to make a go of it, are those that have stuck to the theory that they can differentiate through high quality journalism.
With so much free, useless content on the internet, providing a trusted source for top quality content all in one place is worth paying for for some people – or so the theory goes…
The Financial Times is one of those publications, which still manages to successfully operate a subscription business, having implemented the model way back in 2002. The FT last year saw subscriptions jump 21% to over half a million readers and it said that digital now represents 70% of the brand’s total paying audience. Not bad.
But what does it mean to be a subscription business? I got to sit down with Financial Times CIO Christina Scott last week at Zuora’s user conference in London, where she explained to me how the model impacts the publishing company and talked me through the benefits and the pitfalls.
Scott explained that the FT uses Zuora as a billing engine in combination with Salesforce as a CRM system, which were selected to replace a “very old, legacy, beast of a system”. The aim was to provide the FT with a foundation to do different offers and products in the future for subscribers. Scott explained why subscription was a good choice for the FT, referencing the changes that are occurring in the digital advertising market. She said:
In terms of the advantages, print advertising is declining and digital advertising is not replacing in full from the amount you’re losing from print advertising. And it’s also quite peaky, so it’s cyclical. So the advantage of having subscription based model is that a much better constant. Retail sales would be fantastic during the greek crisis, but maybe less so if there wasn’t big news items. It’s smoothing out our revenue. That’s the positive side of it.
Scott also said that subscription allows a company to have a closer relationship with its customers. She said:
It also allows you to understand more about your customer. That’s traditionally helped you in terms of marketing, advertising, but actually we are now using insights to influence our product development. We are really thinking about the customer. So to give you an example, we are redesigning our website FT.com at the moment. Everybody talked about mobile, mobile, mobile, so we did a design that was very mobile first responsive. But when you look at the data, half of our customers were on desktop still. And of that half, quite a large percentage use really massive monitors. And they read the FT at work, it’s a work tool.
You have to recognise that it’s not just all about mobile, so it made us think about our design and come up with a design that actually worked on large desktop screens as well as on mobile.
The cons
 There are certainly a number of positives to running a subscription-based business. Take a read of our interview with Zuora CEO Tien Tzuo for a breakdown of becoming a business that knows your customer a lot more intimately. However, Scott was honest in the fact that with any business model there are some negatives that need to be considered – including subscription.
Scott highlighted two points that enterprises should be aware of before shifting their organisation from one off sales to regular revenues from subscription. Both of which I had my suspicions may be true when attending the Zuora event last week. Scott outlined how focusing in on a subscription funnel can lead to a blinkered view of who your customer could be. She said:
There are two traps you can fall into. One is that you understand an awful lot about the people that already like you, because you’ve already got a relationship with them. You can be blinkered to the wider. So if you want to increase your audience share, you have to have a relationship with people that don’t use you and are not subscribers. You can become too fixated on the people you know. There are a number of things we did a couple of years ago, where in all the things we were doing on the product were driving engagement with those that were already very engagement. We were making loyal subscribers more loyal. But we weren’t bringing in.
The other downside is that you are also creating a bit more of a closed network. So at the moment we are really thinking about how we get wider reach, so that people can sample the FT, because the FT is a fantastic brand. But not everybody necessarily understands that it’s a fantastic brand for them.
My husband, for example, works in biotech – he would never have read the FT if I had never had worked there. Now he’s completely addicted to it. How can you allow people to sample your content without damaging your subscription model? You can’t put everything for free because then no-one will subscribe.
Scott also provided some insights into what it takes in terms of changing organisational culture when shifting to the subscription model. Apart from getting good systems in place, which is obviously a necessity, it also requires that different functions within the enterprise begin to understand who their customer is at a much deeper level. She said:
It is a shift in how the businesses work. Because you if you have subscribers you suddenly have parts of the organisation that think about retention. And there will be retention programmes that you have to put in place with marketing and customer service, to make sure that you are not losing. There’s no point in getting those subscribers and then letting them out the door. That’s very different because in other companies it may just be about selling, you are selling a one off product and it’s just sell, sell, sell. So actually the marketing and CRM elements become a lot more important. That’s a shift in skills.
And marketing really understanding the customer, so that it can speak to the customer in a language that the customer understands and is relevant to them. And editorial as well. Editorial understanding and engaging with customers. Editorial have had to get used to social, having a presence in social media, engaging with comments on stories.
Making the FT more personal
Scott also talked about the future of the FT’s technology platform. For instance, despite being very cloud-friendly (what with using the likes of Salesforce and Zuora), she also noted that there are areas that the FT likes to retain in-house – most components that hold customer data. And that’s not because of privacy issues necessarily, it’s because of access. She said:
It’s not about whether it’s cloud-based, I think really the question are what are the things that are really important for you to own the IP? For example, our data platform is on Amazon Redshift, but we have bought in house a lot of the data intelligence that we used to have held with third parties.
I don’t think where it’s hosted, it’s actually who is operating it. In that instance it was very important for us to own. When we look at things we wouldn’t want our customer to be held by a third party and us not have access to it. It’s about insight.
Scott explained that the Financial Times is also going through a redesign (which is long overdue) with the aim being to introduce new functions that allow the FT to better personalise its content for readers. She said:
At the moment we are redesigning the site, we are redesigning it in terms of it looking visually different, but it’s much more about thinking about the customer. Complaints are that actually they like the content, but they are often can’t find the content that’s relevant to them. It’s buried.
And our site is very old. And so we have done a lot of work with semantic metadata so that we understand, so we tag the content a lot better, but also so that you can follow authors, topics, you can follow a person and we have an appreciation of the links between the metadata.
It’s kind of personalisation, but not in the way in terms of changing the way the home page looks. There’s a section called My FT, which will be all driven by the things that you have said you’re interested in.
But also driven by the behaviour on-site. Driven by the behaviour of people like you. There are a number of factors in terms of how we can look at relevance – whether it’s the company you work for, your discipline, etc. If I know that 95% of CIOs in London have read a particular article, I’m quite likely going to want to read it.
Read more on: CRM and customer experienceUse cases 