
Marc Benioff
It was a formality of course by this point, but Salesforce’s full year numbers yesterday confirmed that the long-talked-about breaking through the $10 billion annual run rate is now official. 
Top that off with the share price hitting a new high and CEO Marc Benioff was inevitably in ebullient mood, declaring: 

We have propelled Salesforce over the $10 billion revenue milestone, and we couldn’t be more excited about that and having that fiscal year behind us, because now our vision has never been bigger or more exciting as we have a very clear trajectory to $20 billion in revenue. No other enterprise software company has achieved this scale faster. Certainly, no other enterprise cloud applications company has achieved this scale faster, and it’s our dream to get to $20 billion faster than anyone else.

That’s an ambition we’ve heard before and will hear again. That’s all to come. For now though, the firm ended its fiscal year on a high. Some numbers: 

Full year revenue was $10.48 billion, up 25% year-on-year, while Q4 saw 24% growth to hit $2.85 billion. 
Full year net profit was down slightly to $127 million, but last year’s Q4 loss turned into a $68 million profit this time around. 
By cloud offering, Sales Cloud is still the biggest earner on $3.6 billion, up 16% year-on-year. Service Cloud was up 24% year-on-year to hit $2.9 billion, followed by Platform and Other on $1.9 billion, up 34%. The highest growth rate was reported by Marketing Cloud and Commerce Cloud, up 45% between them to $1.3 billion.
By region, EMEA turned in the highest growth rates, up 39% year-on-year to $1.9 billion. Asia Pac was up 26% to $997 million, while the domestic US market grew 22% to $7.5 billion. 

The EMEA growth was picked up as a highlight by Salesforce President Keith Block:


In EMEA, ABB, one of the world’s leading industrial technology companies, went all-in with us this quarter, and they’re using Salesforce to get a broader understanding of their customers across sales, service and marketing. Einstein AI is going to enable them to drive smarter sales and build deeper customer relationships.
ABB also has an incredible vision to combine the power of Salesforce with ABB Ability and their industry-leading digital offering that enables 70 million connected device. Very, very strong partnership with ABB, and we are thrilled to continue to grow along with them.
We also formed a new relationship with Deutsche Bahn, which is the world’s second largest transportation company. And we expanded our relationship with BBVA, who is rolling out our financial services cloud for retail banking to more than 24,000 advisors.
We also formed a new relationship with one of the largest insurance groups in Europe, and they’re going wall-to-wall with Salesforce to get a complete view of their business and also to increase their employee engagement and deliver a  seamless customer experience across all of their brands.

Finance and health
By sector, financial services and healthcare have been particularly strong, said Block: 

Now 18 of the top 20 U.S. and European banks rely on Salesforce. And in fact, in Q4, nearly half of those banks expanded their business with us in the quarter. 
That includes a significant expansion with one of the world’s largest banks in the world, which will be deploying Financial Services Cloud across all their retail branches. TD Bank also selected Financial Services Cloud for retail banking to streamline their mortgage application process for customers. In addition, we expanded our relationship with Transamerica. They are extending Salesforce to an additional 60,000 insurance agents to give them a unified view of their clients. We also expanded with Pacific Life and MassMutual.
In healthcare, we expanded our relationship with Anthem as well as another Fortune 50 healthcare company, which is using Service Cloud to better understand patient needs and provide more personalized care. We also deepened our relationship with the Cancer Treatment Centers of America, which is using Health Cloud to improve patient outcomes.

He added that both financial services and healthcare have dynamic environments that are changing: 

When you think about the ease of regulations [in financial services], the changes in the tax laws, that has just created an environment where IT dollars can now be spent more on innovation than on maintaining the legacy environments around compliance, as an example. So that’s exciting. 
Similarly, in healthcare, one of the things that’s changing the healthcare industry is technology overall, number one. Number two, if you think about it, patients are more empowered by technology than ever before. So these healthcare companies and the healthcare industry overall is ripe for transformation. That being said, it can be unclear at times because of regulations and the regulatory environment where exactly healthcare is going.

For his part, Benioff argued that every sector is a growing opportunity, citing a dinner the previous evening in New York with 20 Fortune 100 CEOs: 

We’re all on a very fast moving economic freight train. We’ve seen incredible increase in investment activity with our customers, especially accelerated with these tax cuts. That has been amazing to us. But squarely in the center of each and every one of their consciousness is the digital transformation that their company is going through. It doesn’t matter if they’re a consumer product goods company CEO or financial services or retail or any industry or any geography. Every CEO is thinking about their digital transformation.

He added:


I can empirically tell you I have never seen a demand environment like this. I cannot quantify that. I can just tell you that every CEO is using the positive economic environment, but also the domestic tax cuts, as ways to accelerate their digital transformations, and it is putting it number one on all of their list, which it should be. This is really exciting for us and for others, of course. But for a company like us, we can help these companies get connected with their customers in a whole new way. And that is, we have the ability, we have the great products and we have the distribution capacity to be able to directly address them.

My take
Amid what’s another quarter/year of growth, I’m struck by two things. Firstly, that the size of enterprise customers continues to grow. Block talked about a doubling of the number of $20 million accounts year-on-year  Secondly, the fact that renewals among existing customers are becoming larger. Eighty percent of the top ten customers increased their Salesforce footprint in Q4. 
EMEA’s performance also stands out. It will be interesting to see what impact Brexit has on this over the next year or so as Salesforce has a big stake in the UK market. The party line on Brexit basically remains, ‘We’ll cope with whatever happens’, which given the current situation is probably all that can be said for now. 
Image credit - DreamforceDisclosure - At time of writing, Salesforce is a premier partner of diginomica. Read more on: Cloud platforms - infrastructure and architectureCRM and customer experienceDigital and content marketingFinancial services and fintechHealthcare transformationIoT robotics and AI 