
Instant collaboration across different departments is becoming an increasingly common feature of modern working life. When we have a question or a problem, we prefer to get it sorted straight away rather than let it clog up our workflow. We know that our digitally empowered customers, suppliers and colleagues expect to get answers on the spot, so we find ways of meeting those expectations.
This new-found mindset of co-operation and responsiveness is finding its way into the most unexpected corners of the digital enterprise. It is even beginning to reach the finance department, a function that in many organizations has traditionally operated behind firmly closed doors.
One of the vendors helping to ease finance into more real-time interactions with colleagues is cloud ERP provider FinancialForce, which this week unveiled the Spring 2016 release of its Financial Management application.
The latest release still has plenty of specialized functionality designed to appeal to the most demanding of finance professionals, including automated transaction reconciliations and global exchange rates for international transactions. But the highlights of the release revolve around functionality that’s intended to make a big impact on the daily routine of people in the finance department.
According to Raphael Bres, general manager for financial management at FinancialForce, this brings much-needed capabilities to teams whose needs enterprises tend to overlook in the rush to embrace digital transformation.
Back-office users have been neglected, especially in the cloud.
High-growth companies need this form of collaboration. It’s all about this accelerated pace. The enterprise social network is part of the modern organization we believe.
But will finance teams embrace this more fast-paced, collaboration-centric work ethic? Perhaps they will in the mainly high-growth companies that FinancialForce targets, many in professional services and technology. The vendor’s thesis seems to be that finance people in those businesses already want to change the way they work. The new release aims to offer them the tools to do just that.
Related information in context
The new collaboration capability builds on the finance-friendly Action Views that FinancialForce already introduced to its product last year. This spreadsheet-style query tool can bring up views of any data held in the underlying Salesforce App Cloud platform, which FinancialForce is built on. For example it can bring together finance and HR data from within FinancialForce’s own product suite, it can combine financials with CRM data from within Sales Cloud or Service Cloud, or it can add data from other vendors’ applications that are native to the platform.
Now FinancialForce has added the ability to extend the Action Views with related content and Chatter social streams from the App Cloud. Users can add pop-up work panes into their Action Views that will bring in conversations, workflow or documents that relate to the accounting transactions, accounts or balances they’re viewing. Since the content panel is connected directly to the Salesforce native object, it can access any related information from multiple apps and bring it all together in a single screen.
FinancialForce says that finance teams won’t have to wait for their IT colleagues to set up these views because a work pane can be designed in just a few clicks. The screenshot at the top of this post shows the example of a credit manager viewing an outstanding balance report who has used the related content panel to check in with the sales team on the social collaboration channel.
The new release also gives finance teams a lot more control over the layout of the screens they use inside the financials application. FinancialForce has recognized that modern browser-based application screens are often laid out to appeal to casual users rather than supporting the kind of rapid data entry beloved of professional finance users. Users can now tailor the screens they use to input, view and update accounting information, again with a ‘clicks not code’ approach that means you don’t need to be a technology expert to arrange the input screens to suit the way you work.
Combined with the built-in automation of intercompany reconciliation and elimination entries, these options to speed up common tasks should help to remove some of the workload pressures that lead finance to close its doors at certain times, especially when closing the books at the end of an accounting period. Making it easier to automate repetitive processes in the most efficient manner possible clearly helps free up time for more collaborative or strategic interactions.
My take
I often feel that financials teams are the cobbler’s children of the enterprise, making false economies on investing in automating their own processes and working late into the night as a result. I suspect they often take false comfort in the notion that they’re demonstrating how selflessly indispensable they are. No matter what impact these bad habits are having on their work-life balance, as FinancialForce’s Kevin Roberts explains in a partner post this week.
Weaning them off these bad habits may therefore prove a lot more difficult than it ought to be. FinancialForce has given them some useful tools in this release, but it’s still up to finance teams to make use of those tools to support a change in their working routines. In many companies, the existing culture is highly resistant to change.
Is the old dog of finance really ready to learn new tricks? It will be interesting to hear some real-world case studies as existing customers start taking advantage of this new functionality.
Image credit - Screenshot by FinancialForceDisclosure - FinancialForce and Salesforce are diginomica premier partners at the time of writingRead more on: Collaboration sharing and digital productivityFinancials 