
As you draw up your Christmas list for Santa, what’s going to be on it? A new laptop? A smart watch? An iPhone 7? A Kindle? Or maybe a Fitbit? 
No, sorry, only kidding on that last one. You’re not very likely to be asking for a Fitbit, are you?  Or at least Fitbit’s management team don’t reckon you will be! That was one of the grim conclusions from last week’s third quarter earnings call by the health tracking device market leader. 
It’s not a pretty picture, with year-on-year sales growth for the all-important holiday season expected to be as low as 2% and as high as 5% if they’re lucky. To put that in stark contrast, year-on-year Q4 growth between 2014 and 2015 was 92%. No wonder there was a run on Fitbit share price last week. 
It also leaves Fitbit on the back foot in a market where it’s been a leader and grown to take 25% market share on the back of selling 54 million devices, but which has struggled with new product innovation, troublesome Asia Pac markets and increased competition from the likes of Apple and Microsoft. 
All this leads CEO James Park to concede that there are “headwinds” that are pushing against the firm, but he insists that the market is only beginning to open up: 

We continue to believe that the market opportunity ahead of us is large. We believe there’s a large gap between consumers interested in improving their health and wellness, with the overall penetration of wearables in connected health devices.
Based on our own research, 66% of people in the US care about health and fitness and have a smart phone or computer tablet. However, only 20% of US adults in a recent independent survey indicated that they own a connected health and fitness device. Our opportunity is in that gap, and we feel that we are the best positioned company to take advantage of it.

Size is going to matter here, he argues, and Fitbit has a sizeable footprint and a brand recognition upon which it can rebuild: 

While the exact size of the wearables market is tough to quantify, utilizing IDC data, Fitbit has the largest share at 25% and continues to outpace the industry based on units shipped. Further, we are now starting to demonstrate that we have a durable business and we have the ingredients to ignite future growth.
The industry is starting to consolidate around the market leaders like ourselves, with prominent players exiting the business or being acquired. One proof point demonstrating the strength of our business model is a competitive note created by the network effect of our large active user community. 
Due to desire to participate in the social experience in the Fitbit app, we believe people are more likely to buy Fitbit over a competitor, because their friends and family are more likely to be users already, and people are less likely to leave their competitor due to similar dynamics.

Hmmm. But is Fitbit as ‘cool’ as a smart watch brand these days? It’s telling perhaps that Park admits that a sizeable chunk of business in the most recent quarter – 40% – came from existing, repeat buyers. But while that demonstrates solid customer loyalty and also the on-off nature of people’s interest in health – some 20% of those reactivations were of devices that had been inactive for more than 90 days! – where’s the ‘sex appeal’ that’s going to get new customers coming on board?
There’s also a need to continue to spend on R&D and product innovation, says Park. Currently R&D accounts for 14% of revenues, an essential spend to improve functionality and form factor to keep up with the style demands of consumers, he notes: 

We are continuing to invest and innovate behind our leadership position to create new, compelling value propositions for our products and to expand the category. Research and development currently represents 14% of revenue. Within R&D we expect to expand into additional form factors and bring software features and services to further penetrate the market.
Investment in R&D is paying off in new ways. For example, technology improvements have enabled us to roll out new advanced experiences, like estimating VO 2 max and personalized stress management. We have also rolled out a new swim-proof design for Flex2. These advancements help drive engagements in our platform and deliver added functionality to our users.

Indeed, but the Flex 2 is also a good example of what’s gone wrong with Fitbit of late with the production being problematic and ending up coming on the market a month after Apple stole the headlines by announcing its latest watch is waterproof. Park knows that there were problems: 

The root cause is that Flex 2, even though it looks like a fairly simple device, is actually a more complex device than we have designed and developed, and that’s due to its incredibly tiny form factor. It’s the smallest activity tracking device on the market. That small form factor made it incredibly difficult to swim-proof the device. It was incredibly difficult to find batteries that were small enough to fit in the device. It was small enough that we actually had to move to a fully automated production process using robotics to manufacture that product. So there was a lot of things that we had to invent and learn along the way, resulting in you could say a non-optimal initial production process.

New markets
There are potential new areas of non-consumer growth, suggests Park, citing the corporate buyer market as a case in point: 

Employers are embracing connected health and fitness technology, as they recognize its ability to improve health outcomes and lower costs. This usage by employers has the potential to advance a category into a must-have and a vital piece of everyone’s lives. Employers have a direct vested interest in improving the health and fitness of their employees.
We’ve started to collect some great data that support this business case. ABI Research data indicates that corporate wellness programs that offer a wearable device increases employee participation from 20% to between 60% to 70%. In a recent study conducted by Springbuk, an employer health intelligence platform, found that after two years, the employees who opted into a Fitbit corporate wellness program incurred $1300 less per person, on average, in annual healthcare costs. Further supporting the study were results from the Dayton Regional Transit Authority, who determined Fitbit’s corporate wellness program demonstrated $2.3 million in employer cost savings over two years on a projected $15.5 million of total spend.

That’s money that Fitbit doesn’t want to leave on the table, so expect to see a lot more activity in that direction. Park maintains that early progress has been encouraging: 

Our corporate wellness business is actively pursuing accounts, and has had several wins across a variety of industry verticals, including Pitney Bowes, and Dr Pepper/Snapple group. Fitbit Group Health has also strategically partnered with Virgin Pulse, a leading provider of wellbeing technology solutions. Virgin Pulse will offer Fitbit as its brand name fitness tracker of choice to their 2200 global employer customers.

Then there’s the wider digital healthcare market, a natural follow-on from the corporate buyer push, suggests Park: 

Obviously, the place where we are seeing the earliest and initially greater traction is with employers, so we count that as digital health. The next area that we hope to see progress is more on the payer side, the insurance companies. And then the longer term is going to be integration with providers, such as hospital systems, just due to the nature of those entities. But, we have a lot of efforts underway tackling each of those three different areas, which we’ll unlock over time.
Looking to the future, we believe Fitbit has a key role to play in the healthcare ecosystem in how healthcare is practiced. Historically, it’s been very difficult to monitor and engage patients outside of the confines of a medical visit. Many influencing factors that impact health are lifestyle- or environment-driven, and cannot be accurately or comprehensively tracked by healthcare providers today. Nor do they have effective ways to communicate with, educate and engage with patients in order to drive behavior, such as improved compliance to guidance, or adherence to treatments.
We believe there is real opportunity for us to improve both episodic care and chronic care and disease management. We have invested, and will continue to invest, R&D in sensors that continuously gather more and more advanced health data, systems that analyze this data, and features that foster more engagement and communication. And we expect this R&D to make us incredibly important partners to providers, pharmaceutical companies, insurers, and employers as we all strive to make healthcare more accessible, accurate, and affordable.

My take
I’ve got a Fitbit…somewhere. No idea where it is to be honest. I’m one of those ‘cyclical’ users to whom Park refers – used it for a couple of months when I first got it, became depressed at its findings/my lack of progress, then stuck it in a drawer. I’ve also got an iPhone with health apps on it and an Apple Watch that I have health settings fired up on. I wear that today, not my Fitbit. I find it more stylish and more functionally useful, beyond just tracking my steps. 
The wider interest in the digital health market is a good directional strategy as is the corporate wellness sector, but where Fitbit urgently needs to catch up is in coming up with some product innovation and design that puts it on the front foot again. The market is relatively untapped still. It’s a marathon, not a sprint, but Fitbit needs to pick up its step markedly if it’s not going be lapped once and for all by its rivals. 
Image credit - FitbitRead more on: Collaboration sharing and digital productivityCRM and customer experienceHealthcare transformationIoT robotics and AIRetail e-commerce and the omni-channelUX and application design 