
The notion of bringing together a hundred or more developers over a weekend to compete in teams and come up with innovative new products or applications — otherwise known as the hackathon — is now firmly established. Hundreds every year around the world are run by a single company, AngelHack, and its nonprofit arm, Code For A Cause. The startup’s founder and CEO, Sabeen Ali, gave me some tips earlier this summer, both for companies that want to host hackathons and for their prospective attendees.
The earliest hackathons were internal initiatives at tech leaders such as Yahoo!, but they quickly caught on as public events designed to interest developers in a particular company or technology. One of the big drivers was when vendors started publishing APIs or SDKs and wanted to encourage developers to write to their platform, says Ali:
The premise is, make your APIs available at our events, challenge the developers to create something new and exciting with your APIs, and then incentivize them with some sort of prize — whether it’s credit, or some monetary prize, or acceleration, or something along those lines.
So our partners will sponsor one, some, or all of our events at some sort of tier of sponsorship. All of our events that are part of our global competition are underwritten that way.
Very soon, companies started asking AngelHack to organize exclusive corporate events where it was all about their own platform. The first was Hearst Corporation. Others followed and now the company organizes close to a hundred such events each year, for everyone from toy giant Hasbro and American football league the NFL, to publishing house Condé Nast and payment network MasterCard.
While these corporate hackathons and associated consulting now make up a big part of AngelHack’s business, the company continues to run its multi-sponsor Global Hackathon series in locations across six continents, and has an accelerator program to help winning teams build startups from their ideas. Through its nonprofit arm Code For A Cause, it helps organize hackathons to address social issues, from environmental challenges in the Gulf of Mexico to women’s health in Gaza.
Based on all of this experience, here are five points that came out of my conversation with Ali for organizations planning to run a hackathon.
1. A hackathon isn’t like any other corporate event
Sometimes AngelHack finds it gets brought in because a company has decided to run a hackathon but realizes it hasn’t got the wherewithal to make a success of it. The most common mistake is just asking the in-house event planning team to set it all up, says Ali:
They don’t necessarily understand the psyche of developers, their needs and their wants. We’re asking a lot of our community. We’re asking them to spend their weekend with us, to stay overnight, to give us some of their amazing ideas. So what we need to do is first think about the value that we’re providing our community, how we build that into our event and then actually organize the event.
That’s probably the biggest mistake we’ve seen. We’ve seen a lot of clients come to us after the fact. They’ve launched an event and now they’re not getting any developers to sign up. We look at some of the rules and we look at the way that they’ve structured the schedule or the challenges and we [tell them], this is not going to resonate within the developer community.
2. It doesn’t have to be about APIs or even technology
While it’s often about APIs it doesn’t have to be — recently there’s been an upsurge in organizations wanting to open up their data to developers. Sometimes it’s just about tapping external creativity.
When Hasbro came to AngelHack to run a hackathon, it was because it wanted to develop a connected toy range. The company had never previously invited the public into its HQ site, says Ali, and had just 6 product developers. The hackathon saw 150 developers working with Hasbro’s R&D team, taking apart toys and pitching 40 projects. Eight ended up being commissioned by Hasbro.
Whatever the subject matter, the hackathon is a vehicle for creating new ideas the community can make use of, says Ali:
First we taught you how to innovate using a toolset of technology. Now we’re going to teach you how to innovate with all or none of the toolsets. Go use everything. Go create something from scratch. Ultimately, what we want to see is something for the betterment of a particular topic or industry.
3. Get the fundamentals right
As hackathons have become more mainstream, the processes have become more standardized. AngelHack makes sure that attendees can connect online before the event starts so that they can start making plans and forming teams. Choose judges that have industry expertise or a VC background. Think too about how you’ll follow up afterwards with winning teams.
Most important is to create an environment where developers will be able to keep working through the night without getting distracted from the task in hand. Organizers must make sure appropriate food and refreshments are on hand, and that lighting and temperature is comfortable.
4. Set the right expectations
Even with the right planning, organizations shouldn’t expect miraculous results. That’s the nature of creativity — with a hundred or so attendees you can expect on average to see about 20 to 35 projects being completed. But not every idea that comes out of the hackathon is going to be worth taking further, says Ali.
The purpose is to allow people an opportunity to play with an idea, and the ones that are worthwhile are the top 2%. There’s probably five apps that you actually want to spend more time with and hope that they’ll work on more.
5. Innovation means change management
AngelHack often finds there’s a lot of consulting work involved in getting an organization ready for its first hackathon. That preparatory work often stretches over several months, says Ali:
We go into a lot of these organizations that never innovated this way before, or they’ve never opened up their technology before, or they opened up some of their data and now we’re teaching them a new way to innovate and collaborate from the outside in.
It’s often a particular champion that brings forward the idea of running a hackathon but they also have to persuade colleagues that may not be so keen, she warns:
There’s the people that maybe historically have been responsible for coming up with the ideas. They’re having a hard time grappling with the new way of innovating — ‘Oh my goodness, R&D is now being dismantled, our budget is being sent to open innovation. What does that mean for us? How do we fit into this picture?’
So there’s a big fear element there as well, which is where the change management comes into it.
In part two, learn Ali’s advice about taking part in a hackathon as an attendee.
Image credit - Hackathon team at AB InBev Hack The World Bangalore 2016 via AngelHackRead more on: Collaboration sharing and digital productivityDevOps NoSQL and the open source stackDigital skills and training 