
Apparel and footwear is not an industry that you often think of as technology-led. But Italian footwear maker Vibram fits the description precisely. From its founding in 1937 to market a high-traction sole developed using vulcanized rubber technology, it has grown through innovation in the design and manufacture of hard-wearing, high-grip soles, of which it sells 60 million a year.
That spirit of innovation also led to the launch in 2004 of its convention-breaking FiveFingers running shoes, more of a glove for the feet than anything like a traditional shoe. Until that moment, few consumers outside the realms of mountaineering and hillwalking were aware of Vibram’s distinctive yellow octagon trademark. The company operated in B2B mode, selling its soles to other footwear makers and direct to large enterprise clients such as the US military.
Suddenly, Vibram was selling a popular B2C product that Time magazine would go on to name in its 2007 list of the year’s best innovations alongside the iPhone. “It was the first time that we went to the end consumer,” says Giuseppe Grandinetti, global digital marketing manager.
With that design we completely changed the footwear industry. Before we started no one thought about how to use the feet in a direct way.
We opened a new segment of the market, the minimalist market.
Customer connection
It was heady success, fueled by viral word-of-mouth and the ability to sell direct in the US market and elsewhere via the web. But it meant the company didn’t have any way to get feedback from its customers, unlike in its very close B2B relationships, says Grandinetti.
We didn’t think about the website because the sale was too easy. But we lost the connection with the consumer.
Like any disruptive innovation, the FiveFingers design attracted a loyal following. But it also had its detractors — not only among onlookers who made fun of the quirky design, but more seriously in a US lawsuit alleging that Vibram had exaggerated the health benefits of the design. The company opted to settle the case in 2014 without admitting fault, paying out $3.75 million to be shared between lawyers and FiveFingers customers. More than 150,000 submitted claims, two-thirds without being required to show proof of purchase.
Among the footwear’s supporters, its distinctive looks made it a natural for sharing images on social media. A huge following developed without the company having to invest any effort, says Grandinetti.
We saw a lot of UGC [user generated content] on social media dedicated to Vibram. We now have 1 million followers without pushing, without promotion. People who just wanted to have a connection with us.
Social media ambassadors
That prompted the company to develop a more co-ordinated approach, initially by creating an ambassador program out of its most influential followers.
150 high-level technical, professional people around the world that use our product give us everyday feedback. We found people that already talk about Vibram with no pushing. They talk about Vibram because they are happy.
The company now proactively engages with customers using social media, both for customer service and sales. That includes getting permission to repromote user-generated content to which Vibram adds a ‘buy’ button that connects into its Demandware e-commerce platform.
For us, social media is the strong way to talk to customers. We use Facebook and Pinterest for sales, Twitter for customer service.
Product is still at the center of its proposition, though. This is, after all, an engineering-led footwear company. More recently, it has been adapting digital technology, for example prototyping smart soles with built-in sensors and Bluetooth that communicate data to smartphone and smartwatch apps.
At a research center in China, at the heart of Guangzhou’s shoe manufacturing district, Vibram is working on shoes that will recharge digital devices as you walk, and shoes for the blind that transmit walking directions through vibrations in the sole.
Product personalization
For Grandinetti, one of the most exciting initiatives combines social media with product personalization. Vibram’s Sole Factor service, which ‘upcycles’ shoes by adding a custom Vibram sole to any shoe, goes out on the road in a mobile cobbler’s workshop. Local promotion attracts people to bring their shoes to the truck for ‘upcycling’ with a sole that offers more grip, less weight, or more volume, according to choice. Different colours and styles are on offer too.
You bring your shoes to our truck, the upcycle is free, you take a picture for social media, it creates interest.
The service is also being rolled out to selected stores in collaboration with local partners. It’s part of a trend for cobblers to become more like designers, says Grandinetti, and it reflects the more personalized, two-way relationships with consumers that brands are evolving today.
In the future, the website will not be B2B or B2C but C2B — consumer to business. Everything must be to build the right product for the consumer, not just to sell them something. This is the future of ecommerce.
My take
A fascinating story about applying technology in an age-old product category and still finding opportunities not only for product innovation but also in finding new ways of collaborating with consumers to deliver the products they want.
Image credit - Runner's feet on path in Vibram FiveFingers © piranha13 - Fotolia.comDisclosure - Giuseppe Grandinetti spoke to media in June at Demandware's XChange conference in Berlin. Demandware funded the author's travel to attend. Demandware is now part of Salesforce, a diginomica premier partner. Read more on: Digital and content marketinge-commerceSocial 