

As VMware’s Head of Advisory & Consulting Services, Richard Bennett was recently moderating a CIO roundtable, it’s a key part of his job, really. The subject, not surprisingly, was digital transformation; but the underlying question was, `in reality, what does it actually mean?’
The problem is that, while digital transformation is now generally a board-level mandate, what CIOs see before them is digital disruption, and, as Bennett put it, they are frightened. He sees the user community as having reached a tipping point where every conversation starts with the lack of understanding of the disruptive nature of digital transformation, followed by the need to understand that the nature of the transformation is well outside the scope of technology. It is now about personal user experience:

I’ve got Sonos, all the cool connective technology. I’ve got the ability to control my heating from here, which is rather entertaining when I am watching my wife who’s got the heating on full whilst I’m away. When I’m in the house it’s not on full so we’re having a virtual fight now, over the Internet, about the heating….because we can, because this is my personal user experience.

The effect on CIOs therefore is how that now changes how they think and what they do, for it is no longer about technology, it is about all users being human and it’s about they’re expectations and adoption, as humans. He does see real opportunities for CIOs but the danger is that some will upgrade and install new technology now to prepare for some idealised, future cross-cloud world without understanding the use cases – neither the generalised examples nor their own specific ones. 
Five key areas
Bennett and his team have therefore evolved a map of four key areas with which to drive conversations with CIOs. 
Underpinning them all, the first area is what he calls storytelling for the board, which is aimed at changing the CIO mindset away from traditional IT. This is closely modelled on Benefit Dependency Networks, developed by Cranfield University, and is a methodology of getting CIOs to start their thinking with business outcomes. He claims they are seeing good success when they can we get an early engagement with CIOs.
The aim is to demonstrate how customers can increase the average revenue per user, increase customer retention, bring new products and services to market faster and, as a result, help the business make more money:

That is a fundamentally key part of the VMware story now. To differentiate the customer you’re going to market to by being more agile than your competitor through digital technologies, and that’s transformation.

The second one is the critical need to deliver a really excellent user and customer experience. 
As an example he used work VMware did with Adidas last year. He suggested the company had started to fall between the two stools of being a sportswear manufacturer, and a major retailer with 2,500 stores around Europe. It was starting fall behind with the competitors in both sectors because the company was not gathering customer feedback. 
This was a set of complex data – and as Bennett observed, big data is not large, big data is complex – and was all about that human context:

So we put digital booths in stores so consumers can not only give feedback on the shopping experience, but also on existing products. They can also add suggestions. We created this idea of a ‘voice of the customer’ through digital transformation.

In practice, this is based on VMware’s Digital Workspace Technologies, VSen, VRealise and VSphere, together with some work with partner, Pivotal, on complex data peer management. But to Bennett’s mind that is not really the point – the technology solutions exist, but it is deciding what is needed in business terms, and why it is important to the business, that are the key questions.
And while this is a retail example, those questions apply across the board in any line of business, as he points out: 

Look at the likes of Atom and Monza – they are app-only banks. They’re now moving workloads around in the cloud to support a growing customer base that don’t care about going into a bank shop – and it is a bank shop if you think about it it’s the same as a retail environment.

What is even more important is the speed at which transformation can occur, once customer experience becomes the key driver. Even a year ago, being able to print a credit card in a bank, on the day it was ordered, was leading edge stuff. In Bennett’s experience, this is now seen as legacy banking compared to the new cloud-only operations. 
Similarly, in the world of online betting, companies are using customer data to work out customer preferences to identify and foster the new high roller accounts.  Yes, the punters that put 50p on the Grand National every year are still good business, but those businesses are looking for people who are spending thousands on horse races or tens of thousands on the Superbowl:

That’s what I mean when I talk about incredible customer experience. You’re not starting with the ‘can I make it faster, what’s the ROI, what’s the TCO’ even though that’s all really important stuff. But when we talk about digital transformation it’s Digital Business and what that is doing.

Be elastic 
This then needs to be backed by the third factor, elasticity of resources, which is one of the key underlying objectives of the new VMware partnership with AWS. With Christmas and Black Friday looming on the horizon, the need for retailers to ramp up resources to meet not just the trading needs of customers using contact centres, call centres, and the web, but the customer experience is getting high right now. 
These retailers will be people looking for real, live, human people to deliver that excellence in customer experience. So they will want to temporarily upscale resources to meet that demand – add 5,000 contact centre agents for just one day, with all of them working from home – but then be able to turn them off again.
Number four of five is the security conversation. Or as Bennett prefers to refer to it, the integrity conversation, because in practice this is about trust between a vendor or service provider and their customers. And he acknowledges that for the majority of VMware customers, safely bounded and secure behind firewalls and an on-premise infrastructure, this can appear to be scary stuff. That is why the first goal is to get CIOs thinking in terms of business outcomes first.
Last comes the need for real agility, which he sees as the predominant way that VMware can help customers bring in business differentiation. It is also, however, the point where the challenge can vary wildly. They need the agility to be able to deliver what the customers are looking for, but that is only a part of the process. He sees that agility being driven by the need for excellent customer experiences that are not only appreciated but also trusted. That is ultimately what creates sticky customers who come back for more: 

I think when we think about it that way it takes a slightly different hue if you think with the human first not with the technology first. The future use case is now the point: how do we get there? what are the steps to get there? Now, customers have to start with the future case and that’s different.

My take
Another collection of ‘how to’ and ‘why to’ thoughts for CIOs to chew on when the CEO comes knocking, uttering the words ‘digital transformation’.
Image credit - Freeimages.comRead more on: Governing identity privacy and securityIoT robotics and AIThe new professional and IT as a serviceUX and application design 