
If you’re planning a bit of Thanksgiving weekend DIY just to get away from the turkey leftovers, then a trip to Lowe’s might be in order. The only problem might be that when you get there, there’s a chance that what you want may not be on the shelves – and that’s a really big issue for CEO Marvin Ellison:
This is a very simple retail analysis. When customers walk into a brick-and-mortar location, they have an intention to either buy or to get some level of consultation on an item they’re considering buying. And we’re in the project business, so that happens quite often. But when we talk to our customers and asked the question, what drove a decision not to buy when you physically showed up at a store, it is overwhelmingly that you were not in stock…we still have a significant number of out-of-stocks on our shelves. You can just simply walk our stores and see it with the naked eye.
That’s bad enough, but it’s only one of the problems facing Lowe’s. Ellison has a list of what he calls “long-standing chronic issues”, including poor reset execution, out-of-stock problems, assortments not being localized, poor customer service, no real focus on the pro customer yada yada yada.
All told it sounds like a poisoned chalice for the CEO who was brought in earlier this year to put in place a turnaround strategy and one with a significant technology and digital underpinning. That included finding what he calls “a world-class Chief Information Officer”, a role now filled by Seemantini Godbole.
She’s had over 25 years in retail and most recently Senior Vice-President, Digital and Marketing Technology at Target. Her track record there includes the re-architecture of the firm’s digital platforms, implementation of Agile product management and the introduction of tech-enabled customer experiences including mobile applications, Buy Online and Pick Up In-Store and ship from store programs, guest order fulfilment, digital wallet, localized pricing, and customer loyalty and engagement offerings.
Ellison calls her appointment “the final addition to our executive leadership team” and positions his new leadership as being now able to get down to business:
Our new leadership team [has] assessed our functional areas, upgraded talent, conducted deeper dives in their business areas, and the team was committed to identifying the root causes of our sales per square foot challenges, merchandising reset issues, our chronic out of stock and our low job lot quantity issues. But rather than implementing quick fixes to address these chronic and long-standing issues… we developed plans to drive sustainable improvement. And this is reflective of our commitment of building a foundation of sustainable long-term success.
To do list
Part of that will involve removation work on the firm’s mobile strategy, says Ellison:
When you look online, we know we have some issues with functionality that we’re addressing. We also know that we have issue with search and navigation and ease of checkout. If you look at our mobile app, you can see an app that desires to be much more robust. We’re in the process of delivering on that.
One thing that Ellison wants to understand better is Lowe’s customer traffic patterns so as to measure success rates:
Measuring traffic online is just pure data-driven. So, that’s something we have 100% visibility to like any other e-com or brick-and-mortar company with an e-commerce platform. That’s pretty straightforward. When we look at traffic in the stores, we have monitoring devices to measure traffic. Our environment is more difficult to measure conversion because we’re a project business. And so, we’re going to shift our discussion from conversion to transactions. We still feel very good about traffic, both online and in store base on how we measure it, but we understand that we have challenges in driving transactions and/or conversion based on the traffic.
We don’t want to make this overly complicated. When a retailer is not delivering on the traffic that’s walking in your store, there are really a couple of basic reasons why. Either you are pricing incorrectly from what you advertised or you’re out of stock. And we feel good about the consistency of our pricing and all of our data tells us that we’re out-of-stock. And that’s why we put such a huge emphasis on addressing this issue. So, we understand the root cause. We understand how we got here and now we’re working to create a sustainable solution to fix it.
My take
Ellison is talking a long game – which is also what he did as CEO at JC Penney and while that delivered some positives, progress went at far too slow a pace for Wall Street to like. That said, Ellison seems intent on taking the same ‘one thing at a time’ approach at Lowe’s and not allowing himself to be distracted by what rivals are doing. Home Depot, for example, has enjoyed considerable digital transformation success and financial rewards – Home Depot’s turns in over $100 billion in sales, Lowe’s around $68 billion. Ellison, who was part of that Home Depot turnaround before being passed over for CEO there, says:
I think the key is, we spend very little time looking across the street. We are a customer-centric company. And what we believe is, if we take care of the customer, everything else will take care of itself. And I’ll just remind you that we operate in a $900 billion marketplace, so we don’t care a whole lot about what’s happening across the street because between Lowe’s and our largest competitors, [which has] less than $200 billion in market share, which means there’s more than $700 billion up for grabs in this really fragmented environment. For us, it’s less about what’s happening with the competitors, more about how we serve customers and how we go out and we take share in this fragmented marketplace that we’re in.
Maybe so, but this is one renovation project that needs to start showing improvements pretty fast in 2019. CIO Godbole has a long ‘to do’ list ahead of her.
Image credit - Lowe'sRead more on: CRM and customer experienceInfrastructureMobileRetail e-commerce and the omni-channelSocialUser experienceUX and application design 