
Girish Rishi centre-stage
Girish Rishi is in ebullient mood. Fresh from his keynote speech at JDA FocusConnect 2018 in Barcelona, JDA Software’s CEO (since January 2017) hails the critical importance of EMEA to the privately held company:
It’s very large. It’s about 35 percent of our revenue. It’s a larger percentage than you’ll see with most other companies. I’ve run EMEA before, I’ve been based in Europe before, and so I’ve a personal affiliation [sic] to EMEA. And what I like is you have enormously developed, first-world countries, but you have emerging economies as well.
You have the highest end of retailing, and you have third-party logistics, such as DHL, and then you have manufacturing… That diversity and concentration all the way from Sweden to South Africa is very representative of what’s happening in the world.
Rishi made a big, public bet on the UK in March, opening a new base of operations at London landmark 30 St Mary Axe in the City – aka ‘The Gherkin’. But how much of JDA’s business now comes from emerging economies, rather than long-established ones, such as the UK?
Rishi says that JDA’s second biggest win this year came from the Middle East – “a very significant SaaS opportunity out of retail”. He’s referring to September’s deal with Alshaya, the Kuwait-born EMEA franchise operator of over 4,000 stores for nearly 90 of the world’s leading brands, including Starbucks, H&M, Debenham’s, American Eagle Outfitters, Mothercare, The Cheesecake Factory, Victoria’s Secret, and Pottery Barn.
All in, 2018 has been eventful for JDA, with the acquisition of retail AI and machine learning specialist Blue Yonder – whose origins, like the Web’s, were at CERN; an enterprise cloud partnership with Microsoft Azure, and others with Dunnhumby and Mulesoft; the launch of the Luminate product line, and JDA’s new focus on AI, machine learning, and edge insight – but that’s one shared by almost every enterprise software company, of course.
Throughout 2018, retail has been a dominant theme for JDA, raising the question of how big a part of the business is retail now for a company that is better known for its supply chain portfolio? Rishi says:
In any given quarter, it ranges from 42% to 45%  of our business. We like the balance that we have. We like the connection we have to the end customer, because that impacts on our third-party logistics and manufacturing strategy as well. So a healthy 42% to 45%, but growing at double digits for us.”
However, retail is increasingly being dominated by the big beast of online commerce (in market cap terms, at least): Amazon, the hyper-company for whom no sector appears to be off limits. And Amazon is also the cloud platform, AI, and logistics company that JDA cannot partner with, as it would alienate much of JDA’s customer base.
Might Amazon one day try to muscle in on JDA’s turf? Rishi says:
We don’t see Amazon as a competitor to us. Amazon is a market agent that’s driving the obvious disruptions that you’re seeing. It’s a competitor to our customers, and we’ve heard customers say, ‘Having you with us gives us a higher rate of probability that we’ll counter the Amazon threat’.
They compete against our third-party logistics customers, but they also use those customers. Are they planning on selling execution or retail software systems today? Not really. Is there a probability of them doing that in the future? Maybe. But they tend to go after multibillion-dollar businesses. So we’ll see.
JDA Software has partnered with Microsoft – which is itself trying to counter Amazon’s threat in cloud services – rather than IBM, or Google (with whom JDA was linked before Rishi came onboard)? There were good reasons for this, he says:
Here were our criteria. First, we wanted to partner with a company that was in the enterprise market. So when we looked at everybody, it came down to really a couple. As an example, Google is not really that strong in the enterprise [despite moves to counter that this summer]. But if I was building a business to compete with Netflix, then maybe I would go with Google.
So all of our customers have a huge, installed-base infrastructure with Microsoft. That was positive number one. Number two, we wanted inherent AI capability that was conducive to the enterprise market. And what we are doing, and what Blue Yonder’s doing, we could leverage on cloud.
And third was go-to-market prowess. Microsoft has thousands of partners and integrators. Azure is the new Windows. And people are getting access to developers… the opportunity to hire or work with partners and developers was huge. We wanted an existing ecosystem. Everybody you mentioned, they don’t have an ecosystem.
And fourth was the commitment at executive level, from Satya Nadella, towards JDA, and vice versa. We wanted that warm touch and that iterative touch. We’ve secured that and our customers are better for it.
Pivots
But it hasn’t all been plain sailing. In his keynote address, Rishi acknowledged that JDA has made what he called a significant “pivot” in its business, refocusing on AI, machine learning, and edge analytics. Rishi explains why there was a need for a strategic shift:
It’s a massive pivot. Our customers wanted better visibility of the core portfolio that they’re using, and the lifecycle of it and the continuity and features of it. They wanted clear line of sight. I’ve only been here two years, but when I look back I can see that was not visible to them.
We had to do things internally to drive that. An example is our partnership with Mulesoft. We shut down internal [middleware] development. We went with Microsoft’s cloud instead of our own data centres, so that’s another massive pivot.
Plus our customers were looking for better integration than was available. And most importantly, they wanted to ingest AI here and now. They were not going to wait until 2020 or 2021. They were saying, ‘We need cognitive edge insight capability now.’ And that has resulted in the Luminate portfolio. And that has also resulted in Blue Yonder coming onboard.
So it’s been a massive pivot. That’s why I called out half a billion in product investment over the next three years. Sixty to sixty-five percent of that is going on the core, and the rest is going on cognitive services and AI.
Microsoft’s own AI and machine learning ability sits at Azure platform level, Rishi explains, while Blue Yonder’s is at contextual level, in merchandising pricing or fulfilment, for example.
Rishi adds that he pursued both relationships “in parallel with no intent of correlation”, but both came onboard in June/July – a coincidence, apparently.
What JDA is doing now with Luminate, would that have been possible without Blue Yonder? It seems to have had a fast-tracked development cycle, with Luminate being announced just weeks after the Blue Yonder deal. Rishi says:
Luminate was, and is not, dependant on Blue Yonder. But there are offerings below Luminate in the stack that the roadmap was saying are two years out, but those are available now [as a result of the Blue Yonder acquisition], such as Luminate Replenishment or Cognitive Demand.
What we have also gained, the whole idea with Blue Yonder was it’s not just about the product or technology, it was also about the data scientists. So now between us and them we have the largest, the richest depth of data scientists in the company to go solve simple and complex problems in retail and the supply chain.
According to Rishi’s keynote, JDA now has over 110 data scientists onboard.
Of course, the supply chain space itself is changing dramatically. Increasingly, monolithic processes are being replaced by more personalised, automated, and localised ones – the ‘PAL’ value chain foreseen by transformation consultant Sean Culey. This breaking apart of the old outsourced, mass-market approach sees the emergence of smaller, more manageable bits, complemented by the sharing economy. Rishi says:
It’s more nimble and we are addressing those market segments via our customers. Local is the new global. The most global companies are now localising their factory, warehouse, distribution, and retail outlet presences closest to the customer.
But phenomenon number two is that the most active customer-engaged companies are not addressing 25-30 year olds, for example. They are addressing individuals via hyper-personalisation, be it in cars or in shoes. It’s getting hyper-personalised. It’s very interesting that, as the population is growing, instead of addressing the lowest common denominator, it’s going right down to the individual.
So think about localisation of factories, warehouses, retail stores, hyper-personalisation at individual level. And the last phenomenon I would name is down to the edge. So with all this talk about cloud, what’s getting lost is the hyper focus on the edge.
So from a software architecture point of view, micro-services are involved. For the ‘normal person on the street’, you will hear about globalisation, cloud, demographic groups, and so on, but really it’s the reverse trend that we see.
As to what’s on the horizon now for JDA – beyond an increasing closeness with Microsoft, perhaps, which would seem inevitable from the shared direction of travel – Rishi states:
You will see more emphasis on Artificial Intelligence. The last two years were about laying out the foundation. Now we’re starting to work on how data insights can drive outcomes for customers. So a year, a year and a half from now, you’ll see a more evolving strategy from us. It’s not just cloud software, it’s not just Luminate. Give me drip [sic] of data insights that will drive my behaviour in a retail store, in a warehouse, in a factory, and the whole business model that will emerge from that.
My take
Despite the clarity of vision from JDA in terms of ‘Industry 4.0’ – AI, machine learning, automation, the IoT, edge processes, and so on – a number of recent reports from the likes of PwC, McKinsey, the World Economic Forum, and others, have suggested that some of the current boom in cognitive insights is being driven by the wrong internal needs.
According to those reports, the perceived need to cut costs, slash staffing, and seek tactical advantage often takes precedence over investing strategically to make the business smarter or get closer to the customer. As a result, there may be a trough and a market shakedown after the current peak of the AI wave.
But according to Rishi, he sees little evidence of that happening himself:
I’m not seeing that anywhere. I’m seeing genuine engagement from customers. There is no one looking for a quick shortcut to save money. They’re looking for sustainable processes and workflows that will evolve. And in many cases the workforce will get repurposed, the same as the VCR did not replace movie theatres. It added to the experience and that’s what we are seeing in every instance.
So we are not seeing any customers rush into deployment for a quick hit. I’m out with customers every week, maybe too much! What I’m hearing in every conversation, including here [at FocusConnect], is that customers are striving to meet their end user more effectively. That’s where our conversations are taking place.
Most of it is pointed towards greater revenue growth and market share, not just a cost-cutting transaction.
Image credit - JDA Software Read more on: Analytics planning and data analysisCloud platforms - infrastructure and architectureMachine intelligence and AI 