
It’s a tad ironic to hear Dick Johnson, CEO at athletic footwear firm Foot Locker, complaining about his business effectively being lapped by tech-enabled changes in buying behaviors:
The disruption taking place today in our industry and in retail and general is the most significant I’ve seen in my quarter-century in the athletic business. The fact is that we’re seeing mobile technology drive shifts in consumer behavior and spending patterns at a faster pace than our industry has been able to keep up with.
Customers are also becoming increasingly fickle in their tastes, he adds:
With constant access to new influences, trends, information, and ideas consumers attention spans are getting shorter, and we’re seeing that they are moving from one style to the next faster than ever before…Our young customers are still highly passionate about sports, music, style, and the other key elements of new culture. We are committed to adapting our business as quickly as possible in the ever faster speed at which they move.
In order to do that, Foot Lockers is looking to shorten product development cycles and ordering and manufacturing lead times, cutting supply chain costs and impriving “storytelling and marketing timelines”. Or at least that’s the theory. The problem, according to Johnson, is that while the theory’s fine in principle, in practice there are some problems to be addressed:
Today, those efforts are much discussed are in practice still in their infancy. We have a lot more progress to make.
That’s not to suggest that Johnson doesn’t see Foot Locker as being in with a sporting chance of success:
Although we recognize the fundamental shift in consumer behavior and have been taking steps to address the new operating environment, it is important to emphasize that we believe premium athletic, which is fuelled by casualization and a trend towards healthier and more active lifestyles is still a great place to be in over the long run. We will continue to build more responsive and nimble practices into how new product is brought to market.
Digital boost
What that translates to is a greater emphasis in digital spend, directed at both customer-facing technology, such as mobile apps and an enhanced e-commerce platform, as well as new POS [Point of Sale] software, and back of house capabilities, such as infrastructure and data analytics. Johnson explains that the analytics drive is particularly crucial:
We believe that with the compression of product life-cycle making these investments and accelerating our efforts will keep us at the heart of sneaker culture. We have succeeded in the past by knowing individual customers better in order to engage with them in the increasingly personal ways they expect. Creating and delivering content, which they find relevant, having stores in the key locations they want us to be, and improving our ability to deliver products to them ever faster – we believe these will continue to be the key ingredients of our future success.
Particularly at the high end of the market, there’s a need to understand the dynamics influencing the purchasing decisions at play, he adds:
At the premium end of the market, most of our customers don’t want to just buy a specific product at the end of Spring. They want that product to have a connection to an experience they find meaningful and want to participate in. That experience could be a special event in the store, [which they are] notified of, or discovering a video on our website or YouTube channel of an athlete or celebrity wearing or discussing the latest product, an interaction with their friends while touching and feeling the product or simply a conversation about sneakers with one of our strikers or other store associates.
We believe our vendors agree with us that consistently selling their premium aspirational product requires great storytelling, great relevance to the influences on our customer’s lives, as well as engaging digital and in-store experiences. We also believe that most of our suppliers have seen more clearly than ever how important and authentic our customer connections are, and how our proposition makes Foot Locker such a critical partner in the future success.
Such is Johnson’s confidence in that thesis that he dismisses the prospect of the firm’s product suppliers leaning towards Amazon, despite the e-commerce giant’s recent distribution deal with Nike:
We do not believe our vendors selling product directly on Amazon is an imminent threat. There is no indication that any of our vendor’s intend to sell premium athletic product a $100 plus interest that we offer directly via that service distribution channel. For lower price largely and differentiated product share, Amazon and other online sales channels are increasing their share of the sneaker market.
In store
An asset in Foot Locker’s arsenal is its network of offline stores, argues Johson, creating what he calls “an integrated marketplace that combines great digital experiences with great physical experiences”, stating:
The physical part of it, of being able to come in and interact with some sort of activation, is part of that experience that the consumer is looking for. We know full well that the consumer is on their digital phone constantly, their digital device constantly, and we have to create great content that’s relevant to the great stories that are relevant to the consumer. We also know that that consumer still has an expectation around the physical space in an integrated marketplace or integrated solution that they find both digital and physical part of the experience that they want when they’re looking for premium sneakers.
Our proposition is clear, great multi-branded stores in which to shop and buying, great digital sites and mobile connectivity, outstanding knowledgeable sales associates, duke [ph] merchants, and unparallel customer insights all of which leads to great experiences for our consumers. We already have a lot of great stores and will continue to invest in key markets in upgrading our top stores.
That said, Foot Locker needs to shed excess outlets and it’s showing no reticence when it comes to cutting the fat. By the end of this year, over 1000 stores will have been shuttered since 2010. The original intention was to close 100 in 2017, but that number is under review and will end up being larger. But Johnson believes that a balance is being struck:
Due to the disciplined investment process we followed in the recent years, and the related increase in productivity we have achieved, we don’t believe we have a store productivity problem in our core banners or store fleet that overall is significantly too large. Stores remain an incredible important component of the experience most of our customers expect on their journey to selecting and purchasing the latest Puma sneakers.
Overall, while the finishing line may not be in sight, Johnson insists that the firm is picking up the pace and will keep pounding on round the retail track:
At Foot Locker, we’re not used to going backwards and we won’t be satisfied until we are back on an upwards sales and earnings trajectories. It’s great stories that ultimately this consumer is after. So, we have to get better as an industry. We have to get faster as an industry. We have to tell better stories in our stores and on our digital sites, and that will keep this consumer.
My take
Johnson has been brutally honest about the issues facing Foot Locker, possibly too honest given the negative reaction from Wall Street to the prospect of running a marathon, not a sprint. I can’t see the ‘not interested in Amazon’ party line going down well with investors either. Expect that to be revisited in short order.
Image credit - Foot LockerRead more on: Retail e-commerce and the omni-channel 