
It’s been a mixed bag of results this quarter for retailers that are trying to carefully balance investments in online and digital with a strong in-store customer experience. Store closures are becoming a regular feature of investor calls each quarter, as are investments in creating a successful multi-channel experience.
And many of the success stories are found with retailers that understand that multi-channel really does mean giving customers plenty of choice. Whilst logistics and online experiences are important, so are in-store pick ups and regular in-person browsing. It’s all about balance.
One such retailer that seems to be pushing hard to get this balance right is Foot Locker. For its quarter ending July 30th, the seller of athletics footwear and apparel said that its revenue rose to $1.78 billion from $1.7 billion for the same period last year, beating expectations and sending shares up 4%.
However, what was interesting from the investor call, was the executive team’s understanding about the need to invest in both technology and physical infrastructure. This follows on from the company’s strategic update last year, where it said that all investments would be focused on customer engagement through to 2020.
Speaking to investors, chief financial officer Lauren Peters said that comparable sales were up 7.1% for Foot Locker’s direct-to-customers segment (online) in the US, with “significantly higher growth rates at Foot Locker’s digital businesses in Europe and Canada”.
Although the US website traffic was weaker than elsewhere, the company increased its expenditure in this area to support its growth. Peters said:
In response to the competitive environment and a softening of traffic to our U.S. Web-sites, we were more promotional on our digital businesses than we had expected heading into the quarter.
We also spent more to drive traffic to our Web-sites, which contributed to a slight deleverage of our SG&A in the quarter to 19.7%.
Approaching $1 billion
Foot Locker CEO Richard Johnson said that there will be ongoing investment in the company’s digital activities, and that it was “running as fast” it could to make the upgrades required. Johnson said that this would be a “long-range project” because there is a “lot of plunging that has to be changed out”. He said:
So we’ll start to see improvements, probably a little bit of leverage later in 2017 would be my guess at this point, sort of the forecast.
Johnson added theatre had been some trouble for the Eastbay brand online, where there was pressure on traffic and pricing in the quarter, but that elsewhere digital growth had been strong and that Foot Locker was fast approaching an important milestone in its digital sales history. He said:
Our digital businesses are approaching annual sales of $1 billion as we continue to connect with our customers often multiple times on their journey to selecting their favorite sneaker or piece of apparel.
Those connections are more and more often happening on mobile devices where we lead in social media interaction, including some of the newer platforms such as Instagram Stories, Facebook Live and Snapchat.
Right now, you can check out the recent exclusive Twitter Q&A we hosted with James Harden, and next week we are partnering in the launch of the Bitmoji app. We’ll have hustle groups in SIX:02 stores within Bitmoji fashion where customers can outfit their avatars in the latest products from Nike, adidas and others.
Long live the store
However, despite the progress on digital and Foot Locker’s focus on the web-channel experience, CEO Johnson also wanted to make it clear to investors that he sees a long future for the company’s physical footprint. He said that the investments in stores have meant that they have become “destinations” for customers and that footfall has outpaced overall mall or high street traffic. Johnson said:
Being a strong retail destination positions us as the leading partner with our landlords in the malls and increasingly in the prime shopping streets across our global footprint.”
We believe there’s only a couple of places in the mall that people will line up for products. One of them is a Foot Locker family store and one of them is the Apple Store. So we know that our customers, our core consumers want to be in our stores.
They interact with us digitally on their way to the mall, they in the mall will take a photo of the sneaker on their foot and they’ll tweet it out or they will send it out to their group of friends and we get the responses back.
So the anchors closing is a change certainly in the makeup of the malls, but our consumer is still driven to the malls as a place for social interaction with their friends. So we are confident that regardless of anchor positioning, we should continue to drive traffic into the malls.
So the malls are far from dead, regardless of what’s going on with the anchors.
My take
Foot Locker looks in a strong position to take advantage of digital changes and a physical presence.
Image credit - Images acquired via Foot LockerRead more on: e-commerceRetail e-commerce and the omni-channel 