
London will remain open for business from the tech sector despite Brext – a strong message from London Mayor Sadiq Khan at the start of London Tech Week yesterday.
Noting that London has attracted over $1 billion of investment from the likes of Google, Apple and Facebook since last year’s Brexit referendum, Khan stated:
Whatever challenges we have to overcome, this city is resolutely open to global talent, global partnerships and global businesses. As Mayor of London, I will do everything in my power to safeguard London’s global competitiveness and our status as a leader in innovation, particularly ensuring we can access the top talent after Brexit. Regardless of the uncertainty caused by the European Union referendum result, I know the London tech sector will continue to prosper.
He pointed to new data from EY which finds that London is Europe’s leading city for foreign direct investment into the technology sector, attracting significantly more investment projects, than any other European city, in each year during the last decade. International investors also ranked London as a leading global tech hub, with London featuring in the three highest ranked cities with the potential to produce the next global tech giant.
Emphasising the upbeat messaging, the Mayor officially opened Plexal, Europe’s newest technology innovation destination, forming Europe’s biggest business innovation ecosystem at Here East. Spanning 68,000 square feet, Plexal has been built on the principles of a mini City & will support 800 technology start-ups & global corporations from across the world.
Car manufacturer Ford has said it will locate a new European smart cities research centre in the capital, based at Here East. Steven Armstrong, Ford’s vice president and president of Europe, Middle East and Africa, said:
Basing our rapidly growing team here in the heart of mobility innovation in London is critical to accelerating our learning and development of new technologies. The location at Here East will allow us greater collaboration and the out-of-the-box thinking needed to tackle the urban transport challenges of tomorrow. We will also be ideally placed to build on existing partner projects and have access to London’s world-class digital talent. Both will be key as we build towards our ambition of being a global leader in mobility solutions.
The Mayor’s Office is also currently scoping the potential for a new London Office of Technology and Innovation to provide a place where London’s boroughs can come together to share best practice, build collaboration and drive solutions to the challenges they face.
The Mayor also reaffirmed his pledge to appoint London’s first Chief Digital Officer (CDO), who will work with the Mayor’s Office, the Mayor’s Smart London Board, local authorities and the technology sector to drive the development of smart city technologies and to build London’s reputation as the city that the world looks to for leadership in urban innovation.
This in turn will support Khan’s aspiration to turn London in to a Smart City:
My ambition now is to harness the new technologies that are being pioneered right to transform London into the world’s leading Smart City. The potential for cutting-edge technology to tackle a host of social, economic and environmental challenges is immeasurable.
London Tech Week, first organised in 2014, is a festival of events across the city celebrating the technology industry.
My take
An upbeat start to London Tech Week and a strong post-Brexit vote of confidence from Ford.
Image credit - London Tech Week Read more on: Digital government and public services

