
The former CTO of the United States government, Aneesh Chopra, has called for the White House to open up its labour market data so that organisations can take advantage of machine learning and AI to better match skills to vacancies – in an attempt to address the economic divide, driven by high tech wages.
Chopra served as White House CTO between between 2009 and 2012 under President Barack Obama, and was speaking last week at PTC’s ThingWorx user conference in Boston.
During an on-stage Q&A, Chopra said that people feel like the internet is taking society into uncomfortable territory because of the impact its having on the economy, with certain demographics experiencing worsening wages and living conditions. He said:
It comes down to the economy. For those of us in this room that are engineers or have engineering backgrounds, the value of our hour of work has gone up considerably. In fact, if you’re data scientist today, you can command quarter back like salaries in the NFL. It’s pretty amazing. What that means is that is that the economic gains are more accruing to the top 1%. So the challenge is, how do we democratise the economic benefits of this infrastructure?
I’m optimistic, but obviously acknowledging for the current environment, for those who live in parts of the country who have not seen a pay raise, and if anything have seen their quality of life deteriorate, the sense of hopefulness is that your kids leave the neighbourhood for the big city, never to come home again – and that’s the victory? That’s a very shallow and sad view of the world.
A new labour market platform
Chopra believes that part of the solution to this “angst” in the economy could be helped by the government opening up labour market data in a similar way that it has weather data, which has created competitive commercial opportunities in the private sector.
He explained that during his time as CTO he saw evidence of the problem that a lack of open labour market data creates, following President Obama’s pledge to bring back troops from the Middle East. He said:
Let me share a bit of context, it tells you the possibilities. President Obama in 2011 announces that we are going to bring troops home. And he asks the American people and the corporate community to agree to hire 100,000 veterans that are coming home. Massively bi-partisan, it was like, “we are there, sign us up”. Thousands upon thousands of jobs. Simultaneously veterans would come back and go through this transitional training programme, which was government developed – help them build resumes, help them get organised.
But like two ships in the night we learnt the following. I took a snapshot of data in 2014, where I hoovered up every job posting in Virginia from an employer that made a veteran hiring commitment. I then said to LinkedIn can you open up your skills taxonomy, read all of these job postings and tell me the strength of skill associated.
Then I went to the employment commission (every time you file for employment benefits you’re supposed to list the skills that you’ve got) – let’s see if we can open up the data to economists. Here are the skills of unemployed veterans, here are the job postings and the skills that they’re looking for – 23% of all job postings were entry level tech jobs.
Every single one of them could have been filled by an unemployed veteran that was tech trainable within 6 months, in those communities. I was talking to a recruiter at one of the big telecom companies, where he said, “our software screens them out, they wouldn’t even make it through the first round”.
Chopra said that if the government did a better job of data labelling skills, in a similar way to LinkedIn, this data could be opened up and it would allow AI-driven platforms to be created that could match skills to vacancies. He said:
The United States government defines about 1,000 skills in our economy. The LinkedIn skills taxonomy has 50,000 labels. Imagine if every job seeker had their equivalent of the 50,000 labels? Not only on the LinkedIn framework, but on an open framework that could be interoperable and used. Now imagine tools that take advantage of the newest techniques in machine learning and AI – where you look at your skills and it tells you that people like you switch off into these adjacent careers and boost their income 20%.
In other words, imagine a little guardian angel on each of our shoulders that can whisper in our ear with advice about every decision we can make at every decision point in our lives.
I’d love to see the government hoover in all the labour market demand data, all of the jobs and skills that are in demand, and make that an open feed. And then let people compete in an open market and let people say ‘I know what’s in demand in your market, if you give me your profile, I’ll give you some recommendations’. That can be a wildly competitive market. Each of us could be choosing our own labour market adviser app. Match talent with opportunity – that addresses some of the angst we see in our economy, strengthens and boosts our GDP.
A new wave of entrepreneurship
Chopra also believes that local communities need to take advantage of the internet infrastructure that’s available across the United States – not just in Silicon Valley – and apply their entrepreneurial skills to this new way of work. He believes that entrepreneurs in traditionally labour-intensive markets could be disrupting using the skills they already have.
He used an example of the North Carolina/Virginia border, which historically had a very rich and successful history in furniture and textiles, but has now seen low levels of employment and depleted growth because jobs moved overseas. He said:
You go there now, it’s a very difficult economy, 20% unemployment. But entrepreneurs are now saying, “I still have in my DNA the underlying understanding of textiles and furniture”. They can do 3D modelling, 3D printing, can take their expertise using these new tools and be a wildly successful entrepreneur. We are starting to see this dynamic emerge where entrepreneurship can be democratised everywhere. It’s not being better than Silicon Valley, it’s taking advantage of Silicon Valley infrastructure to solve problems that they’re well versed in to tackle.”
Think about everything that needs disruption in our economy, every sector of our economy can be tech enabled through services. My perspective is, entrepreneurship will thrive as more people break through this cultural barrier of ‘I can’t be an entrepreneur’. We need to be training people that you can go to the admissions office, or the careers office, and make a job, not look for a job.
Image credit - Image sourced via authorRead more on: Digital government and public services

