
London retail history
Fighting back against “Amazon’s siren call”- it’s a sentiment that we’ve seen articulated in some form or another right across the retail industry in recent years. While it’s said that no sector is safe from incursion by the behemoth, it’s the bookshop business that has had most room to complain.
So the news that Waterstones is to buy London’s famous Foyles bookshop – and the handful of stores around the rest of the UK – came inevitably with ‘to fend off Amazon’ as the sub-text. James Daunt, Waterstones’ Managing Director, said:
We are honoured to be entrusted with the Foyles business, and greatly look forward to joining forces with the Foyles bookselling team. Together, we will be stronger and better-positioned to protect and champion the pleasures of real bookshops in the face of Amazon’s siren call.
Foyles is something of a London institution. The firm was founded 115 years ago by the Foyles brothers and has branches in Bristol, Birmingham and Chelmsford. But it’s the main store on Charing Cross Road for which the retailer, which has remained in the Foyle family ownership until now, is best known.
Waterstones, which with 283 stores is the UK’s biggest book chain, already owns London bookseller Hatchards, which was established in 1797, and Dublin-based Hodges Figgis, 250 years old this year. Daunt said that the Foyles name will live on, despite Waterstones itself being in expansionist mode:
At Waterstones, we see our future as responsible stewards of shops that strive to serve their customers each according to their own distinct personality.
In a statement the Foyle family added:
James Daunt has assured us of his desire to maintain and celebrate the Foyles name and our distinct bookselling identity. Whilst the decision to sell has been a hard one, we are confident that Waterstones will nurture and protect Foyles for the good of the business, its staff and its customers.
Complaints
Co-incidentally, the day before the Foyles news broke, the UK’s Booksellers Association told a British government inquiry into the future of the high street that since Amazon opened its virtual doors in the UK twenty years ago, half of the independent book stores then in business have been lost. In a written submission, the Association told legislators:
In the book trade, we have seen a considerable shift from consumers making the book purchase in a physical shop to making the purchase online. Books were one of the first products to be offered for sale over the internet, helped by the fact that each book had a unique product identifier (the ISBN – the International Standard Book Number), we had a national comprehensive bibliographic database (Books in Print), and well established industry-wide electronic systems in the supply chain. Books were really attractive to internet retailers. Since 1995, the number of independent booksellers in our UK High Streets have halved, from 1,894 outlets in December 1995 to under 900 today.
The Association also complained that offline businesses aren’t treated fairly:
In the internet age, multi-national online retailers should not be able to shifts costs and sales from country to country so that they obtain a competitive advantage over national businesses; neither should they be permitted to operate from huge warehouses way out of town that don’t involve the very high business rates that high street operations are required to pay. This competitive advantage accorded to internet-based retailers such as Amazon is hammering Britain’s booksellers on our High Streets and Town Centres.
And it accused Amazon of playing a long game to take out the competition:
It is the BA’s view that Amazon Prime unbalances the competitive playing field by directing customers to the Amazon ecosystem. Prime was seemingly created to ensure consumers elect not to shop anywhere else and the charge to consumers is believed to have been below cost. What is extremely irritating to booksellers is that Amazon’s perceived near loss-leading – or actual loss leading – is designed to direct consumers to the more profitable products that Amazon sell. It is the BA’s contention that after Amazon have destroyed the competition, they will increase prices.
If they wish to reach a large number of consumers, many booksellers find that they have little option other than to use Amazon’s Marketplace. Over 40% of booksellers responding to the BA’s survey said they had sold books on Amazon Marketplace. But by having to use Marketplace, booksellers are helping to make Amazon even stronger. Marketplace gives Amazon access to data on, say, pricing and consumer behaviour which is not available to Marketplace sellers or competitors, plus Amazon control the catalogue and merchandising (often charged out to publishers), which subsequently controls access to books. This dominance within channel pivots upon control of access to customers, something which is unique.
Love the store
For his part, speaking to The Independent newspaper, Daunt pitched an emotive rationale for the traditional book shop in an e-commerce age:
We knew you could buy everything Waterstones stocks online, so had to really justify why customers would come in store. We had to make it fun and worthwhile and an absolute pleasure and make people come away with a book that’s worth more [than one bought online] because you’ve really invested in it.
That’s a philosophy that’s gaining increasing traction across the retail sector as businesses have begun to appreciate their offline stores as assets to be tapped into in pursuit of an omni-channel operating model, rather than burdens in the desire to ‘be like Amazon’.
It’s something that US book chain Barnes & Noble has struggled with in recent years, being a prime example of futile ‘Amazon-envy’ at times, but Founder and Chairman Len Riggio is pushing hard to restore the balance:
The backbone of our company has always been our store managers and the many thousands of wonderful booksellers who serve our customers.
It’s not been easy, he admits, to strike the right omni-channel balance:
The company has had for many, many years a problem integrating, the retail stores and some online business. We are not alone as a retailer having had that experience. Quite frankly, if you look at the difference in our results and that of the leading online bookseller, I mean it’s such a chasm of difference between the two.
Our company did not perform for many years up to expectations with our online component. We believe that we have the team now in place that really knows how to work from the bottom up, customer-to-customer, book-to-book, transaction-to-transaction, to create a site that is viewed favorably by our customers and cares favorably to the best sites out there.
If we get there – and we said we would do before and have not – but if we get there as we pledge, we believe that we’re going to build our retail business with our site which should have been the purpose of the site from day one. Every retailer worth their soul will tell you that the site drives more sales to their retail stores than it does to online traffic. We’re pledged to do that. And we think that some of the customers that we’ve been bleeding over the past 15 years will begin to come back.
My take
Foyles is one of my favorite stores in London – although I will admit to a sentimental preference for its former rather shabby-chic look than the, undoubtedly impressive, makeover it’s had in recent years. But wandering round Foyles over-stuffed shelves was always an experience in its own right and that’s the challenge for the likes of Barnes & Noble today.
The complaints made to the UK Government by the Booksellers Association about Amazon’s dominance and intentions are well-rehearsed and undoubtedly carry validity, even if they wander into the ‘it’s just not fair!’ foot-stamping arena on occasion. But we are where we are and the book selling industry needs to play to its advantages with the stores as the living, breathing heart of the retail experience, supported by a strong digital presence as an enabler.
Image credit - FoylesRead more on: Digital and content marketing 