
FreeAgent funding via Seedrs
Crowdfunding is something of a high risk lottery. When it works it can be spectacular. When it doesn’t then it can look like a massive fail. Last year I was skeptical that Clear Books would make it to raising £840,000 on a valuation of £18 million. But it got there. This year, FreeAgent is having a go at raising ‘at least’ £1 million on a valuation of £30 million. From  Ed Molyneux, CEO:
We’re seeking to raise at least £1m to help accelerate both our product development and growth, and transform the way even more of the UK’s 5 million freelancers and micro-businesses think about their finances. The only way to participate in the crowdfunding is through our FCA-authorised partner Seedrs, the largest crowdfunding platform in Europe to focus solely on equity investments.
In a friendly quasi advertorial Bloomberg TV slot, Molyneux acknowledged the company has already raised capital and debt equity but positioned this as an opportunity for customers to participate in the company’s success. Asked why raise funds now, he talked vaguely about the opportunity ahead but emphasized the niche in which FreeAgent operates – accounting for small freelancers and contractors.
The comparisons between Clear Books and FreeAgent are unavoidable. When Clear Books tapped the market, I said:
I give Fouracre full credit for getting ClearBooks up to the point where revenue is at a monthly run rate of £60,000 from 5,000 subscribers AND funding it almost entirely from director/shareholder loans. That takes a great deal of faith.
At the time, ClearBooks gave a lot of detail against which to assess the offer and even then I was totally wrong in my skepticism given that they raised the required funds with time to spare. This time I am at a loss to understand what’s going on at FreeAgent but will give credit for taking this risky route.
According to the Seedrs site, (login required) FreeAgent is parting with 3.21% of its current capital and at time of writing has raised £363,470 from 88 investors, of which £282,500 comes from existing investors. That’s a healthy start for a fundraising campaign that runs for another 60 days.
What surprises me is that Seedrs contains no financial information about FreeAgent against which to assess the risks being taken. That is a direct contrast to ClearBooks where the company gave a good amount of detail about how they’re performing. So at this point we have to start taking some semi-educated guesses.
Last year, ClearBooks claimed 5,000 subscribers generating £60,000 in monthly revenue. FreeAgent claims 40,000 subscribers but does not disclose the revenue number. Based upon what we know from other companies combined with the likely heavy discounting applying to its deals with banks and IRIS, I conservatively estimate revenue run rate at something around £400,000 per month although I could be a long way off. Why not higher? The deals it did with the banks and IRIS were known to be market volume accelerators but at heavy discount.
Today, it is more likely that FreeAgent is doing what it should have done years ago and tapped the professional market directly. That didn’t happen as part of what I thought at the time was something of a Faustian deal with IRIS which prevented FreeAgent from going after the professional market directly in exchange for what at the time was viewed as a substantial investment.
In essence, FreeAgent ceded market access control to IRIS at a time when KashFlow and Xero were able to go after those markets free of encumbrance. As we know, Xero has capitalized on that opportunity, benefiting from the company’s access to large amounts of public capital and not having to discount heavily to the professional buyer market.
We also know from public documents (surfaced via DueDil) FreeAgent has raised a total of £4.5 million and long term loans of £1.2 million. The last accounts for the year to 31st March 2014 suggest the company burned close to £1.1 million in the year. It is highly unlikely that figure will have changed in 2014-15 when it started with £1.4 million in cash. We also know that the company raised funds from SaaS Capital Funding. SaaS Capital positions itself as a growth accelerator but in reality looks to charge 10-12% pa on its multi-year loans plus service charges.
SaaS Capital positioning
As you can see from the image above, SaaS Capital positions itself close to that of venture capital funds. That means one thing: ‘expensive.’ Seedrs will also be expensive, taking a whopping 7.5% in fees for funds raised, albeit reduced by 50% when investors are brought to the table and negotiable above raising £500,000.
All of which leads me to conclude that while FreeAgent has the advantage of operating in an important and growing niche, its market is inevitably limited to its home turf and it has not been able to market as well as it could.
In the Bloomberg interview and on Seedrs, the company makes much of its high custsat stats but they don’t buy you market share. They only buy stickiness.
In addition and despite numerous and repeated requests, it took the company a long time to make its solution capable of handling multiple currency transactions. In my view, this held FreeAgent back at a time when others were marching ahead. The next question though comes down to localizations. No SME solution is perfect on that front.
I suspect that with a stated goal of integrating both accounting and complex tax handling into the FreeAgent solution – an advantage in the home market – it would be too much of a development ask without having to split the codebase and raising substantial development funding.
Those issues aside, as in all technology markets, winner takes all and right now, FreeAgent runs the risk of being one of many also rans as both Sage and Xero use their superior financial muscle to market into multiple territories while IRIS leverages its financial muscle to position its acquired KashFlow solution in the UK market. How this translates into projected growth is anyone’s guess but the days of having a free run at the market are coming to an end and without substantial capital tied to an imaginative marketing plan, growth will be limited.
In short and from a purely investment standpoint, FreeAgent is in difficult spot. It hasn’t demonstrated itself to be sufficiently attractive to get the attention of the big VC funds, has taken on significant expensive debt, has a high cash burn rate and is now crowdfunding for what appears to be no more than a year’s cashflow. What it does after that is unclear.
During the Bloomberg interview, Molyneux said that at each fundraising stage, the company has always had a clear plan to break even. That’s fine but it means FreeAgent is in a near constant cycle of funding, a management distraction at a time when enterprise class software solutions are attracting massive funding elsewhere. Check what Zenefits’ CEO had to say about a recent $500 million round.
Will FreeAgent get the money it needs? I’m hopeful. The early signs are very encouraging but it will need to go well beyond £1 million for me to be comfortable with what I am seeing. I would have been much happier to see them start out with a goal of £10 million at a valuation north of £50 million but that’s probably far too late at this stage of its development lifecycle. Regardless, crowdfunding puts Molyneux and his executive team on a heavy round of webinars and meetings to persuade customers and others that it has a viable and cash flow positive future.
Disclosure: In 2007, I was a small minority shareholder in the business. That shareholding is now in the hands of my partner and I don’t routinely track what is happening. We have no plans to invest in this round. diginomica is a Xero customer.
Endnote: this story has been updated for multiple currency facts brought to the author’s attention after initial publication. In the original, I said that it wasn’t handling multiple currencies as well as other solutions. FreeAgent does have a method of managing invoicing in other currencies and has multi-currency in bank accounts. It’s been available since last June. My bad for not checking before hitting the ‘go’ button.

Read more on: Professional services 