
Ed Molyneux, CEO FreeAgent
FreeAgent (or to give it its full title FreeAgent Holdings Ltd) has announced its intention to float on the UK’s AIM market. It hopes to raise as much as £8 million ($9.7 million) on a valuation of between £31-35 million ($38-43 million.) While this may not be in American style unicorn territory, it represents a considerable achievement for the nine year old company.
FreeAgent provides cloud based accounting software for the mom and pop type of business with an emphasis on designers and contractors.
FreeAgent started out as a way for founder and CEO Ed Molyneux to get past running spreadsheets for his own business. FreeAgent aims to make the basics of book-keeping and tax compliance as easy as possible. For anyone who has started out as a small business and for those accounting types in the audience, book-keeping software has always held promise but has proven difficult to make work correctly. People don’t understand basic book-keeping and so tend to categorize things incorrectly. FreeAgent believes it has solved most of these problems through automation and now touts some 52,000 customers that are said to be generating annual revenue at a run rate of around £7.7 million.
The UK total addressable market for FreeAgent is around 5.2 million small businesses and when viewed in those terms, it has plenty of scope for growth. However, it is not alone with competition from the likes of Sage, Xero and the IRIS acquired KashFlow. Until recently, it was not easy for a new entrant to prove itself, largely because Sage, the big elephant in the UK market, had not successfully launched a cloud based product. That changed once Sage One had reached 100,000 subscribers at the end of 2015. Xero announced it had passed 100,000 UK subscribers in September 2015 and the company is due to provide an update later this week.
FreeAgent therefore has a ways to go but then it has only raised some £9 million in pre-IPO capital, from a variety of investors including a crowdsourcing group. Having said that, the UK IPO market isn’t exactly friendly right now. According to Bloomberg, there have been seven UK IPOs in 2016 but noted that Misys pulled its planned £750 million claiming adverse market conditions. Molyneux is more upbeat saying that:
We’re hearing from the investors we’ve been talking to that there’s no doubt that strong businesses coming to the market with good business models and visibility of future revenues will always be in demand because that’s what investors are looking for. Of course we’re very much aware of the wider market environment but the fact remains that we have a very strong business. “We want to raise enough to be able to make a meaningful difference to the speed at which we can move forward in the market. That’s our goal.
Asked about the use of funds, Molyneux pointed to changes in the regulatory environment:
Over the next few years, HM Revenue & Customs’ digitisation agenda will see everybody having to report quarterly with updates on their business, and while this will give people a much better idea about what’s going on with their business, change is always difficult. Our job is to make sure we have the simplest and most compelling product on smartphones and the web that allows them to meet those new obligations.
Like many other startups, FreeAgent has yet to turn a profit but expects to reach break even sometime in the 2018 timeframe. While this sounds counterintuitive for startups, the fact remains that markets have shifted from a love affair with growth to more traditional measures of success – and that includes turning a profit.
I’ve always had a soft spot for FreeAgent, even if, at times I disagreed with what they were doing. What’s been most impressive is that the company’s leadership and engineering teams have always been laser focused on solving difficult problems for an underserved market. Here’s hoping the float is a success.
Image credit - Via FreeAgent and Worklab BlogDisclosure - The author's partner has a small investment in the companyRead more on: Financials 