
Multi-tenant cloud application software is now commonplace in ERP, Finance, HR and other sectors. It’s where major and new vendors have been building products. With multi-tenancy, a vendor can make new functions available with each new upgrade/release and all customers have access to the new functionality. But vendors are sowing confusion in the space as they try to woo new customers to their particular solutions.
I heard the representatives of a couple of HR cloud solution providers throw some smack down the other day at the recent HRTechFest in Sydney. One vendor stated:

Cloud application vendors that have frequent updates (e.g., more than two per year) have immature products. If the products were robust to begin with, fewer functional enhancements would be needed.
Customers should have the choice as to when they will upgrade to new releases. Too many multi-tenant cloud application vendors are imposing upgrades on their customers when some of those customers would prefer not to have to take time away to sandbox test these new releases.

In rebuttal, another vendor stated these points:

The frequency of updates is not the issue nor is the maturity a question either. Her firm ships all-new functionality turned off so that it doesn’t adversely impact customers. Customers automatically get every new release but have the choice as to when they might enable the new capabilities.

I love a good catfight. The reality of the above arguments is somewhere in-between. Let’s go through these items in detail.
Are frequent updates a sign of product immaturity? Generally no – but it can occur when a vendor is brand new and its applications are only days old, too.
Cloud software packages that are built on top of powerful platforms can be developed quite rapidly and cheaply. The ability to deliver a lot of innovation fast is a result of the platform not necessarily of product immaturity.
The vendors with frequent update/upgrade cycles are often unencumbered with multiple product lines (e.g., cloud and on-premises). They can focus their R&D efforts exclusively on a single platform/product line. They move fast because they can and because it gives them a competitive advantage when they move faster than competitors.
If your application vendor’s product roadmap still spans years or decades, then you, essentially, bought a WYSIWYG (what you see is what you get) product. It will still look & feel essentially the same years from now.  You want solutions that change with the speed of business today. Avoid products that age like fine wines and cheeses.
Do robust applications need a lot of upgrades/updates? The key word here is “need”. Great applications should function well at time of purchase but why must/should the innovation end there? What customers should examine is not the frequency but the content of the new releases. If the only things your vendor is releasing are regulatory and compliance features in its releases, then the vendor is merely ‘reacting’ to known product needs. Instead, customers should seek vendors that deliver a mix of ‘net-new’ innovations along with current regulatory/compliance upgrades. Products that are starved for innovation don’t deliver much long-term value.
Customers, not vendors, should be in-charge when it comes to deciding when applications get upgraded. This is an interesting topic as it covers a lot more than a scheduling point. Multi-tenant vendors save money, support costs, etc. by having customers on only a few (e.g., 1-2) releases. What vendors learned in the old on-premises world is that there are myriad combinations of systems software, hardware and application software versions that must be supported, regression tested, etc. to get a release ready for market consumption. All of that testing is expensive, time-consuming and rarely perfect as customer computing environments are fluid, evolving worlds.
So, in the on-premises world, doing an upgrade was an expensive, time-consuming AND risky endeavor for customers. This is why so many firms are so far behind in applying upgrades to their on-premises applications. And, this is why IT Technical Debt is so large and problematic in so many firms. (link to my recent article)
Multi-tenant cloud applications are generally a different animal. Yes, the customer should sandbox new releases to ensure that no APIs, integrations, etc. are going to break. And, yes, customers should experiment with the net-new functions and features to see if any could be of value to their firm. But beyond this testing, users generally are not materially impacted unless they consciously choose to alter business processes or need to convert data as a requirement for the new functionality.
Now, there are some vendors who offer customers the opportunity to stay a couple of releases back from the current cloud solution. I get it. Some customers will find the timing of a new release incompatible with other things going on at their firm. Customers will need, from time to time, the flexibility to defer an upgrade. Not only is this a reasonable item but it is one most cloud applications providers make available, especially as the size of their customers grow.
But what bothers me about vendors arguing that multi-tenant cloud application customers should have the ability to defer, almost forever, their upgrades is unconscionable. These vendors are encouraging companies to again build up IT Technical Debt. When companies choose to enshrine their software and business processes in some never-changing, non-evolving state, they are committing business suicide. Smarter, more nimble competitors of that customer WILL change, WILL apply upgrades, WILL apply new innovations and WILL remain competitive. Vendors that encourage this anti-competitive, self-destructive behavior should be chastened, not celebrated, for this position. Their attitude is akin to telling an alcoholic that they can continue to drink instead of encouraging them to take the brave step (and do the hard work) to change their behaviors. Sometimes vendors need to give their customers some tough love instead of being a co-dependent or enabler of the customer’s long-standing problems.
What does this arguing/parsing of words really mean? That vendors would try to use upgrade frequency as a differentiator, speaks volumes about the adoption of multi-tenant cloud software today. Vendors aren’t hyping or promoting their on-premises stuff anymore (although they’ll welcome your check for more of that anytime). Vendors aren’t building for the past anymore and have moved on. Vendors that previously denied the existence of cloud solutions have come around. Likewise, haters of multi-tenancy have changed tunes, too. We’re moving into the hair-splitting or nonsensical stage of differentiation where vendors won’t argue over functions and features but in differences in platforms, upgrade philosophies, etc.
I’ve seen this movie before. When the technology differences start to get thin, we’re going to see some vendors try to fabricate problems where none really exist. And, when that gets tiresome, customers will start evaluating vendors based on really soft issues like:

vendor culture
vendor’s ability to partner
who has the most likeable salesperson
who took the selection team to the best restaurant, golf course, etc.
and whose implementer is the most professional.

I laughed when I heard these vendors tangle on these points. But I smiled as I realized cloud application software has evolved and gone mainstream – big time.
Image credits: top image via Brian Sommer, featured image: businessman relaxing on a cloud in a blue sky with sun © talitha – Fotolia.com
Read more on: HCM and the digital future of work 