
Thank you too Baubax
What better way to kick off 2016 than with a Friday Roast – kicking the crap out of delayed Kickstarter projects?
I really like Kickstarter as a concept. Back a project, choose the level of reward, wait until the project gets funded, sit back and wait for the goodies to show up. That’s the theory. The reality is somewhat different. None of the five projects I backed in 2015 was delivered on time. Not even close. All projects have severely under estimated the time it would take to fulfill orders. I think I understand why.
Kickstarter opened with the idea of funding art and media projects that would otherwise likely struggle to get attention. That’s a very good thing and something that is relatively easy to execute against. But it is when ideas take on physical form, requiring manufacture, that things go pear shaped.
Getting any kind of product out into the world, let alone one that is innovative, is difficult. I know this because in a past life I oversaw the bringing to market of products as diverse as machine tools, domestic lighting made from a variety of materials and yes; garden furniture.
I remember one lighting project where we contracted with a Danish designer to create flatpack plastic fittings. They were fashionable at the time and while decorative, they could be a nightmare to manufacture to specification. Our customers at the time bought ranges of lighting, so if one design became problematic, we either had to substitute or wait. Both scenarios risked delay in a market that was fashion driven.
At another time, I advised a fashion designer who specialized in short run knitted woolen garments. They too sold collections, and on occasion, they’d find that a design was too difficult or costly to make.
The problems in both cases were not ones of design but of the ability to marry design to execution. This is where I think most, if not all of the projects I’ve backed have slipped up. The difference is that Kickstarter projects are usually one off ideas or ideas with minor variations. Therefore any delay affects everyone who has supported the project.
I also see other factors. The novel ideas often combine hardware and software in new and interesting ways. That makes for two sets of processes where things can go wrong.
For example, the Smart Desk was supposed to start shipping in September 2015. Mine arrived in November but not before there was a lot of prodding to get ship dates. Even then, the software that is supposed to make it ‘smart’ still hasn’t delivered and is not expected to arrive before mid-January. Software bugs? You bet! Note: Software still hasn’t arrived although we’re promised it ‘soon.’ (updated 22nd January, 2016)
None of the problems I see are new. In 2012, CNN published a list of projects that delivered late. See this graphic:

It also published a set of nine reasons why projects over run. Those reasons include:
Manufacturing obstacles – there are plenty of those when moving from prototype to executed product
Shipocalypse – where the project is overwhelmed by shipping problems
Sheer scale – where a project becomes a runaway success which in turn changes the execution dynamic
Apple’s lightning bolt – when Apple decides to make changes that impact developers
Expanded scope – the classic problem that arises when something starts out modest and grows like topsy.
Certification – whether regulatory or imposed by Apple’s certification process
Kickstarter’s infrastructure – this is an interesting one. Kickstarter has morphed more towards looking like Facebook but it doesn’t hold a registry of delivery addresses which are normally handled by post funding surveys. If a project supporter doesn’t reply to a survey request then the creator is pretty much stuck.
Overseas logistics –  since Kickstarter doesn’t collect geo information, so if a backer doesn’t correctly ‘locate’ themselves then the creator is on the hook for costs it cannot easily collect. This also works the other way when overseas manufacturers fail to deliver to promise.
Life happens – unexpected events that derail a project.
Some of the quoted reasons are understandable. No-one has perfect foresight and it can be very difficult to manage third party providers. But the one glaring thing this list missed? Inexperience.
Most of the projects I see and those I’ve backed come from enthusiastic inventors or creators who have little or no experience in delivering a complex project. They may have taken advice, they may have thought things through, but very few have the experience of bringing a product to life. From what I can gather, projects that end up massively overfunded have the greatest chance of failing to deliver on the original anticipated delivery dates, largely because the project scope changes beyond that which was originally factored into the planning. In those over funded cases, none of the projects I’ve seen have gone back to the planning drawing board to reset expectations. That’s a massive failure.
They don’t for example, have the negotiating skills or understanding about manufacture that would reduce the risk of manufacturing delays or cost over-runs.
They don’t understand logistics complexities, a topic in its own right that requires considerable skill.
They don’t think through component substitution issues or run sufficient tests to ensure that what finally goes into the product meets the original design goals.
Despite my personal peeves at delayed projects, most Kickstarter project creators get the need for continuous communication and updates. That helps ease the WTF? feeling when things go wrong. Some are not so smart. Over the holiday period, Baubax sent me a very nice electronic greeting card. That came along with a reminder that they’re delayed which was kind of OK. (See image at the top of this story) But they messed up completely by including a solicitation to buy more stuff at a special price that was higher than the price I’d already paid. That’s just plain dumb for a business that has already failed to deliver.
The idea behind Kickstarter remains a welcome addition to the world of innovation. It’s great to see smart ideas come to fruition and even better that there is a platform from which creators can grow and flourish. But I think that Kickstarter needs to do more. At the very least, it should be providing better tools to ensure that the geo issues are resolved for creators. Allowing the resetting of expectations at an early stage and especially when a project is overfunded would go a long way to solving the reputitional problems that arise from continual delays.
Update: Mark Harris undertook an exhaustive investigation into the failure of Zano, a Kickstarter project that raised record funds for an EU based Kickstarter campaign but did not deliver. Harris makes many of the point I raised, supported by extensive interviews. In addition, he makes the following recommendation:

Kickstarter, and other crowdfunding platforms, should reconsider the way that they deal with projects involving complex hardware, massive overfunding, or large sums of money. There should be better mechanisms to identify weak projects before they fund, as well as new processes to provide mentorship, support and expert advice to newly-funded projects.

This is an important conclusion because without adequate oversight, crowdfunding could easily get a badly tarnished reputation.
Read more on: CRM and customer experience 