
Unless you have your own power generation plant and/or solar power, San Diego Gas and Electric has a monopoly on energy supply in the San Diego area. So much for competition but that aside, its billing system has to be one of the worst I’ve ever come across. By some distance. Here’s the story:
If, like me, you need a supply but have no credit rating, then you need to make a deposit. It’s a standard $38. What they don’t tell you is that paying the amount via the bank – which won’t be $38 but $43 once you add their admin charge  and which doesn’t appear on the demand but does on the reminder – will take at least two and possibly three attempts. Here’s why.
You can attempt to process the request using the SDG&E portal. But unless you are a mind reader, you will almost certainly fail because the demand account number they give you is wrong. In fact, the demand has two account numbers but both of them are wrong.
You of course don’t know this until they attempt to take payment. Then they tell you the account number is wrong. They don’t say which one but my assumption was the bank information had been entered incorrectly. It took two calls to SDG&E to understand what they really meant.
Even then you might well run into trouble as I did when I attempted to use the newly discovered information to set up the UK equivalent of a direct debit. That was rejected by the bank as….you guessed it…wrong account number.
By the time I finally managed to get the thing sorted out I was exhausted with the effort that ran over eight days. Here’s why I think it took so long.
I am convinced that there is precious little about SDG&E’s collections system that’s truly automated. Sure – I get an email with the bill but processing the payments? I am almost 100% certain it’s a manual process with all the potential failings that go with it. What makes this worse in my eyes is that SDG&E must have to routinely deal with people like me who have no verified US credit and who simply want to pay their bills. But then when you’re a monopoly you can afford to behave like assholes.

Read more on: Cloud ERP financials and supply chainGoverning identity privacy and security 