

If my email isn’t clogged up enough then Air France gets today’s award as the most idiotic airline on the planet for sending me this missive.
I can’t remember the last time I flew Air France. It must be circa 2009 when I had the displeasure of riding the ultimate sardine can aka Paris to New York on an A380. That journey will forever be etched in my memory as one of the most chaotic and uncomfortable of many uncomfortable flights. I swear they took out some left over seats from other aircraft and then shoehorned as many as possible into the monster. They had no real clue how to feed, water and then get close to 500 people off the plane at our destination. Of course the airport’s lack of facilities for that brute of a plane at the time didn’t help.
I am pretty sure that was the year I finally decided that London would be my preferred European hub out of Malaga and that love ’em or hate ’em, British Airways would be my carrier of choice. Madrid T4, that icon of airport design insanity wasn’t going to get a look in. Especially given it is the hub for what was the fast failing and inept Iberia Airlines that flew most places I didn’t want to go.
Given that whatever miles I may have accumulated on a variety of AF and Air Europa flights have long since expired, why oh why is Air France/KLM still sending me this stuff? Haven’t they heard about cleansing email lists? Are they deluding themselves by reminding me of my non status? It does nothing to endear me to an airline I have long since written off.
Why the heck are they wasting money printing a plastic card I will never use? It’s bonkers. But then when did airlines ever operate a genuine customer oriented experience? It must have been before my time.
So maybe I should just hit the unsubscribe link. But oh no. That’s NOT what it does. Instead I get this ridiculous page:

Air France/KLM won’t cancel my account unless I let them know via their customer support pages. Gaaaaah. I really don’t want to connect with you on Twitter, Facebook, email or phone. I just want to unsubscribe – permanently. Isn’t the fact I hit an unsubscribe link plus not flying with them for at least six years enough of a clue?
So OK Air France You win. Keep sending your crap but you’re now on my spam list. That’s my response.
UPDATE: Kudos to Air France for having a social media presence that works. But will they change their processes?

@dahowlett Hello Dennis, we have removed your email address from our mailing lists. Sorry for the inconvenience!
— Air France FR (@AirFranceFR) March 4, 2016

Image credit - Leadership or Business Failure © ptnphotof - Fotolia.comRead more on: CRM and customer experienceCustomer service management 