
I see data visualization as a core piece of modern BI. Modern BI is about pushing overcoming IT complexity to provide business users with what they need:

data in a visual form that’s intuitive for them
that reflects metrics they feel ownership of
that’s easily consumable on their device of choice
and is powered by “single source of truth” data that’s pulled from disparate systems they could never compile in real time

Even the prettiest dashboards don’t solve anything on their own. Even if you triumph over dirty/latent/siloed data – no easy feat –  that doesn’t mean users are suddenly going to make the right decisions. In recent use cases, I heard from companies that have confronted this issue. Here’s a few tips that stood out.
Design your dashboards by business role
In my piece Clemson University’s secrets of data storytelling – a chat with data architect Matt Chambers, I looked at how Matt Chambers, learned the hard way that rolling out a dashboard didn’t necessarily accomplish anything:
I come from a really strong technical background, so when I first started working in data visualization and analytics, I would build these really advanced dashboards or tools and then just expect people to use them. Upper-level management doesn’t necessarily want to drill through a dashboard. They want [visuals] that are easy to understand.
Chambers was able to start small, and build up buy-in for data visualizations – in this case from Tableau – through a savvy top-down strategy. But I didn’t get to a crucial point. If Chambers had taken the same dashboards that he built for the Board of Trustees and rolled them out to department heads and data analysts, it wouldn’t have worked. It’s about designing data UI by role.
1. Board of Trustees – executive level role
During our chat, Chambers walked me through a few key roles at Clemson and how he designed for each. at the Board of Trustees level, their dashboards provide metrics on the overall financial health of the university, with drill-down capability if needed:
They used to only get these cross tab reports every quarter. Now, they get it every month – we push in the projections, the budget, the actuals. They can access the financial health – the data story – whenever they want…  We also give them a lot of different ways to drill down or filter things, so they can answer the questions that are important to them.
2. College Deans – department head role
Clemson has five colleges. So what do the heads of those colleges need? Chamber built dashboards for the college’s business officer and dean to use together:
Their biggest thing is being able to understand their fund balance. Every college can carry forward a fund balance every year, if they don’t spend all the money they have budgeted. They use that for different things. They may want to hire a faculty member, or they might launch a new program… The dashboards help them understand where they stand financially, and if they have a fund balance they can potentially use. It’s been a struggle for them to know: “If I have this money, can I actually spend it?” That’s the biggest thing the dashboards help them understand and manage.
For this role, users can also drill down into expenses and revenues. They can also compare their current budget to prior year actuals, their current year’s budget, and their current year actuals to date. A long term trend over three years helps them to judge potential investments versus the fund balance.
3. Data Analyst role
As you might expect, hardcore data analysts want a different setup entirely. They want to be able to see behind the design curtain and manipulate data and displays on the back end. The dashboard data is the single source of truth:
We do allow [data analysts] the ability to download the source data that’s behind the dashboard. Basically, what we’ve done is created a certified data source for budgets and actuals. They no longer have to try to pull data from PeopleSoft or BusinessObjects or whatever. Now, they just go into the dashboard, and then they can download essentially a certified data source that’s been through data governance, data stewards, all that. They know that everything they build an analysis around from that data is going to be accepted as valid. They can still pull in data and do their own analysis in Excel or whatever.
Chambers plans to give the data analysts even more capabilities as they move forward, such as designing their own dashboards in Tableau, again using the certified data sources.
Dashboards give clues, but you may have to dig
In my Domo use case, How Freddy’s Frozen Custard & Steakburgers uses data dashboards to score their growth, Freddy’s VP of Finance, Bill Valentas, brought out another critical point. As he rolls out dashboards to franchisees, he’s looking hard at how to train them to make the most of the data. Valentas cautioned that visuals aren’t enough. There is analytical work ahead:

[A dashboard] will show you, potentially, where you have a problem, but them you have to drill into the source data to see what that actual issue is. Then you have to go talk to people in operations and figure out, “Okay, is this an anomaly, or is this something that you can retrain.” Whatever the problem is, it can’t just be data-driven. In the restaurant business, it’s got to be driven from the store level and the managing.

Valentas used the example of whether guest counts correspond with increased sales. If both numbers go up, that’s a good mix. But if guest counts go up and net sales go down, that’s a problem. It could indicate a price decrease, which Freddy’s doesn’t do. In one case, investigating the data revealed a point of sale system change:

We used Domo to line out all of the data. We could see that between weeks one and three, they made upgrades into their POS system that changed the way their guest counting was happening. Then we validated it with the franchisee to say, “Yes, we made an update to the POS, because we were so far behind that it actually changed the metrics.”

Valentas warned against getting users “data drunk”:

We use this concept around our office, saying, “We don’t want to get people data-drunk.” Now we have all this data, what do you want to use it for? What’s your intention?

The wrap – turning IHME health data into action
In Can visualizations change policy? How IHME shares public health data at scale, I challenged IHME Infrastructure Team Lead Andrew Ernst. Is releasing public health visualizations enough? Don’t we need further action to change policy?
Ernst had some good answers, including IHME’s own initiatives to raise awareness and fund actions. He mentioned their Roux Prize – a $100,000 award for someone who takes IHME’s research further.
After our talk, I looked into some Roux Prize winners. Dr. John Wong, 2016 Roux Prize winner, found a way to turn visualizations into change. Dr. Wong’s mission is improving public health in the Philippines. Dr. Wong and his team used the IHME’s Global Burden of Disease (GBD) visualizations to identify the top 48 factors contributing to 80 percent of all health problems in the Philippines.
Then they tied this list to the interventions that would be most cost effective. Some were already underway, but others could be added inexpensively. Wong’s team helped to inspire a new Guaranteed Health Benefit Package that would be rolled out to 92 percent of Filipinos.
I was struck by Wong’s efforts on premature birth. Philippine’s PhilHealth board had been looking at a premature birth health package for a couple of years, but had not approved anything. The problem was data. Using IHME’s GBD data, Dr. Wong and team were able to show PhilHealth that premature birth ranked number four for total disease burden in the Philippines. IHME quotes Wong:
The world can look at what the Philippines has done, because it used burden of disease data to set priorities and lead to more efficient use of its resources.
That’s a good example of data leading to change. Accessible, visual data was the tool, but it required dedicated people and analytical skill to push it over the top. Sure beats being data drunk.
End note – you can see the feature image and many more customizable public access visuals on the IHME web site, healthdata.org.
Image credit - IHME visualization used with permission of IHME. Disclosure - Diginomica has no financial ties to the vendors mentioned in this article. Domo paid for the bulk of my expenses to attend Domopalooza, where I interviewed Freddy's Frozen Custard & Steakburgers.Read more on: Analytics planning and data analysisDigital enterprise in the real worldUse cases 