
Increasingly there is a prevailing wisdom that it is allowable for IT projects to fail, and especially to fail early. Having a project fail is now seen as not just a manageable risk, but also one that can provide a valuable lesson in how future projects are developed and managed. And if it fails early, the costs can be manageably small, making the knowledge gained extremely cost-effective.
That is certainly the expectation of Oren Nadjar, the CTO of Groupe Chantelle, whose introduction to the company was to manage a significant crash of a legacy application as the spur to moving the business onto a more modern, flexible, more risk-tolerant infrastructure.
Groupe Chantelle is a 140-year-old, Paris-based lingerie manufacturer and retailer employing 6,000 people worldwide and with a turnover of €400 million. It started life humbly, manufacturing elastic components for corsetry, and was one of the first to realise elastic could also be used for clothing. The move into lingerie came in the late 1940s and the group now consists of seven brands, each aimed at different sectors of the marketplace.
Chantal Thomass is the luxury designer brand, sold B2B through what Nadjar calls `Grande Magazines’ and outlets such as Galleries Lafayette, Printemps and Nordstrom in the USA. Darjeeling is both a brand and a network of shops, while Orcanta is another retail outlet that sells both own brand product and brands from other manufacturers. There is also Livera, a brand targeting the Dutch marketplace; Femilet, which is aimed at everyday-wear, and Passionata. 
So there’s a lot going on, notes Nadjar:

This is the complication of our business – we need to be flexible enough to continue the B2B business, because 50% depends on others and retail is the other 50%. And e-commerce is over everything.  So it’s very complicated for us because we have brands that are in retail, brands that are in B2B and brands that are in both. The only thing we don’t do is what we call the primary material. We don’t manufacture these materials, we buy them. We also don’t own the trucks and planes and boats. We still use a service for that. And we do approximately 80 to 85% of our production in our own factories in Morocco, Tunisia, Vietnam and Thailand.

Logistics crash
The system crash the Group suffered was in its logistics warehouse, and Nadjar’s solution was to ask the board to take a leap of faith and move on from the legacy infrastructure that was in place, and on to a hyper-converged environment from Nutanix. While the plan is eventually to move all IT onto the Nutanix platform, it was the logistics system failure that set the ball rolling.
The warehouse is a critical hub in the group’s operations, for all products, regardless of where manufactured or where they are bound, have to pass through it, even if the boxes are never opened. 
The system failure occurred in the existing transport management system at the same time Nadjar was starting the process of installing a new cloud-based application. This would help the company get better cost management over its transport requirements by dynamically assigning tasks to the most appropriate transport service providers. 
The company had also been running the classic legacy applications architecture of one app to one server and Nadjar wanted to introduce virtualisation and the cloud to the logistics management because it was, in his view, urgently needed. So he asked management for an extension to the budget for the new application to add the virtualisation and to experiment with modernising the infrastructure:

I’m not the first one to deploy it – I’ve never said I would be the first one on the moon or Mars first – I just said, ‘Let’s use something you that we’d never tried and see how it impacts on business. See if I can make a better business for tomorrow’ and that was the right thing to say. I’m not the first one to test and I understand the critical meaning of that and I’m bringing the right infrastructure. It will be destructive, but we can keep control on it. We were convinced that it was really the right choice that we were doing it. In fact for us we are on the edge of a big change that will touch every company of every size.

His attitude here is instructional for many a CTO and CIO. A few years ago he was sceptical about the cloud, indeed calling it `the fog’. But he has observed the prices dropping, the service levels improving and the potential benefits of resilient scalable services and their ability to respond to the end-customers’ needs: 

I’m not saying I need that immediately but I do want to be open to be able to do that. I need to change my angle and not keep my infrastructure in the wrong way. I need to try something new and I told my company I’m taking the risk, I want to test it and I want to test Nutanix. We were a company that maybe didn’t invest enough on some parts of the infrastructure, didn’t bring the vision to the table to say ‘in 5 years we’ll be there’ and every year you review this map and you say ‘I was wrong, in five years, we’ll be there in fact’. We have this kind of policy, but we don’t do that.

The company’s attitude is equally instructional. Nadjar has been with the company barely a year and a half, but came with lots of experience rather than paper qualifications. When asked the question the management stood by their faith in him and his answers to questions such as `Will it be better for the business?’ and “Is the price good?’. 
As far as both he and the company are concerned the choice means that the evolution of Groupe Chantelle has a direction, and it will not require any more big investments for at least three years to maintain that direction. All that should be required are incremental additions to the Nutanix infrastructure as more of the existing applications portfolio is moved across from the legacy environment.
It was also implemented quickly. After two or three weeks of negotiation on price and specification details, it was implemented and running within six weeks.
Failure is not a bad word
He sees Nutanix offering a bridge between the old and the new infrastructures, both on-premise and in the cloud. For example, it will not matter whether the `best’ solution is Amazon, Google or some other pure play cloud provider, or one of the legacy offering such as VMware, Dell, EMC, Lenovo or NetApp. This will allow the company to change its mind on its plans and direction as time goes on. That flexibility can then extend to future decisions on what applications need to stay in-house and which can be pushed out to the cloud.
So the start point has been the logistics infrastructure and new transport management system, coupled with the ability of Nutanix to run existing legacy applications to move other applications to the new infrastructure. These will include warehouse management, and another application that provides `specific services’ such as customer-defined labelling of boxes delivered to the B2B customers. 
By the end of it he expects there to be 10 or 12 servers in the Nutanix infrastructure dedicated to running warehouse-related tasks:

To give an idea, the warehouse is 20,000 square meters and all the clothes come through it. So it is not too big to risk something, but not too small, so that we can get the proof of concept working. We knew that even if it didn’t use all the specific features of Nutanix, we didn’t take many risks in trying a new thing on this one. But it was better than just a proof of concept, it was like beta testing in production. 
I could say that we really tried something, we knew that we could fail and that was something new in the company. And as a parachute we still have the old infrastructure in place. I think that failure is not a bad word. I think that people should know that if they fail, they have to adapt and to react. Because there are two ways to adapt to failure – you can be down and go back to the old way, or you can say ok I failed let’s try something else. I’m more this kind of guy. This is the kind of motivation I’m trying to give to my team right now.

My take
Here is a mid-sized company running mid-sized applications and not looking to be on the bleeding edge of anything, let alone technology early adoption. But they are now the ones that have to bite the bullet of experimentation as they start to move from the old to the new, and that means risking failure. In that respect alone, Groupe Chantelle is an example of what can be achieved if IT and company management understand that the risks now can be small, easily managed, and maybe even a valuable learning experience.
Image credit - Groupe Chantelle Read more on: Cloud platforms - infrastructure and architectureDigital enterprise in the real worldInfrastructureRetail e-commerce and the omni-channelUse cases 