
The customer experience doesn’t end when the sale is made. If anything, it’s even more important to create an experience that deepens the relationship with the customer.
Tyler Koblasa, CEO CloudApp shared with me his views on the evolution from support to experience, including the strategies and tools required.
From reactive to proactive support
Koblasa talked about customer support over the last decade, including the initial shift to outsourcing support centers overseas. The focus then was on making sure someone answered the phone and helped resolve an issue. A reactive approach to customer support was the model of the day, as were long-wait times on the phone or via email. The truth, Koblasa said, is that companies didn’t take support seriously. They didn’t look at the positive impact support could have.
Back then, support headcount was 10% of a company’s budget. Today, it’s a little higher, at around 15% or more, but the model is starting to change. Companies are bringing their support center back in the US where they can have a stronger impact.
Every touch you have with a customer is an opportunity to affect to your NPS (net promoter score), said Koblasa. The idea is to shift from a reactive (solve the problem) approach to a proactive (enable the best experience) approach. The shift requires a completely new way of thinking and a new set of tools.
The strategies and tools for a proactive customer support/experience
I don’t think we’ll ever refer to customer support as customer experience, but it is an important element of building a great customer experience. So how can you move in that direction?
Koblasa and I talked about a few different aspects. The first is the value of customer self-service: providing customers with the tools to handle their issues on their own time. It’s a great approach if set up well. But what about those situations where a customer is left digging through article after article to find what they need? (By the way, been there, done that many, many times).
You may have a self-service option, but you also need to way for that customer to reach you when they can’t help themselves. Koblasa mentioned tools like Drift and Zendesk where you can surface your knowledge base into a conversational dialog – like an AI-based chatbot. Even Google is working to leverage AI in voice and text-based chat.
From there, if a customer can’t get the answer they need via chat, they can be connected with a support representative or agent to help them. All the information they shared in the chat helps identify the right agent, and that information is passed along to the agent so that the customer doesn’t have to repeat himself/herself.
Then we think about how the agent can create a better support experience. Now we’re looking at visual tools like screen sharing and video chat. Zoom is one example Koblasa talked about. You can embed video into your workflow, so if a customer isn’t getting the answers they need, they can click a button and are automatically launched into video support where an agent is right there to help them. They can record the conversation, share screens, take screen grabs and more.
I worked with one SaaS tool that provided this type of support. They would jump on a Zoom with you and walk through your issue, drawing on the screen to help you see what you need to do. It was much more helpful than going back and forth in an email trail.
Video is a much more personalized approach to support. You see the person you are talking to, you may even see the office they work in, and it offers an experience that can make you feel like you are building a relationship, not just getting your problem solved.
Turning problems into solutions to build a better experience
The tools are taking shape, but they aren’t completely where they need to be. Chatbots are becoming very popular, and they do have a way to go, Koblasa said, but if you have a chatbot on your site, you can pick up a sales lead faster by gathering basic information and directing the customer to the right agent faster.
We’re even getting better at connecting the data silos that store all that customer information. As companies shift from standalone legacy ticketing systems to newer tools like Salesforce Service Cloud and Zendesk, they are applying multiple layers to support, pulling all the information needed from integrated backend customer systems. The key here, of course, is to enable the integrations needed proactively.
While the idea is to make support as accessible as possible and get a customer to the right agent as quickly as possible, there is another aspect to consider, especially when working with video and screen-enabled support experiences. What if what your agent’s recording or screen grabs contain sensitive information? Privacy, compliance regulations, they don’t just affect marketers and the tools they use, they also affect support.
Koblasa’s CloudApp solution provides an answer we need to see in any tool that captures customer information. CloudApp is a SaaS solution that enables a support rep, or customer success rep to create a piece of content – a webcam, screen capture, recording, etc. and then mark up the screen or highlight part of the video to explain how to do something. This piece of visual content is then integrated into a chat session or a support ticket.
It’s the backend that stands out though. When a rep is dealing with sensitive information that may be recorded or captured in a video session, they can create the content asset then and run it through a machine learning technology to ensure it doesn’t show something it shouldn’t. That sensitive information can then be blurred or removed, a transcription completed and the content is then searchable and available through knowledge bases and libraries. Koblasa said that over the next decade we can expect threat risks and the attack vector (surface area) to increase. He said the number of tools cloud-based tools in an organization is increasing for support alone – opening up risks we didn’t have before.
My take
In many ways, what we are seeing with customer support tools is exactly what we see with marketing tools. There is a stack you will need, and integration will be a necessary aspect of how well that stack works to support the customer. And then there’s the privacy issue that GDPR has brought to the forefront and will only become more critical to managing appropriately.
If you think about it, the support tech stack is really a part of the marketing tech stack. The lines between the two are blurring because both are key elements of customer experience. Look at how you leverage support to shift from asking simple questions to get better information to build insights can improve how marketers engage and communicate, and how products are designed and built.
Image credit - Feature image - Funny racedriver young man driving between clouds concept © ra2 studio - Fotolia.com.Disclosure - Diginomica has no financial ties with CloudApp.Read more on: CRM and customer experienceCustomer service managementDigital and content marketing 