
Hybrid cloud, that elusive but magical ‘right’ mix of on-premises, private and public cloud infrastructure is the buzzword du jour in IT circles, especially as many companies that have moved their environments to the public cloud now realize they need more security, performance and control than they are getting from the public cloud alone.
Dialing back, a November 2016 Harvard Business Review study sponsored by Verizon found that 63 percent of organizations are already pursuing a hybrid IT approach. Hundreds more are in the planning and deployment stages.
IDC predicts that by 2019, 45 percent of data created by the Internet of Things will be stored, processed, analyzed, and acted upon near or at the network edge in private clouds.. 
A Frost & Sullivan enabled report suggests that rather than clinging religiously to one mode of operation or another, customers should contextualize their IT infrastructure as an opportunity for transformation.
Location, location, location
Knowing what data to store where is obviously essential to success. In the report (fill in the form)  Frost & Sullivan Digital Transformation Principal Consultant Jarad Carleton:
Organizations need to find the most appropriate places for data to reside; they need to understand linkages between the applications they consider migrating and the requirements of each application. The propensity to migrate to the public cloud will also depend on company size and type of workload. Many small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) feel the public cloud is the only real option available for reasons of cost and in-house enterprise.
Systems that do not have latency requirements—like CRM–are more likely to move into the public cloud as well as applications that serve regulatory requirements, the report says. Almost all companies would deploy CRM applications in the public cloud, due to interfacing systems already relying on the public cloud. Says Carlton:
The discussion is no longer about the mission criticality of an Application–there is, in fact, an increasing amount of bread-and-butter enterprise IT migrating to the public cloud–the trend is to prefer the public cloud for workloads without particular refresh cycle and hardware requirements.
Geography, geopolitics and regulations can also be an important variable, says the report.  In some cases, you may know where data centers are situated and data resides, but the geographies through which data transitions can be a major issue. The problem is not limited to data itself.
Data can reside in one location, but the logs or transition logs can be at multiple different levels.
The location of clients and operations is closely linked to regulation, and many companies are challenged by different restrictions and acceptance of cloud in different countries.
Regulation may have, for example.  forced cloud providers to move infrastructure into Germany and set up peculiar legal structures to make a service compliant in Germany. Similarly, there may be Russian legislation, forcing organizations to find a separate solution for Russia, when they deploy a new application in the cloud.
Focus on customer outcomes, not deployment methods
Frost & Sullivan’s Think Tank felt very strongly that decisions on private and public cloud should not be limited to the deployment models but focus on desired end customer outcomes. In other words, how does this approach help me serve my customers better, not simply how does it make our jobs easier?
Proper discovery must take place before any initiatives begin, the report says. Before your organization outsources or deploys services, infrastructure or platforms, you need to perform a no-nonsense audit of existing in-house systems, expertise and the value and cost of the human capital existing in the IT department.
Determining the right balance between what exists, what is missing, and what the organization would like to extend, makes it easier to make a buy-rent-outsource choice.
View Hybrid IT as a transformation opportunity
The Think Tank was unanimous in the belief that any cloud migration project should be treated as a transformation opportunity, not focusing on the simple migration of a workload but on improving underlying business processes.  The opportunity to clean up your application portfolio prior to moving it to the cloud.
Most companies would benefit of applications to continually evolve, escaping the traditional paradigm of needing two to three years to upgrade to the next version.
Underlying business processes are invariably linked to underlying systems and the desire for control. IT leaders may first decide that applications that are used a lot (e.g. Oracle databases) should be kept in-house. And then the decision around whether it is private or public comes down to how comfortable the organization is managing SAP applications, which normally run very well in a public cloud set-up. Anything that organizations want to add more control over, they would typically orientate towards a private cloud set-up.
Conclusions
Hybrid IT environments have become the status quo in the U.S. Since President Obama’s cloud initiative kicked off in 2011, “cloud first” has become a de facto mantra of federal agencies although many of them are still struggling with tough questions, like what’s the right balance between cloud and on-premise data storage?  Budget constraints, security, privacy and data control also remain issues.  Even as cloud adoption accelerates, hybrid IT will likely remain the default.
As Frost & Sullivan’s new report indicates, Europe is a different matter.
Some IT leaders in the Think Tank felt the geopolitical situation made Europeans cautious about putting customers’ data in the cloud, and that Europe was 10 years behind the U.S. as a result, not outsourcing CRM and billing systems.
Some Think Tank contributors believed Europe was not prepared to just cede its high-tech industry to the Americans and expect state support and a push towards local solutions keeping development in Europe current and modern.
My take
This report provides a fascinating glimpse into the minds of users and in that sense serves as a gut check for the real world.
But in analyst land, the hybrid and public cloud debates rage on with the balance tipping in favor of public clouds.
In that context, it is no surprise to hear the kinds of sentiment being expressed in this report. I wonder the extent to which there is a degree of hidden protectionism in the European position. Stuart Lauchlan for instance, has frequently called into question the manner in which certain European countries act as if it is OK to be in an internet enabled slow lane.
The U.S. of course is not without its own challenges. It seems that in government circles at least, anything to do with Obama’s administration is viewed as though it were kryptonite. That cannot help to promote the ‘cloud first’ agenda and will, no doubt, be seen as helping to perpetuate what Kurt Marko has described as little better than a bunch of virtual machines with their attendant running costs.
Having said that, the idea that hybrid represents a transformation opportunity may prove to be a good way for IT organizations to get their feet wet in moving away from keeping the lights on to nurturing IT led innovation.
Image credit - © Argus - Fotolia.comRead more on: Cloud platforms - infrastructure and architecture 