
There has been plenty of disruption to the UK government’s digital agenda in recent months. The departure of Government Digital Service (GDS) chief executive Mike Bracken and a number of his close colleagues has raised doubts about the role of the organisation and future plans for the much anticipated Government-as-a-Platform (GaaP).
We have covered this extensively. But in the run up to the results of the Chancellor’s Spending Review next month there has been much debate about whether or not GDS will be slimmed down and lose some of its clout. For example, Cabinet Secretary Jeremy Heywood has said that “you can’t run the whole of digital from the Cabinet Office”.
As such, many are expecting a more decentralised approach going forward. However, this approach also has its implications. What does that mean for GaaP? Will GDS still be a control for all things digital? Only time will tell.
However, I got the opportunity to sit down with one of the most prominent suppliers to the UK public sector in recent decades – Fujitsu.
Fujitsu has a chequered past when it comes to public sector delivery. On the one hand it has and is working on high profile contracts, such as HMRC’s Aspire, which has been running for a number of years. On the other hand it has been criticised heavily for its role in the disastrous National Programme for IT and some other departmental level contracts.
At one point there was a rumour that Fujitsu had even been blacklisted from government contracts, but this never really amounted to anything material. Fujitsu continues to work with government and is bidding for a number of contracts.
The man heading up Fujitsu’s UK public sector operations – Steven Cox – sat down with me to give me his view on how things have changed within central government over the past few years and to give me an idea of where things are headed.
Bracken’s departure and the future of GDS
Cox, for instance, states that whilst he couldn’t have predicted that Mike Bracken would step down from his post when he did, in hindsight he isn’t particularly surprised by the change in leadership. He said:
I think Mike has brought about a huge amount of change and huge amount of disruption, he was clearly that non-standard civil servant operating in that world. Could he have carried on and done a lot more good? Absolutely.
However, Cox adds that there appears to have been a divergence in approach to digital in the Cabinet Office and central government. He believes that Bracken wanted to do it all, be a control for departments and play a role in building future capability. But Cox doesn’t think this would necessarily have been the best route to take.
Is GDS on the setting policy, being trusted advisors to help departments revolutionise services? Or is GDS going to be a delivery capability trying to run GaaP type services? I have a view it’s difficult to do both. It’s a bit schizophrenic to be there challenging and saying ‘no you can’t do this’ and be the monopoly supplier and be capable of doing the heavy lifting approach to delivering services across government.
I think Mike wanted to do both. My personal view is that doing both would have been very difficult thing to do.
 So much of the early Bracken/Maude/Maxwell era in government centred around bashing large suppliers, such as Fujitsu, as there was a view that they had failed to deliver for a number of years and there needed to be a change in approach (which is why GDS exists today). Given the recent changes, I was keen to hear from Cox whether or not he has noticed a difference in approach towards the larger outsourcers and suppliers. And he has. He said:
I think we have noticed a change in the language being used. I think it might be too early to say we have seen changes in the actual behaviours and the real engagement on the ground. Who owns the agenda and what is the agenda? We are waiting for the Spending Review to come forward. There is a period of uncertainty.
In terms of our overall sense, there does feel like there is an intention for a more collaborative engagement. The focus has to be what transformations can be bought into departments that will allow them to become more efficient in the way that they operate and more effective in terms of the way that they engage with citizens.
The good
However, despite Cox’s concerns about the current state of GDS and its future direction, he was also keen to highlight that he thinks the disruption it has brought to the public sector is a good thing. He said:
I think GDS has done a really good job of being quite disruptive of people’s normal ways of thinking and doing business. I think that’s been good for the way that government IT has been delivered in many ways. I think there are some potential negative connotations that come with that as well. But I think in terms of the disruption, I think it’s been quite positive.
In terms of the spending limits they have put into place, in terms of the contract that they expect people to sign up to, the use of catalogue type services, the expectations that departments take back in the intelligent aspects of the services that they are responsible for.
I think they seem very keen to own the intellectual aspects of their IT. I think that’s a good thing, undoubtedly so. It’s a good thing for them as customers because they’ve got a far better idea of what they’re doing, what they want to achieve and how they can achieve their transformation.
He added that departments becoming more intelligent about their buying needs is also good for suppliers, as Cox believes that in days gone by it has been quite frustrating for suppliers when the customer didn’t fully understand what it needed to do, what they wanted to achieve and how it could be achieved.
Cox said that larger outsourcing contracts are inflexible and don’t deliver change, but that’s because they have traditionally been structured around solving problems, as opposed to delivering a capability.
So how does Cox think GDS has done in terms of embedding change across central government? How
Steven Cox, Fujitsu’s head of public sector in the UK
consistent is his experience of ‘digital’ now being part of every day life for a department? It depends.
I think consistency is quite a difficult thing to achieve when you are talking about the public sector. I think it’s also the case that not all departments feel that they all have to align with Cabinet Office policy. Some of them are large enough that they have a sense that they can control their own destiny. They think they know better and they think that maybe they are more intelligent customers.
In terms of general awareness I think it’s very high. And I think there is a surprisingly high degree of compliance with the expectations of the GDS-type agenda, which is a good thing.
But he notes that this has meant that Fujitsu has had to refactor its public sector business here in the UK to take into account the changing buying habits of central government departments.
The market has changed, certainly dealing with public sector. The size of contract is smaller, much greater commoditisation and shorter term – they’re not the features that large IT outsourcing organisations are ideally aligned to.
We are going through a realignment as a company around engaging with that in a new way. It’s in progress. We are bidding for smaller contracts, that have smaller value and a shorter time period. It’s a change, it takes a time to get through that change.That’s a challenge.
Is there a role for big outsourcers?
Perhaps unsurprisingly, Cox still believes that there is a role for large outsourcing providers in the public sector. He says that there is an element of ‘heavy lifting’ and a need for reliability and security that can be better provided by a larger supplier. He said:
Do I think some of those heavy lifting things should be run by large IT organisations? Yes. As a taxpayer, I want that as well. I want to know they’re going to be secure, that they’re going to be available, that there is lots of capability to deploy.
Cox also believes larger suppliers can play a role in introducing innovation through the use of SMEs via their supply chain (the government has a number of targets for working with SMEs going forward). For example, he says that Fujitsu has somewhere between 600 and 800 SMEs at any one time in its supply chain and about 30% of its external spend goes to these businesses. Cox says that working with these companies adds a “richness” to the supply chain.
However, I raised the point that some SMEs have said that they would prefer to be working directly with government departments, as opposed to via a big supplier, as this gives them higher margins and better ability to control the outcomes. But Cox says that if all government departments were to work directly with SMEs, it could present a number of challenges for the buyer.
I think we have to be a little bit realistic about the expectations. If every department wanted to work with SMEs directly, there would probably be tens of thousands of them working directly with government.
I would question whether or not government departments are able to handle that degree of supplier management, payments, bills and so on. Let alone the stakeholder engagement. I’m convinced that there is a role for organisations like ours to act as a bit of a bridge between the two. We do genuinely do bring innovation to the public sector as a result of that.
What does all this mean for GaaP?
I’ve discussed pretty extensively the plans for Government-as-a-Platform as outlined by GDS in the run up to Mike Bracken’s departure – whether or not these will be fulfilled following next month’s spending review remains to be seen. However, I was keen to hear from Cox about whether or not he thought GaaP was possible with a decentralised GDS and whether or not suppliers could play a role in this.
Cox argues that shared services are an approach to GaaP that suppliers can play a role in, as this allows common applications to be delivered centrally to a number of areas across government. He says:
[Shared service centres] are an approach to deliver a coherent single service across central government, that I think is effectively a GaaP capability. It has the ability to deliver HR, finance, payroll, business intelligence services to multiple central government departments.
Although it’s not a platform that one might think of in a simplistic sense, and although it’s not owned and run by one department, if you were to deliver that platform across all central departments then you have all civil servants using the same environment. That’s got to bring efficiencies. If you take that model, then yes of course it’s possible to deliver GaaP without a single unit driving it.
I think if we were sat here in three or four years time, I think we would probably be able to refer to groups of departments sharing systems, where they are sharing government-as-a-platform capability. And perhaps we should not regret the whole benefit, but celebrate the benefits that have been achieved.
My take
I liked Cox and I think he takes a pretty balanced view (considering he works for a major outsourcer) about the changes that GDS has introduced and the future role of suppliers and digital in central government. Having said that, I do think the vision he outlines and the proposals he puts forward portray a very different idea to what GDS had in mind a year ago.
For example, in my mind, shared service centres are not the GaaP approach that would change the way services are delivered across government. I also am not convinced that GDS purely as an advisory role is the way to go – that severely limits (in my mind) the possibilities for GaaP.
However, it is good to hear that Fujitsu – a supplier that was given a proper bashing – is talking about changing the way it works in an attempt to align with central government’s needs. That’s a very positive thing.
Read more on: Digital government and public services

