
As 2019 gets underway we’ve introduced a modest effort at podcasting. It’s early days so expect us to suck on some days while sucking less on others.
The (current) idea is to create a show out of the daily digests that are sent to our daily email subscribers. Those shows run about 3-4 minutes. It acts like a Flash Briefing so that those who wish to can hear the highlights from the top three stories we publish.
In addition, we’re lining up an eclectic mix of people in our broader network who we have come to know over the years and who we think provide interesting perspectives on the modern, or as we prefer to call it, the Future Enterprise.
We’re toying with the idea of a weekend roundup which might (or might not) include content we’ve found during the week that adds to our pool of knowledge but which would not necessarily translate into text we can sensibly use on the main diginomica site or as a show in its own right.
As with most things we do, the idea is not to be overly serious but to inject personality into the shows that reflects who we are and our often skeptical view of technology innovation.
If you would like to be a guest on the show the feel free to reach me via our Let’s Talk form and we can discuss the details, practicalities and topic outline via good ol’ email. Please note that we’re not using the show as a platform for marketers, we ant your thinking and ideas about the topics in which you have a passion.
We’ve not yet decided exactly how the cadence of shows will pan out and right now, we expect it will be a tad scrappy as we try to assess who wants what and when. That might turn out to be a tad confusing at first but we will figure it out. Most likely it will work something like this:

Monday – guest
Tuesday to Thursday – daily briefing
Friday – weekly round up

That’s not happened yet and our ability to meet this kind of schedule is largely dependent upon our being able to fit guests into their schedules and having the right recording tools to obtain the best sound quality. Does that sound like a plan?
If you like the ‘sound'(sic) of that then feel free to take a dip over at Podbean. If the content floats your boat then please subscribe via Podbean, Spotify or iTunes.
I encourage you to check out Episode #3 and Episode #4 to get a flavor of the show differences. Episode #3 is a 40-minute conversation with Tom Raftery who I’ve known for many years and who has a passion for clean energy. I learned a great deal about progress across multiple areas of this sector and will likely run a separate story covering the highlights. Episode #4 is the audio take on the daily and runs four minutes.
We are actively looking at Alexa Flash Briefings but that’s a little way off since that takes some additional planning and finagling we’ve yet to nail down. The TL;DR is that so far, my efforts to get Alexa to understand ‘diginomica’ have led to my receiving an obscure show from MyHeart Radio. The upside is that if you like the Daily Flash Briefing then it’s relatively easy for you to add the show into the content you listen to as part of your daily routine.
But – if we can get Alexa up and running then there are numerous possibilities for things like event briefings where we are on the ground with multiple teams over several days. I can also think in terms of selecting snippets from earnings calls and splicing those into summaries. But let’s not get too far ahead of ourselves.
The audio geek section
For those interested in how we’re doing this, here’s a quick overview of the kit and method of production. First up, technology innovation in this area has largely been static for the last 10-years, relegating podcasting to those prepared to get seriously geeky.
Right now conker brains…Joe Muggins yours truly is leading the charge in large part because Santa gifted a Rodecaster Pro over the recent holiday period. It’s a brand new toy mixing desk cum recorder with multiple inputs designed specifically with the podcaster in mind. I added a dedicated Rode podcasting mic designed for studio use. In this context, it always makes sense to use matched equipment and on setup, the Rodecaster Pro simply asked me to confirm my mic choice.
I got the Rodecaster Pro for two main reasons. First up I can record Skype conversations from my smartphone directly into the deck without having to worry about configuring a mixing desk for mix-minus, one of those incredibly annoying issues you have to manage when running Skype through a mixer. I ‘could’ use the ECamm recorder available for Skype but I’ve found that it can be unreliable and requires me to set up my computer to only run Skype.
The second reason is the fact I can get great sound quality both in and out of the machine over a smartphone using Skype though I think I can do better still with a service like Zoom. There are many such VoIP style services available but the output quality depends on available bandwidth at both ends of the conversation coupled with the kind of equipment that is available on the remote side of the conversation. We shall see how it pans (sic) out and we will likely use multiple services, depending upon the circumstances. Colleague Jon Reed, for example, has been hugely impressed with Uberconference but in the end, it will come down to what is most convenient for the remote user. In some circumstances, we might just do a straight phone call but I already know that sound quality is unlikely to be pristine.
The Rodecaster Pro is a great piece of equipment and is almost foolproof. It is a major step forward for those working in audio. But it comes with limitations and does require the user to have some degree of familiarity with show production. In theory, the Rodecaster Pro could act as the single place where the entire show is produced but having run four shows to date it’s clear that isn’t viable except perhaps in a live streaming context. Intros and outros do need a certain amount of work and when you know you’re working solo in a tight timeframe then it takes oodles of experience to run it exactly as you’d like. We’re a long way from that, nice though it may be, although there is some upside in the potential to take the kit on the road and have up to four guests in a live setting.
Some have criticized the Rodecaster Pro for only providing a single channel of combined audio which makes post-production tedious. I am less concerned about that aspect because, with a bit of planning and pre-recording testing, it is possible to level up audio on both sides before making the recording without too much difficulty. I do wish I had better control over audio compression settings but that will work its way out with more familiarity around the sound controls. Or…when Rode decides they need to upgrade the software.
There are other niggles like the need for me to insert and retrieve a micro-SD card from the back of the machine each time I want to go into post-production because my MacBook Air can’t ‘see’ the Rodecaster Pro’s bluetooth connection. It’s probably a ‘me’ thing but it’s annoying nonetheless.
I undertake minimal post-production editing in Audition which allows me to tweak the sound quality to a certain extent but I try to keep it as natural sounding as possible including all the breaths and blips you get in any audio sound recording. I’ve not gone so far as to soundproof the ‘office’ as I can’t see my good lady allowing me to plaster the walls with baffling foam.
The really good news is that I’ve been able to create a sound ‘studio’ at modest cost and with minimal setup requirements that so far, just works and, so far, has produced some shows where the sound quality is decent enough. It’s also remarkably easy and fast to turn around any given show. If I spend 30 minutes in post then I’ve had some serious editing to undertake.
OK -that’s about it. I hope this has proved useful and please, feel free to ask questions about the setup, our plans etc in the comments. We’re more than happy to take suggestions and ideas.
Image credit - Photo by Jason Rosewell on UnsplashRead more on: Collaboration sharing and digital productivity 