

As we have noted previously, digital inclusion is the elephant in the room when it comes to the UK government’s plans for digital transformation of public services. Whilst the Cabinet Office has said that it hopes to get 82% of all central government transactions online, with the aim of saving an estimated £2.8 billion a year, for the people that don’t or can’t use digital services, this creates a problem.
This is particularly important when considering that those who are most vulnerable in society are also the ones that are least likely to be digitally literate.
A recent BBC Media Literacy study found that 21% of people can’t use the web and 14% of people don’t have internet access at all.
Over a year ago now, the government launched its own Digital Inclusion Strategy with the aim of reducing the number of people who are offline by 25% by 2016, which would bring 2.7 million more people online over that period. It also intends to reduce the proportion of people who are offline by a further 25% every two years after that.
By April 2016 (which, let’s face it, isn’t that far away) the government hopes to have fewer than 8.3 million people (16% of the adult population) offline. And by 2020 it wants the number of people who lack basic digital skills to be less than 10% of the adult population at around 4.7 million.
Since the strategy was launched we haven’t heard that much by way of plans or achievements to date, which brings into question whether or not the targets outlined above are actually in reach or not.
However, this week GDS has launched a Digital Inclusion Outcomes Framework that may go some way to fixing that. Interestingly though, the aim of the framework doesn’t appear to be about boosting the digital inclusion numbers in the short term – it’s focus at the moment seems to be about mapping the activities that are currently taking place, figuring out what is working and where, sharing that knowledge and then securing future investment off the back of it.
Lauren Kahn, who is head of strategy in the Digital Inclusion team at GDS, explains in a blog post:
By investing in digital inclusion, we can support better economic, health and social outcomes for these groups and a more equitable society.
But we know that engaging this ‘hard to reach’ final fifth of the population will require significant investment. In order to justify investment at a time when resources are scarce, and ensure it’s optimised, we need to know what works in delivering outcomes, and to track progress towards them.
To date, this has been a huge challenge. Organisations across the UK are delivering a diverse range of digital inclusion activities that are responsive to local needs. However, this diversity often leads to inconsistency in how progress is evaluated, making it hard to compare and share learning meaningfully. Moreover, activities are often measured by volume, rather than value, so it’s difficult to tell what is working and measure the impact of these activities on people’s lives.
Kahn says that the framework aims to solve these problems and outlined the three key elements to its structure. First of all, she states, that digital technology and getting people online is about improved outcomes in people’s lives. These outcomes are mapped below, but relate to intermediate digital outcomes, which in turn lead to wider economic, health and social outcomes.

Secondly, progress towards each of the outcomes will be tracked by a set of multiple relevant indicators, according to Kahn, which are “specific, measurable ways of assessing whether a change is happening, or whether an outcome is being achieved”. See the image below:

 
Finally, there will be sources of evidence that make clear links between outcomes and the use of digital technology, which will be reliable and collected regularly through national surveys.
The framework includes an online inclusion dashboard, which will visualise and report on progress towards outcomes UK-wide, collating data from the ONS, Ofcom, the Oxford Internet Institute and BBC surveys. And there is also an evaluation toolkit aimed at helping local projects track progress towards relevant outcomes on the framework.
GDS said that users of the framework will be able to:

Measure and evidence the difference your project/service makes and its contribution to local priorities
Make the case for continued investment
Shape and influence the commissioning process
Demonstrate to other organisations why they should be working with you
Communicate the value of digital inclusion to decisionmakers
Use it to inform strategy, policy and planning
Promote improvement by identifying what works in delivering better outcomes.

Kahn says:
In the long-run, use of comparable and impact-based metrics across projects will make it easier to share learning and best practice, and build towards a shared evidence base about what works. And, for the first time, we’ll be able to track comprehensively and robustly the progress we are making as a society in achieving digital inclusion.
This will help target and tailor efforts, improve the use of existing resources and make the case for

future investment, and increase our collective chance of success as we tackle the hard to reach 20% of the population who remain digitally excluded.
My take
I’d be very surprised if we make the April 2016 targets for digital inclusion. However, I like the idea of GDS crowd sourcing a map of digital inclusion activity across the UK, with the aim of finding out what works and what doesn’t – IF it is going to lead to future investment. Which is needed. What would be a shame is if the framework is just used as a reference point for all the things that are already happening across the UK. Understanding existing activities is great, but we do need to do more.
Read more on: Digital government and public services

