
Harel Kodesh
The first real step on the road to increasing industrial automation, and maybe in the long run fully autonomous manufacturing facilities in some areas, is what GE Digital is claiming to have achieved with the latest developments around its Predix cloud-based Industrial Internet operating environment.
It is also a first step along the road towards the reduction and removal of the ‘technology’ from the Internet of Things (IoT) equation, with the aim of making it more understandable to and applicable by a wider range of individuals in business and industry.
Predix has been pitched as the basis of a platform environment since its introduction last year. But a platform in practice means the availability of applications that sit on top of it, every bit as much as the base management system itself. The appearance of the first GE Digital-developed applications for Predix from has now started.
The primary goal is to start building out the framework of tools that industrial users will require. But perhaps the more important objective for the company, according to CTO Harel Kodesh, is that it now sees this as the first demonstrable step towards making fully autonomous factories an achievable, targetable goal.
These will also be factories which offer far more operational flexibility, moving from a schedule-based model of operations and maintenance to a task-based model, where management judgements can balance factors such as greater production in real-time against re-planning maintenance work according to past, current and subsequent real-time measurements of wear and tear. Kodesh says:
The real contribution of this operating system called Predix, as far as many of the industrial players are concerned, is really the applications on top of it. So, [last week we released] what we consider to be our killer app for the industrial world. This is called APM, Asset Performance Management. It has a couple of functionalities, but I guess the breakthrough state change from before APM to after APM, is essentially giving operators of industrial equipment way more visibility and way more control over their production resources.
We think autonomous cars will turn up in the next five years or in the next decade. But by the same token, you can be looking and talking about autonomous manufacturing facilities, where the facility itself or the factory itself is self-healing, self-optimizing. People will always like to know what’s going on, but you really don’t always need a human in the loop.
APM is actually three pieces, with the first part released now, the second part available as a preview, and the third one in the final stages of development. There will also be additional components and applications to follow later in the year.
But the first element is designed to give any operator of any industrial equipment a picture of the health of their means of production. Making information available on anything they want to know about what’s going on in the factory is the first level objective. Because it is a cloud-based service, management teams will have that access anywhere there is an internet connection available, so they are tied to the specific plant being monitored.
Kodesh sees this increase on operational flexibility playing a key role in improving industrial productivity which, he suggested, has been stuck at around 40% for some years with only minimal growth of around 1% over the last decade:
At the end of the day the reason that today people have hard times making factories and manufacturing more efficient, is that they don’t have the data. If they do have the data they have no idea what to do with that. It’s all buried in peoples’ minds and it’s static information. It’s mostly based on some hunches that you get, the more experience you get on the factory floor. People are people, and at the end of the day, we need machines to take care of themselves.
Those three parts
As noted earlier, the first APM  function GE has released is the Machine Health element. This is the monitoring diagnostic part that will allow users to see how the machines are working, are they connected properly, are they at top performance, and so on and so forth.
The second element has been dubbed the Efficiency Analyser. This will provide the ability to take all of this information, process it and explain to users whether a system is working at peak efficiency, or what needs to be done to increase that efficiency.
The third element will be known as the Maintenance Optimizer. This is the element that allows users to modify operational policies to accommodate real time demand swings. This is where users have to deal with much longer term policies, such as the obvious candidate of maintenance scheduling, as Kodesh pointed out:
It will allow users to say,  ‘Look, I can actually service one part of my factory without hurting the efficiency. I’ll lean on some machines, I’ll take other machines off the loop and at the end of the day, I’m going to live within the envelope of my sector recommendations, but I will both be able to increase the efficiency in this factory, and live by the rules of the commercial maintenance agreement’.
Additional applications and tools intended to both fill out APM and the overall Predix platform are currently in development in the GE labs. Kodesh declines to talk about these for now, except to say that they all fitted into a category defined as ‘Operational Optimization’. He does indicate however that he expects them to have a profound impact on the ability of businesses to generate income, and that they will be appearing in what he dubs ‘a constant barrage’ over the next 12 months.
An important sub-text here is GE’s understanding that manufacturing efficiency has wider implications than just making the largest number of a product at the fastest speed and lowest all-up cost (i.e. without running the plant so hard that the production line fails catastrophically and requires a six-month major re-build). The output has to fit the wider requirements of both the business as a whole, and its marketplace.
Efficiency per se is no longer just about the maximum number of units a factory can produce; it is about matching the appropriate number to the market place so that business are not holding unsold stock for any longer than absolutely necessary.
This means that APM becomes a direct feed, through Predix, to business management tools such as ERP and sales management applications, with the goal of creating a virtuous circle where manufacturing levels match market demand, and sales capabilities match the ability to produce at an appropriate cost. Kodesh argues:
ERP systems have some blind spots. For instance, it’s great at knowing how much materials you still have in the warehouse, but once those items go on to the manufacturing floor, the ERP system loses track of the materials. So we augment the ERP system as we have visibility by using a system we call ‘work in process’. So if you go to a Boeing manufacturing facility you have hundreds of millions of dollars of raw materials on the manufacturing floor, so we add that.
This is where GE’s recently announced Brilliant Factory comes into play, for it is this suite which manages such processes. APM is a major component of it, but there is more, such as Factory Pulse, which aims to give a 360 degree view of end-to-end production facilities. Kodesh explains:
APM and Brilliant Factory are not different, and they’re not the same. As part of the redesign of our portfolio, we try to make sure we look at certain elements of a certain clustering of features, and we can then actually tackle them with a single component rather than create something from scratch.
My take
There are a couple of factors to consider here. One is that IoT, especially in the form of the Industrial Internet, has to have both the right information about what is happening in the factory and be able to integrate that with the business management system. GE looks to be positioning itself well in this respect.
The other is rather different While GE is keen to stress that increasing automation will not lead to machines replacing humans, rather freeing them up to be more productive and make better, more informed decisions, the evidence for an elephant being in the room continues to grow.
Image credit - GE DigitalRead more on: IoT robotics and AI 