

“Tiger” Tyagarajan
As we’ve seen in the last two or three months, clearly, apart from digital being a big conversation, obviously, a lot of other potential macro changes are also big conversations in every company, whether it’s taxes, immigration, trade, protectionism. Therefore, how do you run a global company?
It’s an interesting question from N. V. ‘Tiger’ Tyagarajan, CEO of Indian outsourcing giant Genpact, and one that reflects the uncertainties brought about by the likes of Brexit and, most particularly I suspect, by the rise of US President Donald Trump.
What’s at stake here is how those uncertainties impact on the decision-making processes within both existing and prospective clients. If you’re about to commit to major investment, do you wait and see how things play out on, for example, freedom of movement or H-1B visas or just the general state of the world!
Tyagarajan muses:
Does that, therefore, change the way clients think about the way to run their companies? Absolutely, yes. Does that, therefore, change the speed at which sometimes they come to a decision? Yes. It does slow some decisions down. And do we need more options to solve for different problems? The answer is yes.
But on the immigration and H-1B issues at least, he’s confident that Genpact has the infrastructure and resources in place to calm nerves:
Here’s the good news. We have a history of US operating delivery that goes back 15-plus years. We have 4,500 operating folks and 7 operating centers in the US  that have done and run operations for our clients for 15-plus years. And therefore, our ability to actually offer those to our clients, which we’ve done in the past in many, many situations. But to change the scale of those is something that positions us in a competitive advantage position in those conversations, and we’ve actually taken those to some of our clients.
There is a difference between the classic IT players versus the classic large-scale BPO players. By definition we have operating footprints. Those operations are staffed by local US citizens and permanent residence in those locations. They do the same work for years and years. In fact, as I said, they have big domain expertise in that space and that makes a huge difference in that debate. It positions us in a differentiated way. It positions that portion of the industry in a differentiated way, because the dependence on visas is dramatically lower.
Volatility
Nonetheless, Tyagarajan is in no doubt that it’s going to be bumpy ride for the sector for the coming year, but what that does, he says, is play to the digital transformation agenda:
As I look back and reflect upon 2016, it was a year of the unexpected. Global markets saw a number major events including Brexit, wide fluctuations in energy prices and uncertain Chinese outlook and heightened global economic and political uncertainty. Against this backdrop, we are seeing a large shift in the expectations of clients and their customers driving corporate leaders to completely rethink the way they do business or risk being disrupted.
In this environment, there are four clear trends we are seeing across all industries. First, the volatile and low-growth global macroeconomic environment coupled with the rapid evolution of digital technology is driving more and more companies to look on completely new ways of doing business by experimenting with newly highly-disruptive business models.
The second trend we are seeing is a deep focus on enhancing customer experience using digital solutions. The third trend is an intense focus on automation of a number of traditional business activities and processes using new digital technologies. And finally, digital tools allow significant leverage of real-time analytics to drive decisions and actions.
He adds:
In 2017, we expect the macro environment to continue to be volatile. Operating in this uncertain environment, there is no question that digital transformation is mandatory for our businesses to stay competitive in every industry.
Key technology trends shaping business transformations include the growing importance of big data and analytics, providing companies with real-time predictive insights to drive actions. Second, [there is] transformation driven by the Internet of Things across a range of industries. We’re already developing many IoT-driven solutions helping clients optimize inventory levels and grow aftermarket service revenues. And third, Artificial Intelligence [is] making the leadp from science fiction to reality, with solutions being developed to work collaboratively with humans to solve intensely complex problems.
This in turn, of course, leads Tyagarajan to pitch Genpact’s offerings as meeting these trends head-on through its Lean Digital methodology and approach:
Genpact is on the right path to capture the value of these secular trends. Our Lean Digital approach brings together deep domain knowledge of specific industries, design thinking methodologies, end-to-end process understanding and a set of digital technologies to completely re-imagine the way clients run their businesses to drive transformation.
These engagements implement full end-to-end solutions from the front office all the way through the middle and back office. By attacking the entire process, we can drive clients’ top-line growth through dramatically reduced end customer response times and enhanced customer experience.
Our engagements with both new and existing clients start with a Lean Digital design thinking consulting engagement that often leads to downstream managed services. More than the X’s and O’s across all industries, I’m talking about digital disruption. As a result, we are engaging with clients at a deeper, more strategic level and given widespread interest in our highly differentiated Lean Digital approach, we are participating in deals that historically we would not have been a part of.
Combining advanced digital technologies with design thinking, deep domain expertise and operations expertise represents the core of our unique Lean Digital approach to drive disruptive transformation for clients. We have created strong momentum in the market as evidenced by our industry-leading Global Client BPO growth rates.
In practice
There are examples of this in practice, he adds:
For example, co-innovating with a leading CPG company, we are completely reimagining their order management process by incorporating analytics, artificial intelligence and robotics. This solution dramatically improves order fulfillment cycle times. Using digital signals, orders from retailers are automatically filled by warehouses holding the inventory. The items are then routed to delivery trucks that travel on algorithmic-optimized routes based on retailers locations.
Another example, we work as a global insurance leader to re-imagine and automate critical processes to significantly speed up their claim resolution and reduce the level of overpayments that result from incomplete data sets.
A third example. For a global Life Sciences company, we are developing an artificial intelligence-based platform to completely re-imagine the way they monitor, detect, assess and prevent adverse effects from pharma drugs.
All of this means doubling down on the talent base in order to support the shift to digital:
We built our critical mass within our digital organization with almost 1,000 team members, more than doubling the number from the end of 2015. Additionally, we implemented various training programs to ramp our sales practice and consulting teams on Lean Digital.
We opened our world-class digital and analytics innovation center in Silicon Valley where we demonstrate to clients the disruptive value of transformative journeys and showcase innovative solutions that leverage a core set of digital assets built with advanced technologies including robotics, artificial intelligence, machine learning, dynamic workflows and mobility.
We built a leading design thinking program that hosted several workshops at our Silicon Valley Innovation Center with multiple clients to help them understand and solve for critical business problems. This program is gaining traction with clients and we are ramping towards three to four client CFO visits per week.
And that’s not going to do Genpact any harm at all in the current limbo of Trumpian uncertainty around US v offshore talent.
My take
A cogent and pragmatic worldview from Tyagarajan at a time when uncertainty remains the only certainty.
 
 
Image credit - GenpactRead more on: Future of workInternet of ThingsMachine intelligence and AIOutsourcingTalent management 