
Every company takes a different approach to customer experience. That approach depends on the type of company as well as the industry it’s in. While every company applies different tactics to build and grow relationships with their customers, there are certain things they focus their efforts on that provide the biggest payoffs.
Altimeter, a Prophet company, released a new research report “Choosing the Right Customer Experience Management Platform” that looks at the four “experience archetypes” that help us understand the types of CX programs each group would focus most of their attention on.
I wanted to say marketing programs in place of CX programs above, but that wouldn’t be correct. Customer experience is not just about good marketing. It’s also about good sales and service – this is the customer lifecycle that every company must support.
Let’s look at each experience archetype:
The Brandvertiser
These are companies like Red Bull and Coca-Cola who don’t sell directly to the customer, so they can’t influence the customer experience when they are purchasing their products. Instead, they focus most of their attention on brand awareness through advertising and content. Think of Red Bull; its website doesn’t talk about its product – it has tons of content focused on events, news, music, sports – and you see the Red Bull logo or colors everywhere, but you aren’t reading a pitch to buy Red Bull. Red Bull is the ultimate case study in great content marketing.
Coca-Cola is a little different in that its website does talk about its products, but it also provides a lot of non-product content. Its website looks very much like a media site with sections on the homepage that cover news, business, sports, sustainability, history and more. You can read articles that cover a range of topics, sometimes with some Coca-Cola angle (e.g., they support or sponsor something). There’s also a section on the homepage where product lovers can upload their own photos of them enjoying their Coke:

Omar Akhtar, the author of the research report, noted that Brandvertisers “create and distribute content at mass scale.” It’s about mass awareness.
The Inbound Optimizer
The Inbound Optimizer focuses on driving traffic to their owned-properties. Once they get someone there, they optimize the experience to engage them. Akhtar said these are often ecommerce or mobile app companies who want to create “frictionless interactions.”
Here the focus in on owned channels and the use of tools like web content management, digital asset management, personalization, and analytics. Akhtar also noted tight integration with ecommerce and service platforms to ensure a consistent experience across the customer lifecycle.
There were no companies mentioned here that fit this profile, but I would suggest that every company with an ecommerce site would be an Inbound Optimizer. I’ll throw FootLocker as an examples:

For both Footlocker and Nike, these are ecommerce sites that offer engaging experiences that include not only showing how great their products are and making the shopping experience as easy as possible, but also providing a lot of good content that meets the interests of the visitor.
The Relationship Builder
If your company has a long buying cycle or sells a luxury product, then Akhtar said you are a Relationship Builder. These companies create a lot of high-value content that provides value beyond the product.
Enterprise software is a perfect example. It’s not enough to create datasheets and push product information on your website. It can take months or years to finalize a deal, and that means you need a way to stay top of mind with a customer during the sales cycle. You do that by continually offering value-add content that matches the challenges and opportunities the customer faces.
Luxury products like those from Coach – who sells ridiculously expensive but beautiful handbags – are big purchases. To keep its customers continually coming back, Coach has to create an experience that lasts beyond the first purchase (because you don’t buy a $300 handbag every month).
Relationship Builders act as “trusted partners or sellers,” said Akhtar, and they deliver content through email and social.
The Constant Communicator
As its name reveals, the Constant Communicator deals with real-time messaging. These companies need to constantly reassure customers by offering “relevant information exactly when it’s needed.”
Companies that meet this archetype provide products or services that require regular, consistent notifications. Akhtar gave the examples of FedEx, who needs to keep its customers up to date on delivery notifications, and TransUnion, who deals with fraud resolution:
For example, private communications for resolving a case or conflict can happen by email, whereas high-level customer service can be accomplished through social media.
These companies need to pull data from a lot of places and provide it in a single experience. At the same time, each customer wants their information provided through different channels, from SMS to email, social media or a customer support site, depending on the context and type of information.
My take
Although most companies do fall into one of the experience archetypes above, Akhtar said that most companies embrace more than one. However, success, he said, relies on prioritizing one above all others.
From the perspective of marketing, you can understand what he means. Too often marketers have too many different initiatives in their marketing strategy that spread resources and budget too thin. Although every company should be a relationship builder at some level, if they are selling everyday products and services, they would be better suited to focus their efforts on creating personalized, contextual experiences across their web and mobile properties.
A company selling enterprise software doesn’t need to do mass awareness programs to gain attention in mass scale. These companies should do awareness marketing, but on a much smaller scale to a well-defined audience who would purchase their product (or influence the purchase of a product).
I’ve never really thought of defining companies in archetypes like these. But I find it has helped clarify some of the marketing work I do with my clients. And if it helps me help them focus on the right areas, that’s a good thing.
Image credit - Feature image - close up of teacher hand with marker © .shock - Fotolia.com. Footlocker and Nike images from their respective public web sites.Read more on: CRM and customer experienceDigital and content marketing 