
I can see you
One of the provisions of the GDPR or General Data Protection Regulation set to go into effect in the EU in 2018 is the idea of “the right to be forgotten,” and for good reason. Thomas Shaw, a historian and legal scholar (“World War II Law and Lawyers—Issues, Cases, and Characters”) who writes about privacy rights especially those stemming from the war noted in an online post,
During the war, there were vast intrusions in the privacy of citizens of belligerent countries, typically under the guise of national security.
This and other abuses are part of what led Europeans to insist on the ability to take down or otherwise curtail use of individuals’ identifying information—the heart of a right to be forgotten.
The effort to enshrine data protection in law has a long history dating back to the 1970’s in Germany at both the state and national levels and it was one important driver of the right to be forgotten. Shaw writes that the right was first surfaced
In the German state of Hesse (Hessisches Datenschutzgesetz) in 1970,
And that
…the federal government had enacted a national data protection law (Bundesdatenschutzgesetz) in 1977.
But throughout the long history of data protection, the working assumption was more or less that enabling citizens to control their identifying data and information would be an unalloyed good thing because it would enable them to keep it out of the hands of those who might leverage it to do them harm.
It was a reasonable assumption and held up well until last weekend when hundreds of white supremacists descended on Charlottesville, VA to protest the impending removal of a statue of a Civil War general from a park.
News accounts of the protest went global and include the demonstration, a peaceful counter protest, and ensuing mayhem that left three people dead. Then, as if that wasn’t enough, something really curious happened.
A private citizen, Logan Smith, has a Twitter account with the handle “Yes, You’re Racist” which he has operated since 2012. According to online site The Wrap and other sources, Smith began using online photos to help identify some of the people involved in the march.
Smith said he was ‘inundated’ with tips, allowing him to pin names to the faces [in the crowd]. Smith then cross-referenced the tips against his own social media research, looking to see not only if the pictures match, but also if the person has shared racist content in the past.
Smith then did what he always does—he began posting identities of people at the march, which had predictable consequences.
In the wake of the postings we saw headlines like, Ridgeville man out of a job following photo next to Charlottesville murder suspect in The Post and Courier (Charleston, SC)
From the New York Post,
Family disowns racist outed at Charlottesville rally.
Now, depending on your point of view, this turn of events might cause you to conclude that the good guys won a round or that this is a technology overreach. Don’t be so quick to either conclusion. Under current data preservation practices in the U.S., the information from the march, including the outings of some attendees, would remain active in perpetuity and it could be discovered years from now with a simple search.
But times change and so do people’s perceptions. What’s true of an individual today may at some point no longer be so. In 2013 Bill Keller of the New York Times, published a story about a Connecticut woman who had been convicted of a misdemeanor marijuana offence. Her state, like many others in the U.S., allows for a person’s record to be expunged after passing a drug education course. Connecticut law also stipulates that such persons “shall be deemed to have never been arrested” and “may swear so under oath.”
Unfortunately, the woman was a nurse and found she was no longer employable because a basic internet search revealed the old case. In effect she was still guilty as charged according to the internet because she didn’t have a right to be forgotten even when the information about her was no longer relevant.
The two cases suggest that a simple right to be forgotten might not be so simple to implement. Society has a right to know some background characteristics of individuals especially if their behavior occurs in public but it also has to balance the passage of time and an individual’s development. Viktor Mayer-Schönberger, a professor at the Oxford Internet Institute, and author of Delete: The Virtue of Forgetting in the Digital Age said of this kind of issue,
This is not just a privacy problem…If we are continually reminded about people’s mistakes, we are not able to judge them for who they are in the present. We need some way to put a speed-brake on the omnipresence of the past.
My take
We all do stupid things and many of the casual attendees of the Charlotte unrest might feel different about their motivations at some point but the video of the event will live on.
At the same time, activists using the tools of the internet were able to strike a blow for decency against white supremacy and could make participants at least rethink their tactics in the future. Ideally, they might rethink their life strategies as well.
But without picking sides for the root causes of Charlottesville, these examples suggest that a right to privacy might be more elusive to pin down and harder to develop technology for.
No doubt there are workable solutions to the identity problem but they won’t be free. It now looks like an administrative office is needed to referee personal identity cases in the future, the rules for which represent a gnarly problem of their own.
Endnote: we have a section on this topic you might wish to explore – also check out the GDPR coverage.
Image credit - public imagesRead more on: Data privacyDigital government and public services

