

Two become one
We feel, in the business, that the merger, other than the tech work, that work has been done…I’ll oversee the final part of this, which is the delivery of the technology project.
That’s the view from CEO Breon Corcoran as he looks towards the coming 12 months having overseen the merger of gambling businesses Paddy Power and Betfair. It’s all done bar the technology integration, he reckons, and that’s an appropriate time for him to think about stepping down from the top job:
There’s never a good time to leave out a great business, a business with the prospects that I believe this business have. You’d appreciate that there’s never an easy time to leave a business, an industry that I’ve been as involved in as I have over the last 16 years. I was thinking this morning that I’ve be working in this industry longer than most of us would ever be married. So it’s been quite a while, but I do think it’s an opportune time for the business.
Before he departs however, there’s the question of getting the technology stack in order. It’s particularly important to get it right as the gambling industry is moving increasingly online and becoming accordingly more and more tech dependent. This is something that Corcoran has seen developing over his 16 years in the industry:
Once upon a time, we had websites that kind of were the online manifestation of what happened in the shops. But now this industry is completely defined by and underpinned by technology and technology investment – and that’s across all of our operations, high street and online.
Against that backdrop, Corcoran admits that when he looks out at the combined technology real estate of Paddy Power Betfair there are some significant issues that need to be addressed, particularly around the “problem child” that is the gaming business:
Our customer-facing product is not good enough. The UI is a bit sloppy, if I’m honest. I’m not proud of that, but if I’m honest it has been a bit sloppy. Our mobile software, in particular, is a bit dated and that’s not great. The gaming customer is quite demanding. By their nature, they’re fickle. There are lower costs, lower barriers to entry, and more gaming brands. It’s more fragmented. They churn higher, therefore they’re exposed to better product and more, because of their churn, than maybe sports betting customers are. Our product is not quite where it should be.
That said, there has been considerable progress in key areas:
The online customer platform, which we’ve been working on since May of last year, is on course for completion in Q4. That work will start at the beginning of October. We’ve talked about how we will do it in a series of batches, starting with the customers of lower value first or less frequent customers and then migrate more. But it should be definitively complete by the end of the year. The majority of the work is done. It’s taken a considerable amount of effort.
But the key benefits will include an increased pace of development, a faster rollout of new products to all our customers across most of our brands, channels and jurisdictions, a material reduction in time resource required to build new brands or enter new markets that may prove to be relevant in gaming. And we have significant technology resources, with over 1,000 engineers globally. And a higher return on investment generated for each pound spent allows more development to be deployed with greater certainty on new product.
Corcoran adds:
We will get to a place where the customer-facing and the back office stuff and the promo stuff and customer operations stuff, we’ve rebuilt the customer, the back office tools. It used to be OpenBet for Paddy Power, it was a think called Console for Betfair. It now has a somewhat techy name of Yoda and that allows our customers, operations people, primarily in Malta, to have one interface to manage customers across multiple brands, better surfacing of promotional offers to the customer service agents, When they’re talking or chatting with customers and that’s now all in-house.
Future platform
The CEO adds that the scale of the technology task should not be underestimated:
This is more than just about integrating the legacy Paddy Power and Betfair stacks. It’s also about enhancing overall scalability, operation resilience, data security and capacity of the platform for future growth.
As a consequence, this is a program that, at its peak, has been eating up 70% of technical resources inside the company, he notes:
I think if we’d fully appreciated how much work was required with the re-platforming, we might have been even more daunted. We talked at a time last summer about feeling that we had a one-off opportunity. We talked with, quote marks around, “having the moral authority” to do this re-platforming, not just to re-platform the Paddy’s site to the Betfair one, but also to refresh the Betfair one and give us the capability for future flexibility. Thank god, we’re very close to the end of it.
But as I said, to ensure we’re best positioned for long-term growth and to enhance the ability to release new products at pace, the tech resources have been focused, pretty much since the merger, on this platform work…with a lot of the residual resources focused on business-as-usual, lights staying on and operational projects.
But the benefits are worth the challenge, he argues, pointing to the importance of customer management and outreach, citing digital marketing investment as a key priority:
We recently deployed an in-house data management platform and a new marketing automation engine. As a result, automated customized customer messaging can now be delivered across eight distinctive channels as opposed to the existing four CRM channels. The technology allows us to get a material increase in our digital reach to our customers and possibly new customers, and that allows us to efficiently target customers with appropriate messaging.
We’re now better able to contact customers or to at least make ourself aware, make customers aware through advertising, customers who previously have chosen to be uncontactable.We’re already seeing evidence that this is driving incremental activity. For example, the Cheltenham March, the Bedford reactivation campaign drove a 5% increase in activity from reactivated customers when compared with controlled groups.
The majority of customers will begin to recognise the benefits of the technology upgrades from 2018 onwards, predicts Corcoran:
There will be some immediate benefits rising from the integration work. Betfair customers are already seeing the benefits in some of the products. Some additional products, improved pricing following access to Paddy Power proprietary risk and trading models. Whilst on migration, Paddy Power customers will see some incremental product benefits and there will be more to follow. In the short-term, Paddy Power customers will see an improved Sportsbook offering, access to new gaming apps, which will go some way to addressing the product app, and greater promotional flexibility. They’ll benefit from the promotional tech work that Betfair did two, three years ago and more recently.
On the Sportsbook, there’ll be an immediate introduction of a faster sports app, an enhanced cash out offer, and new proprietary desktop that’s more consistent with the mobile betting experience. Post the completion of the integration project, the focus will shift to capitalizing our significant development resources to accelerate the pace and frequency of new products.
My take
The challenges of integrating and consolidating technologies is a challenge that has crippled many mergers in the past across multiple business sectors, so this is a vital final challenge that Corcoran has set himself. News of his departure wasn’t handled particularly well and accounts for the fall in the Paddy Power Betfair share price over the past few days. But Corcoran’s candour about the challenges and shortcomings of some of the merged firm’s tech probably didn’t help.
Image credit - Paddy Power Read more on: CRM and customer experienceDigital and content marketingDigital enterprise in the real worlde-commerce 