
Lloyds Banking Group could point to a couple of positive signs when it turned in its latest quarterly results this week. The first, and the one of most note to the UK taxpayer, was that the government has reduced its stake in the bailed-out bank to less than 5%, resulting in what’s pitched as an £18.5 billion profit over the past three years.
The second was less headline-grabbing perhaps, but was further indication that the $1 billion commitment made last year to digital transformation across the Group is bedding in. Group chief executive António Horta-Osório reiterated his goal of establishing the best multi-channel model for the bank, getting the balance right between online and offline operations:
As I have always said, we really like our multi-channel approach. We have the largest digital bank. We have the largest branch network as a whole. And several of our clients can use the others branch network in order to do counter transactions, which is helpful. So we are focused on the multi-channel approach in which customers contact with us however they want.
What Lloyds can boast, he argues, is a digital banking set-up with a 21% market share and physical branch network with a 22% market share:
Our branch network is the UK’s largest, with around 2,000 branches. And while counter transactions continue to reduce, the branches are increasingly being used to advise customers with more complex financial needs. In addition, we continue to deliver our Commercial Banking client relationship model with over 3,000 client-facing colleagues across the SME, mid markets and other Commercial Banking coverage teams. And we operate the UK’s largest digital bank, with around 12.5 million active online customers, of which around 8 million access the bank via their mobile. And we had over 2 billion customer logons in 2016, which is up 24% compared to 2015.
While branches have closed, this is less about cost and more about picking up on customer trends and desires, he claims:
What we are doing here is to follow our customers’ behavior. So given that our customers are growingly accessing us through mobile or digital, so transactions are exponentially growing. Simple needs now are met more online than with all the other channels. We obviously have to adapt our physical branch network to whatever they want to do. And we will continue to do that. So the trends will depend on our customers’ behaviour.
We don’t look at it as a cost measure and then we try to influence customer behavior. We look at how customers want to interact with us. And we adapt our multi-channel approach, including the branch network, to their needs. For example, in Scotland and in the UK, outside the big cities, we are now having a significant program of mobile vans in order to cover the small locations that we leave and [where] we have less banking done. And in order to serve the clients that don’t use digital, we are having the service of mobile vans to cover those cities a certain number of hours a week for them to be able to do banking with us.
Digital direction
For all the importance of the branch network, it’s clear that digital is the direction of travel, as it should be with £1 billion being thrown at transformation activities. This is paying back already, insists Horta-Osório:
Digital is a critical element of our multi-channel distribution model and also increasingly a competitive advantage. We have seen significant growth across the channel. In terms of simple customer needs met, we are now at 61%, which is up from 41% in 2014. Our new business market shares demonstrates the attractiveness of our digital propositions, with the Group’s overall digital market share 21% and strong market positions across our major digital product categories.
We do expect this rapid growth in digital users to continue as our customers’ behaviors evolve; and we make additional significant progress in simplifying our key customer journeys, including an increase in the proportion of approved mortgage applications which proceed to offer within 14 calendar days, increasing from 37% to 55%, and a simplified SME on-boarding process, which has gone from 15 paper application forms down to just one digital form.
The next milestone this year is likely to be getting to a point where the vast majority of account-opening journeys in branch are fulfilled via tablets and completed in less than 30 minutes across current accounts, savings products, credit cards and loans. This would previously have required a 60-minute appointment to complete.
That’s more efficient for the customer and more cost-effective for the bank, concludes Horta-Osório, who adds that there’s much more of this that can be achieved in the future:
While we are currently ahead of our major UK peers in terms of cost efficiency, we are not complacent. We will continue to focus on becoming even more efficient, as we believe this is a strategic key feature in the context of the banking industry’s ongoing digital transformation.
My take
Lloyds Banking Group reported a pre-tax profit of £4.2 billion this week. That’s more than double the £1.6 billion it turned in in the previous year, although in large part this was due to lower payment protection insurance (PPI) provisions. Nonetheless the digital transformation investment has clearly contributed to a 3% reduction in operating costs. So far, it’s looking like digital money well-spent.
Image credit - Lloyds Banking Group Read more on: CRM and customer experienceDigital enterprise in the real worldFinancial services and fintech 