
The impact of Brexit on skilled worker immigration from Europe has been widely debated since the 23 June vote to leave the European Union, but it’s only one part of a “triple talent hit” facing the UK.
That’s the grim warning from technology trade association techUK in a new report published 24 hours after Prime Minister Theresa May triggered Article 50 and set in motion two years of negotiations with Brussels, negotiations in which future immigration and movement of labour regulations will play a major part. In its report, techUK warns:
Recent analysis for techUK by Frontier Economics showed that 18 percent of the digital sectors’ three million workers are foreign-born, with one-third of those are from EU countries. Foreign-born workers also accounted for 45 percent of net employment growth between 2009 and 2015, with EU-born workers contributing the most, in relative terms, to the sector’s success.
Whilst Brexit potentially disrupts access to skills by disrupting a vital talent pipeline from the EU, it is just one part of a talent triple hit facing UK tech. Recent and incoming changes on skilled migration from outside the EEA, alongside long-standing and growing shortages in domestic digital skills, present tech companies with an ever tightening squeeze on accessing the talent they need to grow.
In what techUK calls the future Global Britain, what’s needed is a “positive economic, social and cultural case for controlled migration”. The association argues:
The time is now for a new data-driven immigration system, calibrated to the real-time needs of the UK economy. A smart immigration system would help to rebuild public trust and confidence that immigration is being controlled and calibrated to the needs of the UK economy.
To that end, techUK has laid down a series of requirements and recommendations to achieve this, beginning with a commitment to allow resident European tech workers to remain in the UK post-Brexit. It urges:
The Government should urgently commit to avoiding a “tech talent cliff-edge” if no deal is reached with the EU in exit negotiations, so that there are guarantees that UK firms will have continued access to the European tech talent they need to grow. An abrupt termination to ongoing access to EU digital talent will be devastating to UK tech.
The ability of UK firms to have staff in the European Union also need to be factored in:
Recognise the importance of UK firms being able to locate UK nationals to work in EU member states to support business operations in those markets. Similarly, the Government should consider a visa-free system for short-term business travel between the EU and UK.
Smart Migration
Reform is needed of existing non-EEA migration limits in order to attract skilled workers:
This would send a positive message to business, particularly multinationals who need to make the case to global headquarters on why the UK is the best place to invest in a tech company.
The UK government plans a £1000 Immigration Skills charge, added to all Tier 2 visas and long-term intra- company transfers (ICT) from next month, which is expected to raise £250 million in 2017-18 financial year alone. That money should be put to good use, suggests techUK:
Rather than use the charge as a revenue raising tool, the Government should ring-fence this new £250m per year to help fund a major and world-leading domestic digital skills programmes fit for Global Britain.
Source: techUK
Finally, techUK wants to see digital technologies being put to good use in transitioning to a Smart Migration system:
The Government faces an unprecedented administrative task in processing the volume of right to remain applications of EU nationals in the UK. The Government must give urgent consideration on how it can instigate better data and information sharing across government to expedite the high volume of right to remain applications that the Home Office will need to process.
The Government should undertake an immediate review on how new technologies can be deployed to ensure frictionless migration systems, including visa applications and movement of people across borders. This system should be calibrated to provide data on the real time needs of the economy, which will be more responsive and provide the public with additional data on economic needs.
Such a Smart Migration system is something that needs to be dynamic and evolve longer term, adds techUK:
A Smart Migration system is not static, it is iterative. The long-term aim should therefore be ceaselessly innovate this system so it becomes ever more responsive to the UK’s skills needs. To do this, the system needs to be outcome- rather than technology-based so that it can be continually developed. It should also follow inter-operability principles so it is compatible with other Government and industry systems. There is no reason why, in the future, it cannot be integrated with international immigration data to create a universal smart migration system that allows the UK to value both immigration and emigration opportunities.
The report concludes:
Government should commit to avoiding a “tech talent cliff-edge”. This is particularly important if no deal is reached with the European Union in exit negotiations, so that there are guarantees that UK firms will have continued access to the European tech talent they need to grow.
My take
It’s hard to argue with any of this.
Image credit - freeimages.com/HE van TwillertRead more on: Digital skills and trainingFuture of workTalent management 