
At an industry event in early June, I was fumbling, along with fellow attendees, to find common ground to carry on a pleasant lunch conversation between strangers seated together. That day, my attention was squarely on the Warriors’ playoff game that night, so I talked about it. A fellow attendee at the table proclaimed the NBA was ‘unwatchable,’ as he favored the much more civilized Stanley Cup Hockey Playoffs happening that same week. Alas, what he missed by ignoring the 2015 US NBA Finals phenomenon was an exemplar demonstration of brand building and execution of the highest order that marketers can learn so much from. It comes from a solid understanding of the need for customer experiences that build an emotional bond between customer / fan and the brand.
This NBA series was a huge success in many ways. Notably this playoff series had the highest network TV ratings since the glory days of Michael Jordan’s Chicago Bulls in 1998. Let me share with you what I observed – and was profoundly touched by – as a marketer who seeks to build connections for a living.

Superior product
Attention to the customer experience
Emotional connection to the brand

Superior product – the team, staff and business operations
Five years ago, the then new owners of the Golden State Warriors, an NBA basketball team based in Oakland, California, set out to build an organization to win a championship. The owners and General Manager* recounted this strategy at the Warriors’ 2015 Championship victory rally. They managed their roster to assemble a group of players with superior basketball skills AND the personalities to play selflessly as a team. They recruited a coach with championship DNA. The General Manager won Executive of the Year in the NBA. Once assembled, the team, led by Steph Curry, executed a precision brand of basketball that withstood many doubters during the season, but prevailed in the end.
The Warriors’ assembled capabilities produced: the best record in the NBA (67-15); the record for most points scored in a quarter (37, Klay Thompson); most wins for a rookie coach (67, Steve Kerr); single-player record for most three pointers made in a season (286, Stephen Curry).
All season long, competing teams were said to have more star-power, more grit, more size, more brute strength, but our team stayed committed to superior skill, precision, ball-passing and handling and in the end, a smart “small ball” strategy, all of which prevailed to produce a stellar result.
Attention to the Customer Experience (#CX) – treating fans like an asset
Peter Guber is a co-owner of the Warriors. He is also Chairman of Mandalay Bay Entertainment and Dick Clark Productions. Make no mistake, building the Warriors brand and associating it with superior customer experience is top of mind and these guys are pros. I was a customer/fan who hung with this team from opening night in October ’14 to the victory parade in June ’15.
Every touch point. fans were surrounded by compelling connections to our team.  And I mean EVERYTHING. From the explosive live game experience at Oracle Arena, to Warriors.com loaded with videos, podcasts, live Twitter feeds, branded gear for sale, to the social media connections on Instagram, Facebook, Twitter with prizes for game day check-ins, Warrior brand loyalty was a badge of honor in our community.
Coincidentally, I saw the VP, Digital & Marketing of the Warriors present at a social media event last month and heard him describe in textbook form what I was experiencing as a fan. He described their B=MAT approach to the fan experience: Behavior = Motivation (give fans a reason to believe) + Ability (make it easy to engage) + Triggers (beacons onsite at the game). Highly motivated fans with easy access to triggers create a ton of engagement, which builds Warrior loyalty.
The Warriors’ high marketing IQ extended to customer intelligence leveraged to further enhance my experience as a fan. To wit: I’ve bought tickets for a few games but I’m not a season ticket holder. I was delighted when they noticed that I’d bought tickets to a Playoff Round 2 game, but had not yet purchased for Round 3. My newfound personal ‘account manager’ phoned to enlist me to purchase tickets for future playoff games and get on the waitlist for season tickets! A surprising personalized customer experience builds loyalty like no other marketing interaction!
Emotional connection to the brand – pure serendipity

What can I say about the emotional bond Warriors fans feel for the Brand?
The good guys won. You’ve gotta root for these guys and their pure joy at being rewarded for their perseverance and skill. From the fans sitting courtside to the die-hards in Club 200 far away from the court, I observed a heartfelt connection to those players and their personal stories.
The players humanized the brand in ways that were endearing and authentic. From Steph becoming “Riley’s Dad”, to the Father/Son story of Steph and Klay as second-generation NBA stars, to Draymond talking smack, this was a roster full of guys you wanted to root for.
They played with a selflessness such that it didn’t matter who got the credit – a characteristic I often see in articles about winning teams in business. They are the antidote to the blowhards and braggarts on the other popular teams. Their humility, modesty, spirituality and commitment built an emotional bond that goes beyond what can be engineered. This was pure serendipity. The team’s scandal-free lives was a great contrast to the previously scandalous NBA. As a mom of a young, impressionable son, what better role models could I ask for?
Marketers, take note. Brand building success stories come in many forms. This US based 2015 NBA Finals win for the Golden State Warriors is one for the ages and full of lessons about building a 360-degree customer experience and how social/digital can be employed as part of – but not all of – a compelling customer relationship of the kind that speaks ‘authentic’ in every sense of the word.
* Owners Joe Lacob, Peter Guber; General Manager Bob Myers
Read more on: CRM and customer experienceUse cases 