
Whilst Uber is used to being in the news and featuring in headlines, it seems to only be on the rare occasion that it receives any sort of positive attention. And this is to be expected, given the level of disruption that the ride-sharing app is causing to the transportation industry and the headache that it is giving regulators across the world.
There are also big question marks hanging over whether or not this ‘sharing economy’ strikes the right balance between empowering and exploiting its workers – check out our story here.
However, this Easter holiday weekend, two Uber headlines caught my attention, both of which are likely to please backers of the taxi app.
First, it was revealed by the Financial Times that a leaked private letter by EU’s commissioner for transport that Brussels is considering regulation of Uber across the whole single market, instead of leaving it to each individual state making its own decisions about the app’s availability.
The news comes shortly after Uber filed complaints with regulators in Brussels against three EU member state governments, claiming that they violated the region’s laws by banning its services. Complaints have been filed with the European Commission against France, Germany and Spain.
Getting regulatory approval has proven to be one of Uber’s biggest challenges, due to the innovative way that the application manages its drivers and charges for its trips. It is often considered that Uber is operating within a legal ‘grey area’, which is why an EU-wide consensus would be helpful to the San Francisco based company in terms of accelerating its rollout.
For example, in the UK the transport regulators have ruled that Uber isn’t using a meter to charge for its trips (which would have conflicted with London’s black cabs and would have been a blocker) because its fare calculation system isn’t attached to the car itself. As a result it has been given the green light.
However, largely thanks to taxi industries putting up a fight in other countries, Uber hasn’t been as lucky and has been blocked by state-level regulators.
The letter from Violeta Bulc, who oversees transport regulation for the EU, said that she is planning an in-depth study into the European taxi market to “provide the necessary background for the commission to decide on the need for – and possible character of – any further action at EU level”.
She added that taxi regulations were “currently” dealt with at a national level, which had resulted in variations in costs and services of taxis, as well as inconsistencies in rules on Uber within the EU single market. Bulc wrote:

As a result, the regulation and market situation differs from one member state to another and even from one city to another.

If Uber can campaign and get approval from the European Commission at an EU-wide level – which may be helped by the fact that it recently hired Obama’s 2008 campaign manager, David Plouffe, in a bid to calm regulatory concerns – it could go a long way to getting Uber into the hands of millions of users across the European Union.
Business use in the US
The other piece of good news for Uber this weekend came from travel and expense software management company Certify, which released the latest results from its 2015 first quarter business spending report.
The report tracks spending across categories such as food, airlines, lodging and car rentals and points to the top vendors for business travellers using data from millions of business expense receipts processed in Certify by end users.
So, for example, it identifies that the most expensed restaurant by Certify business users was Starbucks, with

5.32% of expenses, averaging $12.22 per receipt. Whilst the most expensed airline was Delta with 20.67% of expenses, averaging $399.64 per receipt.
So why is this interesting for Uber? Well, Certify’s Q1 results highlighted the impact that the ride-sharing app is having on the business travel market for taxicabs and limousines.
The first quarter of this year saw 46% of all total paid car rides go through Uber, compared with just 15% in Q1 of 2014. Business taxicab travel (including limousines and shuttles) dropped to an average of 53% of paid car receipts in the first quarter, compared with 85% in the same quarter last year.
Certify’s data also indicated that using Uber is generally cheaper, with the average ride for Q1 costing $31.24 per receipt, which compares to an average of $35.40 per receipt for traditional taxicabs.
My take
You cannot deny the level of disruption that Uber brings to the market. Despite all of the negative publicity, the bad headlines and the resistance from the traditional taxi market, business users are still heading in the droves to the app and regulators are taking it seriously.
Convenience + lower cost is a tough combination to argue with, even if you aren’t entirely comfortable with the company itself.
Image credit - via UberRead more on: Digital transformation - frictionless enterpriseRegulation 