
Just as Google decided to submit a solid rebuttal to a European Commission complaint about the search giant’s alleged abuse in delivering price comparison results to shoppers, India’s Competition Commission issues a report that concludes that Google abused its dominant position in online advertising.
In January 2013 the Federal Trade Commission in the US cleared Google of any monopolistic wrongdoing and decided against imposing any sanctions on its core business. However, this doesn’t appear to have had any sort of ripple affect, as Google is continuing to fight antitrust fires globally.
Earlier this week, for example, Google lawyer Kent Walker was forced to issue a response to a European Commission (EC) Statement of Objections, which focused on how the company delivers price comparisons to shoppers on its website.
Back in April the EC Commissioner in charge of competition policy, Margrethe Vestager, said:
The Commission’s objective is to apply EU antitrust rules to ensure that companies operating in Europe, wherever they may be based, do not artificially deny European consumers as wide a choice as possible or stifle innovation”.
In the case of Google I am concerned that the company has given an unfair advantage to its own comparison shopping service, in breach of EU antitrust rules. Google now has the opportunity to convince the Commission to the contrary. However, if the investigation confirmed our concerns, Google would have to face the legal consequences and change the way it does business in Europe.
 However, Walker said in his blog post that the EC’s statement of objections are “wrong as a matter of fact, law and economics”. Walker’s response was generally received as sound and also questioned why the EC wasn’t investigating the impact of major shopping websites such as eBay and Amazon, which are the main players in this space.
Walker said:
We don’t think this format is anti-competitive. On the contrary, showing ads based on structured data provided by merchants demonstrably improves ad quality and makes it easier for consumers to find what they’re looking for. We show these ad groups where we’ve always shown ads — to the right and at the top of organic results — and we use specialized algorithms to maximize their relevance for users. Data from users and advertisers confirms they like these formats. That’s not “favoring” — that’s giving our customers and advertisers what they find most useful.
Our search engine is designed to provide the most relevant results and most useful ads for any query. Users and advertisers benefit when we do this well. So does Google. It’s in our interest to provide high-quality results and ads that connect people to what they’re looking for. The more relevant the ads — the better they perform in connecting potential buyers and sellers — the more value they generate for everyone.
Throughout the almost 17 years since Google started, our engineers have been developing innovative approaches to search and ads that are valuable for both users and advertisers. In the video below you can hear from our engineers about how our services have evolved to give people better results and ads. We are proud of their work and eager to tell their story.
And this is where I believe Google’s point is the strongest. Although the company does dominate the search

market in Europe, it doesn’t appear that there is any sort of backlash from users over the services it provides.
Typically a monopoly has some adverse consequences on consumers, but for many it’s not immediately apparent what these are. It’s not to say that there aren’t any – there are arguably costs associated if you choose Google as a vehicle to gain a presence. But equally, Google isn’t restricting users from accessing other sites. It’s providing a service and we have the choice to use that service or not.
However, despite being confident about its offering and positioning in Europe, Google is struggling to prove itself in India after the country’s Competition Commission concluded that the company has abused its dominant position in online search advertising.
The regulatory body began investigating Google back in 2012 and according to a report seen by the Financial Times, it has found that the internet giant breaches a variety of India’s competition law.
The complaints against Google were initially filed by Bharat Matrimony, an online matrimonial site, and Consumer Unity & Trust, a consumer rights organisation. And the lengthy report has concluded that Google gave preferential treatment to its own search results. The report reads:
Google steers users to its own products and services, and produces biased results.
Users may not receive the most relevant results. This also adversely affects the competitive landscape in the markets for online general web search and search advertising, as well as adjacent markets such as travel, maps, social networking [and] ecommerce.
The report also allegedly gives Google a black mark for the use of its AdWords system, claiming that it gives preferential treatment to Google’s in-house adverts.
According to India’s Economic Times, Google has said that it is reviewing the report and that it is working closely with the Competition Commission to comply with India’s competition laws.
My take
It’s a tricky one. Market dominance has historically not been a good thing for consumers, competitors and innovation. However, when you look at Google, even though you may use a lot of its services, you don’t necessarily feel like you have to. There are alternatives out there. And Google hasn’t attempted to restrict users from accessing other sites.
That doesn’t mean that companies don’t feel like they’ve got to play along with Google to get ahead in the game. And that’s probably where the greatest problem lies. Those of us in publishing know all too well about that. However, if the users want to continue using Google, that’s the game we have to play.
But it’s worth remembering that tech companies in the past have considered themselves to have an unbreakable market dominance and have been disrupted by new companies that have spotted changes in the market. Google isn’t untouchable in that respect and it’s naïve to assume that it will be the only company to innovate in its areas of expertise for the foreseeable future.
Read more on: e-commerce 