
Google’s restructuring seems to have caught the cognoscenti on the hop. Some in tech media are laughing at it as ‘same old, same old,’ others don’t understand it, still others are trying to parse this as a firm indication of the weirdness that is Google. I see Google’s restructure as a welcome move that holds the potential to drive innovation at scale. What’s happening?
Google has created a new corporate structure, playfully called Alphabet under which Google becomes a wholly owned subsidiary. Google gets a new CEO, Sundar Pichai, who is widely regarded as a safe pair of hands. Co-founders Larry Page and Sergey Brin head up the holding company with a watching brief on the various entities inside the new structure.
Some of the provided detail give solid clues where Page/Brin want to go:
Alphabet is mostly a collection of companies. The largest of which, of course, is Google. This newer Google is a bit slimmed down, with the companies that are pretty far afield of our main internet products contained in Alphabet instead. What do we mean by far afield? Good examples are our health efforts: Life Sciences (that works on the glucose-sensing contact lens), and Calico (focused on longevity). Fundamentally, we believe this allows us more management scale, as we can run things independently that aren’t very related.
Alphabet is about businesses prospering through strong leaders and independence. In general, our model is to have a strong CEO who runs each business, with Sergey and me in service to them as needed.
Some have compared this to a Berkshire Hathaway style of portfolio management. I disagree. Alphabet is acting as the investment management vehicle for the kinds of world-changing bets the co-founders wish to place. At one level, you could argue that Alphabet is akin to a portfolio VC fund.
A good number of pundits assume that everything except Google is loss making. We cannot know that for sure. However, splitting the entities in this way allows Google to create levels of transparent reporting that encourage fiscal probity. The statement says as much.
We will rigorously handle capital allocation and work to make sure each business is executing well. We’ll also make sure we have a great CEO for each business, and we’ll determine their compensation.
I like this because it means that each operating unit will be assessed on merit rather than being lost in a much larger balance sheet.
It is not all sweetness and light. A structure like this creates an environment where ‘old’ Google is internally perceived as a maturing business where all the cool stuff has been done. The other entities will be perceived as attractive to bright minds. That perceptual division creates a talent tension that requires exceptional management skills to avoid a mass exodus. If nothing else, and as Simon Wardley noted, it will put head hunters on high alert.
My concern is that the other entities will appear as a bundled reporting item. The release  says:
In addition, with this new structure we plan to implement segment reporting for our Q4 results, where Google financials will be provided separately than those for the rest of Alphabet businesses as a whole.
It’s the ‘as a whole’ portion that concerns me. I would like to see reporting based upon industry focus and/or size of investment because that gives us a directional steer on innovation areas in which Page/Brin are investing. This matters for a variety of reasons, not least the fact that the new entity has the potential to develop entirely new ecosystems around world-changing products and services.
It is an open question whether EU and other regulators will see this restructure as an opportunity to put more pressure on Google. We must wait to see how the new structure is reflected in regulatory filings to get a better picture.
Uncategorized 