
 
Did no-one in the US think to check the brand name Brillo?
Google just made a pitch to own a significant chunk of the Internet-of-Things space, announcing Project Brillo at its I/O conference this week. Brillo enters the ring as the latest OS of choice for developers and manufacturers to build their connected ‘things’ upon – taking on others that have already entered the market and have been partnering to get ahead and win the race.
Some of the others that have already launched programmes include Ubuntu, Intel and Qualcomm, with Apple and Microsoft expecting to make their own announcements soon. However, given Google’s existing ecosystem and the amount of people across the globe that already own Android handsets, it has a very good chance of taking on the others and winning out.
But with one proviso – that the winning ‘applications’ pick Google Brillo as their platform of choice. Google needs to convince developers that this is the easiest platform to build on and Brillo is the one that has the most reach in the long-term.
Sundar Pichai, senior VP at Google, explained to a packed conference room that the Brillo OS and the accompanying communications layer, Weave, which allows the cloud, mobile, and Brillo to speak to one another, could have a big impact on the connected world and the the experience users have with their ‘things’. Pichai said:

If you could get physical devices connected to the internet, we think we could transform the experience for users. We call this the Internet-of-Things.

Given Google’s investment in Nest, Pichai was obviously keen to point out that the connected home is prime for developers focused on Brillo. However, his ambitions are much greater than that, saying that Brillo is perfect for connecting everything from farms to city transportation systems.
However, he added that problems exist for those that are looking to build across the IoT market. Pichai said:

There are challenges. People today are making connected devices, but it’s really hard for device manufacturers – you don’t know how to build your software stack, developers don’t know how to target these experiences and for users it’s confusing to make all of this work together. We are lucky to have Nest, Nest has been working hard to take traditional devices in the home and re-imagining them for users. We want to provide an end-to-end approach to our ecosystem.”
Project Brillo is an underlying operating system for internet of things. It can run on devices with the minimum footprint, with full OS support. And based on Android you get immediate scale.

And if you look at the below diagrams from the presentation at I/O, you can see how all of this is meant to work together. Brillo is meant to be used as a ‘lightweight’ operating system that can run on any IoT device, with Weave working as the communications layer that seamlessly talks to the cloud and the mobile device.
The Brillo stack
Weave – The communication layer
Pichai provides an example whereby you could be reading a recipe on an application on your mobile phone and upon deciding that this is the recipe that you want to make, automatically turns on your oven at the correct temperature.
He added that because the platform uses a common and standardised schema, rules such as ‘lock’ or ‘unlock’ will be understood across all devices. Making it a much simpler development process.
Not only this, but one of the main selling points – from Google’s perspective – is that given that the entire Brillo project is based upon the Android operating system, the user experience will be consistent and standardised across all devices.
All in all, the argument from Google for Brillo is actually quite compelling. It already owns plenty of the components, it has the adoption rates amongst consumers in terms of Android devices and it has the avid attention of developers.
However, the main thing holding Google back from success, from my perspective, is that if for some reason an IoT manufacturer becomes extremely popular amongst consumers for whatever purpose – it could be the home, it could be elsewhere – but it chooses another development platform. This could pose a challenge to Google.
If consumers are adopting on a certain platform for one particular purpose, it would make sense for other manufacturers to follow the route of the leader in the IoT market, instead of going off in a different direction, to make future interoperability easier.
That’s not to say that there will be one successful platform either, we have learnt from history that there is typically room for at least a couple of mainstream OS’. But if Google wants to be the leader in this market, it needs to be the platform of choice for some of the early IoT ‘killer apps’. It’s investment in Nest goes a long way to making this happen.
However, it’s early days and competition is rife. Now it’s over to the developers and manufacturers to make their choices.

Read more on: Internet of Things 