
Rusty chain – Trever Salomon
Tim Fisher produced a helpful piece that was replicated on LinkedIn on the topic of developing SAP HANA business cases. He says [my paraphrasing]:


It’s not all about the technology – quantifiable business benefits need to be at the centre of any argument. It’s very unlikely you will be able to create an entire benefits case for a move to HANA based solely on the technical arguments.  There will be exceptions to this rule.
Your single killer application for SAP HANA probably won’t cut it. A business case has to demonstrate exactly how technology can be used to create business benefit so there won’t likely be a single argument.
Be careful what types of benefits are included. The intangible ‘blue-sky’ stuff is still really important but you mustn’t try to pay for your programme with it.
But do be aware some of your arguments may evolve the more you learn so you need to be flexible. In the work we’re doing with our clients we’re seeing that sometimes the benefits cases can’t necessarily be fully complete when we put them together.  The technology is moving so quickly you need to be prepared to cover some areas at a later date and this is posing an interesting challenge within the models – reporting strategy for Simple Finance is a great example of this.


All of this is very helpful for CXOs but as I pointed out on Twitter, it misses that all important ingredient – real world use cases. These can always be disguised to protect all involved but please, give me something I can contextualize.
Given that Fisher is convinced this remains a problem – albeit solvable, I put myself in the shoes of a CXO. Coincidentally, SAP consultant Alex Sadler put up this photo of an advert he spotted in London:
SAP advertising – via Alex Sadler
Looking at this I was a bit befuddled. Is Honda the client? Mobil? So I Googled ‘Honda SAP HANA’ on the basis that 11,000 parts must be something to do with the car and came up with a Honda McLaren story related to SAP and Formula 1.
This looks like a co-branded piece of collateral that talks to different aspects of the SAP HANA story. The problem though is that while glitzy and glossy, I would likely have no idea where to start. SAP Mission Control Online looks interesting but it led me to a blank white screen. I then tried The Perfect Lap. This is a beautifully produced, interactive ebook but it tells me almost nothing in which I would have an interest until I get towards the end.
Even then, what I discover is that rather than supporting the story in the London ad, this is about a system renewal from homegrown to standard SAP running on the Hana Enterprise Cloud. That might be interesting in another time or place but today?
Details are thin on the ground but it starts with HR somewhere around page 14 out of 20, moves on to talk about ERP and finally something in which I might be interested: configuration to order, a well known process that is already live at Harley Davidson. That in itself is interesting but it comes at the end of a rambling 18 pages of content I don’t care so much about.
SAP McLaren – via Honda McLaren site
Where’s the problem here?
I was doing this as an exercise in random discovery yet it took me the thick end of half an hour before I could find anything useful. While there’s nothing wrong with the collateral, it’s so over produced as to be almost useless except as a digital coffee table piece.
What other resources might we find? John Appleby, global head SAP HANA at Bluefin has produced a short book: Building there business case for SAP HANA. Jon Reed, who edited the book has a well received piece on this topic. I’ve read the book and it is full of great examples of business cases. Where it falls short though is in real world hard facts to support the often technically based business case. Yes, there are plenty of quotes from CIOs but none of them talk hard metrics. You know – the ones that will get the check written?
More worrying, I cannot find any of the use cases that would propel me beyond the technical benefits most describe and which would show me things that HANA enables and which would be unimaginable or unthinkable without HANA. Many will argue that is not where the bulk of the SAP user base is at and that is a fair point. If true then it is hardly surprising that it is proving tough to get the stories out.
But that argument utterly misses the one thing that SAP stood for back in the day when it was defining ERP: vision that can be articulated into a well understood roadmap.
In the meantime, I see SAP wasting hundreds of thousands of dollars/euros when it could have a much simpler form of presentation that gets to the nub of the things that match business needs today. I know these stories exist – I’ve seen some of them – albeit often under NDA.  C’mon guys – think this stuff through in a better way. It should not have to end up on the shoulders of SIs.
Image credits: as noted in captions
Disclosure: SAP is a premier partner at time of writing.
Read more on: Analytics planning and data analysisCRM and customer experience 