
Karen Bradley
Government strategies are a bit like buses. You wait over a year for one, then three come along in succession.
Hot on the heels of last year’s Industrial Strategy from Prime Minister Theresa May and the Transformation Strategy from Minister for the Cabinet Office Ben Gummer last month, this morning it was the turn of Karen Bradley, Secretary of State for Culture, Media and Sport, to pitch the government’s Digital Strategy.
How does this latest initiative differ from the other two? Well, clearly it’s to be hoped by not too much. The last thing the UK needs is three different strategies with digital running through them, each pulling in a slightly different direction.
According to Bradley at today’s launch, the intention is to be complementary:
The Government’s new Industrial Strategy will create an economy that works for everyone. It backs business, builds on strengths, and tackles weaknesses. The Digital Strategy is based on the same principles. But, vitally, not only is digital a key sector in its own right, it is central to the success of all other sectors – and central to all our personal lives.
Two main themes leap out from the Digital Strategy on first viewing – the need to skill up the UK population and the need to get a digital economy on solid footing before the Brexit split with the European Union.
On the first of these, the government is promising free digital skills training for all, a pledge that is heavily dependent on the private sector to deliver for it. To that end, deals have been struck with:

Google to launch a summer programme to teach digital skills aimed at boosting tourism and growth in coastal towns.
Lloyds Banking Group to offer face-to-face digital skills training to millions of individuals and businesses.
Barclays to teach basic coding to 45,000 children and general digital skills and cyber-awareness to one million people.
BT to expand the firm’s “Barefoot Computing Project” to a further 500,000 children, and train primary school teachers to teach basic computer science courses.
The HP Foundation to bring a free online learning platform, HP LIFE, to the UK.
Accenture to partner with FutureLearn to offer online lessons in digital skills.

A number of of these had been announced prior to today’s launch of the Digital Strategy and there’s a strong sense of deja vu about a lot of this with confirmations of existing commitments and policy announcements, now bundled into one document.
Bradley gave no clue as to what investment the government plans to make in terms of UK taxpayer-funded programmes to accompany the private sector initiatives. Instead, what we’re talking about here is a “government-led” programme, with lots of stakeholders. The Strategy document says:
We will establish a new Digital Skills Partnership, working together with partners who are passionate about making a difference and who share our ambitions to tackle the digital skills gap. The Partnership will play a crucial role in helping people access digitally-focused jobs at a local level, bringing together technology companies, local businesses, local government and other organisations to identify digital job vacancies and take action to help people move into these jobs.
Two new ‘Forums’ are to be created – one to allow the UK Government to collaborate with the tech community, and the other, to be chaired by Bradley herself, to help businesses get better access to fast broadband. What these will add that existing fora and government/industry organisations do not currently provide is unclear.
On the broadband point, Bradley trotted out the usual claims – “Nine out of 10 premises now have access to superfast broadband” – that make BT’s PR team happy, but don’t stand up to particularly close scrutiny. There were also some unpriced promises – free wifi on trains, for example.
Brexit, Brexit, Brexit
But it’s Brexit that looms large over the whole strategy. Skills can be grown in the UK, of course, but that’s not going to happen overnight and nor frankly is it going to happen to a sufficient degree within a two year window after Article 50 is triggered. So the question of being able to source digital skills from outside the UK remains a critically unanswered question. Today Bradley could only say:
I can assure you that the Government is well aware of the importance that industry places on an immigration policy which enables [businesses] to hire the best talent – both now and after Brexit.
Last month’s immigration statistics show that more than 30,000 Tier 2 workers were sponsored in the Information and Communication sector. Take-up of the Tech Nation Visa Scheme continues to rise. Government has agreed a temporary increase to meet demand for this year, demonstrating our commitment to attracting the brightest and best to come and work in the UK.
We also recognise that digital businesses are concerned about the future status of their current staff who are EU nationals. Securing the status of, and providing certainty to, EU nationals already in the UK and to UK nationals in the EU is one of this Government’s early priorities for the forthcoming negotiations.
With that last point about to be tested to breaking point in the House of Lords, this is about as far as Bradley could go, but it’s a far from satisfactory position. Meanwhile, in terms of the workforce, increased diversity is an aspiration:
As we encourage businesses to embrace digital, we also want to see a more diverse workforce. Just 17% of people who work in the tech sector and only 9.5% of students taking computer science A-level courses are women. We cannot expect to lead the world if we largely ignore half the working population.
Again with an eye on post-Brexit and the need to have new trading relationships in place, five international tech hubs are to be created in emerging markets to create and develop partnerships between UK companies and local tech firms. These hubs are intense to help provide British businesses with a global competitive edge and drive collaboration on skills, innovation, technology, and research and development. The hubs will be based upon the existing UK-Israel Tech Hub.
My take
As we prepare to leave the European Union, our Strategy will create an economy which is resilient to change and fit for the future.
But will it? To be honest, it’s hard to tell as so much of today’s strategy document – and Bradley’s various media appearances and the launch itself – is aspirational, long on some good mission-statements and soundbytes, but short on detail.
The creation of two new talking shops between government and business strikes me as just adding an unnecessary set of organisations into the wider debate. There are plenty of existing organisations that could meet the needs outlined here. As for the broadband forum, this will only serve a purpose if Bradley and her department are prepared to use to shake up BT’s grip on the country’s infrastructure. I won’t be holding my breath on that.
The focus on skills development is all good and well and I’m not about to criticise any of the individual initiatives – every little helps as they say. But it’s all so piecemeal and fragmented and outsourced to the private sector. There are some good words about educational initiatives that the government can accelerate, but outside of those, the Strategy sails dangerously close to handing over skills development to banks and technology companies.
There’s talk of AI and putting more weight behind the UK’s industrial stake in this space, which is welcome and the introduction of new tech hubs is a good idea. I’m less clear as to what the purpose of a “competition” to develop FinTech tools is, other than something that sounds like a headline-grabber, but if it fuels the UK FinTech sector, so be it. (What’s the prize for the competition BTW – and who’s paying for it?)
All told, I come away from the Digital Strategy launch with a decided sense of…meh! There’s nothing to take exception to, but equally very little to inspire. It’s a holding statement of sorts. Or as the strategy document puts it:
This digital strategy is…a first statement in an ongoing conversation between digital businesses and government.
That’s fine. But with Brexit looming, this needs to be a conversation that’s conducted in pretty sharp time and in considerably more detailed terms.
Image credit - DCMSRead more on: Digital government and public services

