
 
The Government Digital Service (GDS) has started to reveal some bits of information about how it plans to reform the much troubled Digital Services Framework (DSF) – most notably, the digital team within the Cabinet Office has decided to haul in the Treasury Solicitor’s Department to help with the framework’s third iteration.
For those unaware, the Treasury Solicitor’s Department, which is set to be rebranded the Government Legal Team, is a 2,000 strong non-ministerial department that provides legal advice across Whitehall. It also has a specialist Commercial Law Group and European law division.
It is likely that the move will be perceived as GDS preparing to stick its neck out with the third iteration of the Digital Services Framework, after the first two iterations have failed to get much engagement from buyers and have caused somewhat of a backlash from the supplier community.
It also indicates that GDS could be preparing to find those all important ‘grey areas’ within EU procurement law, in a similar way that the G-Cloud did, in order to push some boundaries and help buyers get what they need.
It may also spark some alarm that GDS is setting itself up for an uphill struggle against a new legal team and the Crown Commercial Service, which is already involved.
Over the past month or so GDS has come under huge criticism for its lack of progress with the Digital Services Framework. It was widely considered that the first framework was poorly handled and didn’t hit the right note with buyers and suppliers, but it was hoped that second time around that the framework could emulate some of the success of the G-Cloud.
DSF was designed to help get departments the skills and capabilities they needed to build specialist digital products, in a bid to complement the commoditised products available on the G-Cloud. However, it soon became apparent that DSF wasn’t built in a way that got the best out of suppliers, with many digital agencies complaining that it reduced them to nothing more than a cheap body-shop.
Once the backlash got into full-swing, the hashtag #gcloudforever soon emerged on Twitter and grew in popularity, indicating that buyers and suppliers would rather continue purchasing their agile dev services from Lot 4 on the G-Cloud.
GDS had threatened to pull agile from the G-Cloud, but this only angered people further, and it has since temporarily reversed its decision, whilst it figures out how to get DSF right.
The problem is, having agile development services on the G-Cloud could be perceived to be a bit ‘legally dodgy’, given that many of the services aren’t actually cloud related and could be argued to be technically out of scope in terms of EU procurement law.
This is something that GDS hasn’t been particularly keen to highlight – understandably – given that it opens itself up to legal challenges.
I interviewed Tony Singleton, the G-Cloud and DSF’s programme director, shortly after GDS took a battering from the press over its handling over the frameworks. And it became apparent that he was all too aware of the need to get the right agile services on DSF and figure out which ones could stay on G-Cloud. He said:

CCS are coming up with a plan – we don’t want to be in a position when all of a sudden, for those particular services, the public sector has nowhere to buy and suppliers have got nowhere to sell. So we want to look at DSF2 and what comes after that, what suppliers are on that. What’s more important is actually getting that service description right.
So, if its clearly a supplier providing people with a bespoke build of a new digital service – no, that should not be on G-Cloud, that should be on DSF. If it’s someone saying I work in an agile way, and I can do the configuration, give you the support you need, then that’s fine.
So what we are doing now, with CCS, is contacting suppliers and asking them to describe their service a bit better than what it is. And if you’re using ‘agile’ as a verb, that’s fine, but it’s only agile with a capital ‘A’ we are worried about [laughs]. Whatever the service is, it’s a matter of defining what services are in scope and what services are out of scope. I don’t really want to use the word ‘agile’, because it’s more about the bespoke software development builds – they will be moved over DSF or somewhere else.

It has been suggested to me that GDS will do whatever it can to keep as many of those agile services on G-
The man in charge of G-Cloud and DSF, Tony Singleton
Cloud, within the legal boundaries, as buyers seem to be happy procuring those services from that framework.
However, GDS’s blog post today, stating that the Government Legal Team will be part of the DSF creation team, also suggests that GDS wants to do everything it can to not get this wrong.
It also could indicate that DSF is going to do some new innovative things in terms of procurement, which would be exciting for suppliers and buyers, and it wants to protect itself from being exposed to legal threats. What those innovative procurement tools could be is anyone’s guess, but Singleton did tell me in his last interview that DSF3 was going to be a “complete revolution” and “complete revamp” of the entire thing.
The GDS blog post indicates that it held a Digital Services Team workshop this week, and that it is now focusing on user research to validate the following themes:

Buyer needs for the delivery of digital projects
How suppliers feel they can best meet those needs
The level of trust, evaluation and support that buyers expect and want
Other similar frameworks in the public and private sector

However, unfortunately, we are unlikely to hear much more until after the 7 May election, as the Civil Service has to keep communications to a minimum during the pre-election period. GDS has said that once this period is over it will be regularly talking about its progress and looking for feedback – if its objectives haven’t changed under new leadership, that is.
My take
I am keen to take the inclusion of the Government Legal Team as a positive step – as long as GDS is doing it because they think they are going to be doing some bold and innovative things with procurement. If it is planning to use the legal team as a control for pushing the boundaries, that’s great news.
However, what we don’t want is the Government Legal Team being yet another ‘no’ person. GDS already has the Crown Commercial Service for that. If that’s the case then this might well be an uphill struggle, even with the best intentions.
[mailmunch-form id=”14637″]
Read more on: G-Cloud and the Digital Marketplace

