
Rebecca Kemp
People-related issues came to the fore as key drivers in establishing cloud-based services when the Think. Cloud for Digital Government conference at London’s QEII Conference Centre turned its attention to case studies of how Government-related cloud service implementations had gone.
According to Rebecca Kemp, now a digital consultant, but formerly Head of Digital Services at UKTI, Deputy Director for Digital at Public Health England
and Head of Assisted Digital Programme at the Government Digital Service, the key factor is to look for the people support you need, while being prepared to do a good deal of groundwork yourself.
The issue here, of course, is that while support may be available the introduction of cloud services is still new enough for some of that support to come in inappropriate forms.
In the case of UKTI, the body that she turned to seek that support was GDS. Her experience shows that there is, as with any body providing advice to any industry sector, a chance that its advice may not fit the plans or goals for the project in question.
So there is a need to have a clear strategy of what the project is intended to deliver well in advance of initiating its development:
There is a fair amount of pre-work that needs to be done to get to the point where you can start procurement. So you need a strategy of delivery. GDS can provide lots of resources and support, but you can’t just take what it tells you and sometimes you can end up with the wrong resources, or over-resourced in places. So you sometime still have to do fair bit of work to get where you want to be.
One of the key people issues is just how open, or otherwise, they are to change. This, she acknowledged, is multi-faceted question which can depend upon the mindset and experience of individuals. As she observed, it can be difficult if you’re a senior leader that hasn’t worked in a digital way. Then, background and experience may make it hard to understand what is really needed as part of a move to a cloud environment.
Start small
Her recommended approach is to start with one small thing, an easily scoped and understandable process that is readily comprehensible. That way, it can be a lever to not see the operation and result, but also see the wider context of how services can fit together.
In this context, good service manuals can be helpful – and an important part of the pre-work – when it comes to getting staff up to speed:
They do need to have a lot of content, a good depth of information, These can provide non-digital people with a way in to working in a cloud environment quickly and easily. There will always be times when a lot of explanation will be needed by staff etc so starting with a small thing and having good service manuals will make it easier.
There has, of course, been considerable focus on Whitehall skills shortages recently, the result of decades of outsourcing,  and Kemp acknowledged this is a problem area. This also makes it important that project leaders work to get the mindset of staff into the right place.
According to Kemp, the issue is less about availability of skills and more about their application in practice. Here, she suggested, it is important to get people into the right frame of mind. This means project leaders need to be able to give them clarity about what is being delivered and why, while bringing the concepts of business and operational agility into the mindset. In essence, there is a need to get the focus ‘right’.
She did observe that there is a need for GDS to be more collaborative with other departments and staff, working in a more joined up and shared way.
Her ‘top tips’ for being more successful with Cloud projects, especially in Government applications, include finding the way for everyone involved – from the project leaders down – to get the support and mentoring they need. Next, she said, any team must be clear about what it is delivering and where it can make most impact. Finally, she suggested it was important to be kind and generous to and with the other people on the team:
Most people are not trying to block you, they are just trying to do what they think is right.
Read more on: Digital government and public servicesG-Cloud and the Digital MarketplaceUse cases

