
 This digital strategy is…a first statement in an ongoing conversation between digital businesses and government.
That’s one of the concluding comments from today’s Digital Strategy launch by Karen Bradley, Secretary of State at the Department of Culture, Media and Sports. Bradley said:
This is a Digital Strategy that is rooted in the Government’s plan for a country that works for everyone…It contains ambitious plans for infrastructure, connectivity, skills, business, safety and security, online government services, and data – guided by experts, underpinned by investment, and led by a Government that will work with industry to address challenges and build on existing strengths.
This will be a joint effort, and this strategy is just the start. I am looking forward to chairing a new Digital Economy Council, working side by side with all of you in the tech community to make our digital economy both stronger and fairer.
So what reaction has this latest strategy generated, both from the tech sector and from the wider business community in the UK? For its part, the government secured some supportive commentary from a number of companies that are cited in the strategy document as taking part in specific initiatives. For example, Ronan Harris, Google Managing Director UK & Ireland, said:
We believe that digital can have a transformative impact, no matter where you live and what your job is. Everyone deserves access to the tools and opportunities the web has to offer and that is why we welcome the Government’s timely Digital Strategy which ensures the benefits of the digital economy are spread across the country.
Meanwhile Josh Hardie, Deputy Director-General at the Confederation of British Industry, produced a mission-statement of:
UK companies are at the forefront of the digital revolution. The pledges announced by the Government underline businesses’ commitment to build the skills we need for a modern economy, as well as tackle barriers to technology adoption. To uphold our position as a world-leading digital economy businesses, we and the Government need to work together – the strategy’s focus on skills, connectivity and innovation provide a useful framework for this.
Time to engage
Antony Walker, deputy CEO of industry lobby group techUK, is more robust in his critique:
This Digital Strategy is…both ambitious and comprehensive, and most importantly, it recognises how strategically important our digital know-how is for the rest of the UK economy. This all about making sure that businesses and people across the UK can benefit from our global leadership in tech.
Walker picks up on the skills aspect of the strategy:
UK tech faces a triple hit on digital skills: the UK’s domestic digital skills pipeline still isn’t strong enough to meet the growing demand for digital skill, and skilled workers from both the EU and non-EEA countries face tighter restrictions in the near future. While the Strategy places skills at its core, establishing a new Digital Skills Partnership, the UK’s digital economy will suffer if it cannot access international talent in the near term.
To realise the Government’s ambition to be a global tech hub, the UK must be a global hub for talent. techUK will hold the Secretary of State to her commitment to working in tandem with the Industrial Strategy to provide the UK’s digital economy with the global talent it needs to flourish.
Gavin Mee, Senior Vice President and UK Managing Director at Salesforce, applauded the skills focus. Salesforce offers its own Trailhead scheme that offers free tech skills training. There needs to be more of this from the private sector, says Mee:
We welcome today’s announcement of the Government’s Digital Strategy and applaud the focus on skills. Private sector also has a role to play to help address the digital skills issue from all angles. The entire digital sector has a responsibility and big interest in arming both the current and future generation with the skills needed to drive the UK’s digital economy forward. Everyone has the potential to use technology to solve business issues, regardless of age or industry.
For UK public sector supplier UKCloud, the Digital Strategy’s ambitions are in the right direction, but will need businesses and government to engage to deliver on those. CEO Simon Hansford says:
We welcome the Government’s commitment to protect and grow its flourishing digital economy. While Britain is a world leader, there is no room for complacency, and we are facing significant challenges – none more so than ensuring that Britain has the skills it needs to stay at the forefront of the digital revolution.
This strategy lays the foundations for an exciting period of growth and opportunity, and is a great opportunity for government and industry to work together to optimise digital’s economic and social value for the benefit of the country. Fostering innovation, building a world-class skill base, and a establishing s framework that supports start-ups and business growth are not going to be optional for Britain.
We have to get behind this strategy, and play our parts – whether large or small – in making it reality.
My take
That last point from Hansford seems critical. In an earlier article, I questioned the aspirational nature of much of the strategy document. The government talks a lot about the need to work with the private sector to deliver on its ambitions. That’s a statement of intent that businesses in the UK, both tech sector and beyond, need to meet head-on and engage with. The devil’s in the detail and I’m coming away from today’s strategy publication with a clear vibe that the government’s looking to industry to fill in the blanks on a lot of this. That needs to be seen as an opportunity, particularly for UK firms. Step up and make yourselves heard. If you don’t, then don’t complain in a few years time when the post-Brexit digital strategy has a Californian-twang!
Image credit - Freeimages.com Disclosure - At time of writing, Salesforce and UKCloud are premier partners of diginomica/government Read more on: Digital government and public services

