
The government is considering launching a new investment fund to support the growth of start-ups in the UK, fearing a loss in access to funds from the European Investment Fund (EIF) after its exit from the European Union.
EIF-backed funds have participated in around £1 billion per year of private equity investment into UK firms between 2014  and 2016.
According to a new consultation released by the Treasury, UK start-ups struggle to reach their potential in the latter stages of investment and growth, falling well short of what is seen in the US and China. The government wants to set up a National Investment Fund to help more young, innovative firms in the UK reach Unicorn status (valued at over $1 billion).
The government has been involved in the promotion of start-ups in the UK, particularly in London, where it helped with the ‘creation’ of the digital and technology hub in Shoreditch, dubbed Tech City. However, it wants to take its involvement further by ‘significantly increasing’ its current financial commitments, particularly focusing on ‘patient financing’, which focuses on long-term returns and gives companies the time and resources to scale.
This is particularly relevant for technology returns, a newly published government consultation, focusing on patient financing, notes:
Only some firms need patient capital to grow to scale. External equity becomes much more important to firms with ambitious plans for growth and those focusing on the commercialisation of technology, where revenues often lag investment significantly. For example, nearly half of high-growth technology firms use external equity finance and external equity investment becomes essential for firms without existing revenues looking to commercialise R&D. These innovative firms have a disproportionate impact on productivity through the new ideas that they commercialise and bring to market.
The consultation notes that there is a disconnect between the UK’s potential and what it achieves. For example, it states that 24% of the Financial Times’ recent analysis of Europe’s top 1000 fastest growing companies are British, compared with 24% from Germany, 19% from Italy and 14% from France.
However, evidence suggests that the UK is lagging behind its potential in the longer term process of scaling up successful start-ups. The report states:
By not realising the economic benefits derived from its strengths in creating start-ups with world-leading ideas, the UK therefore appears to be failing to maximise its potential productivity gains. Consequently, the number of UK firms at the global frontier of productivity is reduced.
The UK underperforms in the creation of ‘unicorn’ firms, i.e. start-ups that reach a $1 billion valuation. While these firms’ short-term valuations do not always reflect their long-term prospects, they can act as a proxy for the amount of underlying investment within individual countries. And, while the UK has more unicorns than other European countries, there are significantly fewer UK unicorns than for the global leaders: 54% are US-based; 23% Chinabased, 4% in India, 4% in the UK, 2% in Germany and 2% in South Korea (May 2017).
Venture capital investment in private firms is currently around £4 billion per year. Comparing this to other countries, if the UK had the same level of investment as the US, total venture capital investment in UK firms would be around £4 billion per year greater.
Focus on the long-term
The consultation explains that investors in the UK often shy away from patient capital, given that the returns are often given over the long-term and that as an asset class, 50% of returns often come from a very small percentage of the original investments. Given that UK investors typically make on investment every two years, compared two investments a year in the US, this has resulted in a lack of experience in and expertise in selecting high potential funds.
The Autumn Statement 2016 included a government commitment for £400 million of new investment in venture capital funds over the next four years, but the government now states that there is a “strong case that [it] should seek to crowd in new investment significantly beyond this commitment”. It added:
First, the government should be ready to replace some investment currently made by the European Investment Fund (EIF) if the EIF is no longer an investor in the UK. Second, although important, it is clear that the EIF’s current level of activity in the UK is not sufficient by itself to meet the identified need for patient capital. Third, there is a strong case to address wider gaps in the market that are not currently supported by the EIF.
The focus is also firmly on competing with the US. The government notes that fewer than 1 in 10 firms that receive seed funding in the UK go on to get fourth round investment, compared to nearly a quarter in the US. It adds that top US firms are also younger than UK firms, again suggesting the US is more effectively growing new businesses into large scale firms. 10 of the UK’s largest 100 listed firms were created after 1975 compared to 19 in the US but only 2 in Europe.
The Treasury today has suggested that a new fund could be set up as a public-private partnership or be placed fully on the government’s balance sheet to be sold off once it has established a sufficient track record.
The consultation is part of the ‘Patient Capital Review’ announced by the Prime Minister in November 2016, to strengthen the UK as a place where innovative firms can obtain the long-term ‘patient’ finance they need to scale up. The Patient Capital Review has drawn on an advisory panel of industry experts.
Chancellor of the Exchequer, Phillip Hammond said:
Britain is an innovation powerhouse and it’s vital that we make sure our cutting-edge firms have the funding they need to meet their potential and conquer new markets.
Meeting this challenge will boost our productivity and enable us to create more well paid jobs across the UK.
My take
It’s not the first time, and certainly won’t be the last, that we have heard about the government wanting to encourage the long-term growth of start-ups in the UK and how it wants to rival the growth seen by firms in the US. However, for a number of reasons, we still struggle to compete. Things have improved in recent years, but we are still miles off the money we see being thrown around in Silicon Valley. However, the government putting its money where its mouth is – and focusing on long-term growth, as opposed to short-term gains – is promising. A further acknowledgement though that another funding gap will have to be plugged after our exit from the EU.
Image credit - Images free for commercial use Read more on: CentralDigital government and public services

