
As we’ve noted many times before, being a woman in the technology industry has its challenges. Bro-culture and sexism in the workplace are well documented in Silicon Valley and beyond.
Equally, there seems to be a systemic issue in attracting both boys and girls to technology related subjects from an early age.
But a more diverse team is a more creative and open team – one that allows people to be themselves at work. So instead of diversity for diversity’s sake, this is about making the most effective company you can.
And that doesn’t mean women acting more like men (whatever that means), or pretending that they don’t have a family, or being okay with attend networking events at strip clubs. It means companies fully embracing that not everyone is a white male. And accommodating for that so that you get the best out of a bunch of different people with different ideas and approaches.
Yet in the FTSE 100, the fact that boards are now 26% female is hailed as a success story. This number drops to around 20% for the FTSE 250. This is an improvement from the tragic numbers in the early 1990s, but it is still a long way off true equality.
But it appears that the British government is doing what it can to set an example and to show that women can lead on digital and that the talent is there. It’s new Digital Advisory Board, which has been set up to help the Government Digital Service reform public services, is launching with a 50/50 gender split.
Whilst the Civil Service has a pretty strong track record in recruiting women, with over 50% of all employees being female, this number shrinks to about 39% when talking about senior civil servants. That’s still impressive when compared to the FTSE stats, but it’s good to see that a new, high profile digital board is leading the way in gender equality.
It starts early on
 I got the opportunity to speak to Wendy Tan White, who has joined the board, along with other high profile women in tech that include Baroness Lane-Fox and Dr Sue Black OBE. White is an entrepreneur and co-founded Moonfruit, a company that helps people build their own websites. She is also a general partner at Entrepreneur First and a board member of Tech City.
White sold Moonfruit to Yell back in 2012 for £23 million and at that time was considering her options, including a chief digital officer role at the Cabinet Office. She said:
I did a lot of exploring about where I would like to be. Would I like to do another start-up again? Scale up a bigger start-up? Go into a fund? I felt pretty strongly about trying to give something back into the system, rather than just doing another business for myself.
I explored taking on the CDO role in the Cabinet Office at the time and that’s when I got interested in what GDS was doing. I think the government was truly trying to engage about how they could make the digital services offered to the general public better for the modern era.
I decided I wasn’t quite ready to go fully into government, but when the opportunity came up to do the advisory board, it seemed the perfect opportunity to do both.
White explained that both her parents worked in the technology industry and she studied computer science at Imperial College London. She said that when she studied at the university just seven of the 120 students were female, which she described as “very typical”.
And whilst these numbers have since improved, White said she believes that the problem of attracting female talent to technology starts earlier than that. She said:
It’s to do with maths and science, STEM subjects if you like. Most good universities can’t take students for computer science unless they have maths and physics, so it really starts at school level.
I think there is a diverging issue. I think there are less students overall taking maths and science, but there has been a decrease in the percentage of girls going into it too. So I think we need to address it at that point.
White added that pre-1984, prior to the first personal computers, it has been well documented that women made up a big chunk of the technology workforce. Women also made up the majority of code breaker during the second world war. So what’s changed? White said:
I think there is something about the publicity and the media around how this is portrayed, which causes an issue. I’ve got two children myself, an eleven and an eight year old, a boy and a girl, and right now they are both as equally as interested in maths and science. And both as equally as interested in coding and computing. I think something happens to polarise later down the line at school.
Self moderation versus quotas
I was keen to find out White’s views on whether or not companies and governments should set
Wendy Tan White
themselves quotas to try and attract female talent more quickly. This idea has divided people in opinion, with both women and men split on whether the benefits outweigh the chance that recruitment could be skewed because of positive discrimination.
White argued that whilst quotas have been effective in speeding up the process in certain countries, she believes that self-moderation is the more effective route to long-term change. She said:
The UK took a stance to not set quotas around boards, but encouraged the industry to moderate itself and it had a 25% women on boards target, which I think it is getting pretty close to. I think that’s not true across the whole industry. If you take countries where they have put that quota in, what they’ve found is that it has created a ‘norm’. I think sometimes to shift things rapidly, sometimes something like a quota can make a big difference.
Saying that, I think the UK approach through self moderation is probably the best way to go. I’d rather we did it ourselves as a community and an industry than try to quota it, but I think the drive towards it is the right way to go. We are a 50/50 world after all.
So why do we still only see 25% of women at board level in large companies? I asked White whether or not she thought that because girls aren’t attracted to the subject at an early age that this has resulted in a smaller pool of talent higher up the ranks? However, she disagreed, and said that companies need to work harder to find female talent internally. White said:
I don’t think there is a lack of talent. I think the thing that makes the biggest difference is who champions you and sponsors you. What a lot of organisations have found that when they have that sponsorship and mentoring through, they do get to the top positions. I found that myself.
My mentors played a huge part in providing me with confidence and how theses systems work. I think that can make a huge difference. These things generate themselves; the more women on boards, the more will come through over time.
Priorities
White also took a couple of minutes to explain what she hopes the government’s Digital Advisory Board will be able to achieve over the next few years. It is being chaired by GDS director Stephen Foreshew-Cain and is hoped that the private sector experience will help guide the reform of public services into useful digital services for citizens.
White’s main priority is that the board doesn’t become a talking shop and is able to deliver some tangible results. She said:
I think what has been done very well is that there is broad representation from across the digital industry there, everything from venture capital, to social and community, to academia and entrepreneurial. I think the good thing about it is the diversity of experience in the digital economy.
It’s a new board so it needs to get clear on its remit first. But it’s not about general digital policy, it’s about how government can modernise its systems and processes to serve the public better. We need to be very clear about that, I think that’s what we are trying to achieve.
Like most board it’s about getting a clear strategy and how that links to execution. I would very much hope that this is not going to be about more talking at a high level and not getting impacted through a large organisation. That can be tricky, but the will is definitely there from the government to do that.
I’d like to hope that we can get to a good strategic view quickly and kick off with some things that can make a difference quickly. I’d really hope it’s about really making a difference.
Read more on: Digital government and public servicesDigital skills and trainingDiversityHCM and the digital future of work

