
Underpinning every pre-paid card transaction is one key factor: the payer has to be there, operating, no matter what, so that transactions can be processed. Unlike the major credit card operators like MasterCard and Visa, a pre-paid card service provider such as Global Processing Services (GPS) has a very specific time frame – often down to just a few seconds – in which to make that round trip from a customer payment at a POS terminal, through the acquiring network, through the pre-payment service, out to the client and then back again.
If GPS doesn’t reply in time the transaction gets declined, always assuming the customer has not abandoned it already. Essentially, it means the company has to be there 24/7 from an IT systems perspective. The credit card companies are allowed to take a risk on payments if they choose, but having breaks in pre-payment service provision is tantamount to financial suicide.
Overseeing this responsibility at GPS is Lisa Grahame, who joined as Chief Technology Officer for Operational Technology, but has recently been promoted to be the company’s Chief Information Officer. She came from investment banking, which is a high volume/low latency operation, but also one where the markets do close. In the pre-paid card sector there is no concept of markets closing for the night:
When I first joined, the biggest element I had to get my head around was there’s no such thing as ‘off’’ from a system perspective. And in relation to that, one of the things that I wanted was to know that I had in place the monitoring alerting capabilities that we needed at an enterprise level. But in my journey with GPS things have rapidly changed.
Monitoring what is going on in the GPS IT systems is therefore more than a little important, and one of the first things she discovered was that the existing internally generated systems were not what she would have called state of the art.
The cost of maintaining them was expensive, and the company’s ability to respond to change meant they were implementing both the software changes and monitoring and alerting tools. Grahame saw a need to get specialists to provide the latter, especially as they need to know about problems in real time if they are to meet the tight response time limits. This is where AppDynamics became involved.
Monitor faster, deeper, more richly
To Grahame, this was not so much a decision that was forced upon the company, but more a challenge to keep up with. It was a way to get ahead of a key trend in the fintech sector – the faster processes can be completed the greater the chance of generating more revenue and profits through the ability to provide customers, and their users, with a good service. The side benefit was that it has also given the company an important promotional asset to exploit:
It was a forward-thinking investment on our part. Over the last 18 months we’ve built multiple dashboards – we’ve now got a very clear view of the operations. We’re getting more and more granular within it in terms of the information and we’re not just using it as a monitoring and alerting product but also for development and product improvement. The development team are engaging with it now. We’ve gone through a transformation and change internally. Think of it as a small fintech organisation where change is quite it’s slow at first and then it ramps.
Her team has not thrown the old monitoring systems away but instead built incrementally on top of that. They are now starting to generate what she calls ‘summary of views’ dashboards and even quickly putting together demos of monitoring processes for both customers and her team.
The key for Grahame is to empower the team, particularly as it is now split between the UK and India. The AppDynamics tools provide the framework that operates over both sites allowing thoughts and ideas to be shared between them. This is particularly important when it comes to raising new requirements for what functions need monitoring or what new reports need to be generated.
This has also allowed her team to be transparent with its clients about the monitoring improvements and the investment being made from a multi-year perspective:
I have a vision of where I want to take this and how I want to expose it. There’s no reason I can’t expose client-visible perspectives on this data. There are multiple use cases that we can see around the data and how we can leverage it. For me having a strong capability to drill down and identify the root cause of an issue, and do it effectively, is the foundation and we are using it now in relation to talking publicly.
There are several side-benefits to the generation of multiple dashboards and the ability to drill down from them into the data without affecting any of the production processes. One such is in on-boarding new staff. The dashboards, coupled with example drill downs, go a long way to explaining complexities in the system, allowing new staff to come up to speed faster. Grahame has found that running them through real use cases and examples allows them to move quickly from the use case to being productive in the live environment:
We are growing the use in development and I now hear developers asking, ‘what does AppDynamic say?’. That, in its own right, is kudos. That it means they’re not trying to write the query themselves, they’re not trying to look at the logs manually.
Bridging that infernal gap ‘twixt tech and biz
It is also helping bridge the gap between the business and technology sides of the company, for the dashboards can be streamed to any number of wall-mounted displays so that each `camp’ can see the results achieved by the other. Evidence of the growing importance of this was that, when the company moved offices recently, one of the encouraging problems to be faced was just how many screens would be needed and where they were required.
Grahame found that the business side wanted the same visibility on operations as provided to technology team. And there is a realisation amongst the latter that having a view into that technology isn’t just for technology’ sake.
Her next step will be to the next level of abstraction – duplex the communication by taking that operational data and presenting it in a business-related format. This is already happening in the form of KPIs for board reporting and she sees no reason why it cannot be extended:
It is part of making a business real, especially in an environment like ours. It is not just how many authorisations are we processing, it’s really about how much money is moving. It is about making it real for people and how it equates back to our client base. But the good thing is that everybody in our technology side is starting to get on this journey. Our production team are embedded in it, our Development Team are. Culturally for me its let’s all move forward as one. And there’s also this excitement about using something new. There’s excitement about something that creates that tangible, visible thing that is meaningful.
A third benefit, which may well coincide with her initial consideration of how AI may fit into the picture, is the potential for not only drilling down into a current process but also drilling back into the extensive – and growing – repository of operational data. This could prove particularly useful when examining historical use cases and could help avoid `re-inventing wheels’ when it comes to building new custom software modules.
Finally, there is that factor of closer customer interaction and collaboration:
We’ve had clients coming asking us ‘what are you doing, how are you doing it, when can we get a viewer?’ They are now actively engaging more and wanting to know when the road map to those things comes to them, which is really positive. They’re asking us about support and service capabilities, which is different. We have also had conversations around, ‘if we did this would it help you?’. Now we’re able to do some analytics, look at it differently and say, ‘we noticed this, could we do this and would it help you if we did x y and z’? For the first time we’re able to proactively identify change rather than it being client driven.
My take
A good example of how monitoring and alerting are not really at the boring and mundane end of all the techie stuff, but rather are the essential feedstock that gives clear insight into just what hell is going on (especially when it is going wrong) and creates the basis for unification between ever-hostile tribes of tech and business. It is interesting to speculate what might happen within many businesses if both those camps understood how they were actually on the same side and could learn to pull together.
Image credit - Mobile banking, financial success, accounting and electronic internet money payments business concept: macro view of stack of credit cards and modern touchscreen smartphone on office laptop keyboard with selective focus effectRead more on: Analytics planning and data analysisDigital enterprise in the real worldFinancial services and fintechFintech 