
Earlier this month, an ad appeared on classifieds site Gumtree, offering for sale an engagement ring with just one previous owner: “Satan”.
A snip at just £150, the ring is clearly the last vestige of an acrimonious break-up. Its seller, meanwhile, is the jilted suitor, who describes himself as:
a simple, quiet, reserved and generous gentleman.
While simultaneously portraying his ‘satanic’ ex in rather less-flattering terms and the ring as:
Size Fat.
Some gentleman, huh?
Whatever the circumstances – for better, for worse, for richer, for poorer – eBay-owned Gumtree is on a mission to make selling and buying items on the site as fast and convenient as possible, especially for those using mobile devices.
According to Bas Anneveld, CTO at Gumtree, these mobile users make up a growing proportion of Gumtree users, but recently, there’s been a concern at the company that its Android app wasn’t keeping pace in terms of features and functions with the growing number of Android users in the UK.
(As of January 2017, the Android OS UK market share was around 54.4%, compared to 43.3% for iOS, according to figures from Kantar WorldPanel.)
That makes Android the single biggest opportunity Gumtree has for growth in 2017 and beyond, says Anneveld. Last year, his development team set about completely redeveloping the Android app, and in particular, focusing on ‘posting flow’ – the steps a seller takes to get an item (a returned engagement ring, for example) up on site. On the new app, he says, it takes less than 30 seconds: you take a photo of the item, put some text around it, post.
But Android is just one piece of the mobile puzzle. There’s also an iOS app to consider, plus a responsive website for more occasional mobile Gumtree users who don’t feel the need to download the apps and, at the back end, a large, rather monolithic legacy platform for both desktop and mobile which will soon be broken up into more convenient microservices in the mission to speed up development times.
Bedding in
Either way, it’s a lot of pressure for Anneveld’s development team and, in response, he’s reorganizing their efforts along new lines, a process that has just begun but has yet to truly ‘bed in’ at the company. He says:
We’re transitioning our way of working, from being roadmap-driven, like many companies in the UK, to being more objective-driven. What does that mean? Well, rather than organize our development resources around one, big product development roadmap, we’re instead organizing development teams into ‘squads’ and each squad is given a ‘problem statement’ and ‘key results’ as their framework.
A squad’s problem statement, for example, might be a 5% year-on-year decrease in email replies between buyers and sellers in a specific Gumtree category – for example, bicycles. The squad’s objective would be to fix that decline, and their key results might be to lift email reply rates from a 5% decline to flat in three months, and then from flat to a 5% lift over the next three months.
The answer to this problem, meanwhile, might lie in push notifications from the mobile app that alerts buyers to emails from sellers (and vice versa) that need a response – but testing hypotheses with a volunteer audience of customers always happens early on in the process.
It’s important to note, however, that developers aren’t the only ones on a squad. These are cross-functional teams, in which around half of the ten to twelve members are technologists, one is a business analyst, one is a product manager, one is a designer and the rest are a mix of non-technical people from the business, such as marketing managers or customer services staff, depending on the individual squad’s objective.
That stops squads from getting trapped in ‘classic developer thinking’ by bringing in new perspectives on changing consumer behaviours and company-wide goals, says Anneveld. It’s still early days for this new way of working, he adds:
We’ve only just started with this, so the process isn’t completely clear yet, but we’re working on the idea of quarterly objectives, although it might be that we redefine an objective for further work in a following quarter – because in some cases, three months isn’t very long to drive a substantial behavioural change.
Right now, people are super-enthusiastic about getting involved. Developers have been more used to being on the receiving end of instructions from the business and now they’re getting involved right from the start.
The biggest job for us as a leadership team will come a couple of months from now when some of that excitement wears off and we start to face some headwind. We’ll need to be persistent and show that we’ll continue to work in this new way, rather than return to old ways of working.
But, he adds, the Gumtree development team have benefited from a great deal of cheerleading, knowledge-sharing and mentoring from teams already working this way at EBay’s Classified Group – and will continue to do so.
The main thing that we’re aiming to achieve is that we release functionality faster to customers, but more importantly, it’s functionality that we’ve already had a conversation about with customers and which they’ve told us they want or need to use.
Image credit - GumtreeRead more on: Collaboration sharing and digital productivityDevOps NoSQL and the open source stacke-commerceUse cases 