
A wily move to appoint Christopher Wylie?
It’s hardly unknown for a fashion retailer to sign up a high profile figure to produce their own collections or to front new design pushes on social media platforms. It’s maybe a bit more of a left-field decision to recruit the whistleblower who kicked off the Cambridge Analytica expose last year, but that’s precisely what H&M has just done.
The beleagured Swedish outfit has signed up Christopher Wylie on a consultancy contract as Research Director, with a brief to:
help H&M Group improve its capabilities within consumer, product and market insights. Besides that, he also supports our work on sustainable and ethical AI.
Actually Wylie’s a pretty savvy catch when you look into his background. Prior to his time at Cambridge Analytica he worked as a fashion trends forecaster, which is basically what he’s going to do for H&M. He told reporters in Sweden:
If you better understand what people like to wear, and how they like to wear it, and how they want to feel when they’re wearing it, you’ll naturally start to create insights as to modernizing and updating your collection.
In other words, he’s going to tap into data from the 30 million worldwide members of the H&M Club loyalty program and based on his analysis, deliver the retailer sufficient insights to avoid it repeating the situation it found itself in last year when it needed to stage a massive ‘fire sales’ to try to get rid of unsold inventory.
That’s the theory at any rate. There’s a lot at stake here as well. The Swedish firm just turned in another set of poor quarterly and full year numbers that will do nothing to convince investors that the much-vaunted transformation program is having much impact.
That said, there are a few encouraging signs amid the red ink, not least a 22% year-on-year increase in digital sales, taking online revenues to SEK 30 billion or 14.5% of total sales. That digital growth is balancing out the decline of the physical stores revenue in some key markets. For example, in the UK, a 38% year-on-year online rise offset a one percent decline in store, leading to the region claiming overall growth of 8%.
Hand-waving
But arithmetical hand-waving can’t conceal the ongoing omni-channel problems that the retailer has and needs to address more urgently than it has demonstrated to date.
While CEO Karl-Johan Persson cites rollouts of initiatives like Click-and-Collect and one day delivery, the harsh reality is that some of these 2019 retail essentials are only an option in as few as 7 of the 47 markets in which H&M operates.
With that in mind, there is one important milestone that’s just been passed which is to get German stores – H&M’s biggest market – up-and-running on the firm’s new global online platform. Persson clearly sees this as a major achievement:
When it comes to our tech and IT infrastructure, here we invest a lot, and this has made it possible for us to complete the transition of online globally to our new online platform. Last week we successfully transferred online in Germany, which is our largest market and this means that now all H&M’s 47 online markets are now on the new platform, which will enable further improvements of the shopping experience for our customers.
It’s not for want of spending that H&M remains in the omni-channel slow lane – around 60% of CapEx goes on digital projects and the ‘to do’ list is ticking the right boxes. Underway at present:

Upgrading of hm.com and H&M’s mobile app with improved navigation and product presentation as well as more payment options to enhance the customer offering:
Image search is being rolled out and is now available in 29 markets, providing image recognition functionality to help customers move directly from inspiration to purchase.
Next day delivery is available in 11 markets including Germany, USA, UK and Sweden, while same day delivery will be launched in a further 6 or 7 markets in 2019.
A VR app called Perfect Fit is being trialed in Sweden which allows customers to try on items virtually and shop via the mobile site or via the app.
In partnership with Google, H&M Home has developed a voice app called H&M Home Gift Guide, which allows customers to make a purchase entirely through the voice app.
Find-in-Store is now in 18 markets and lets customers use their mobile device to find an item they have seen online in the right size and at the right store.
Scan & Buy is available in all 47 online markets allowing customers to scan the QR code on an item in store to find the size and colour they want online.
In-Store mode is available in Sweden, Denmark, UK and Ireland, showing customers which items are in the store they are currently in as well as online.
As noted above, Click-and-Collect is available in 7 markets, with a further 10 planned for 2019, leaving 30 more without the option.
Online returns in store is now available in 15 markets and to be rolled out to “several more markets” in 2019.
Behind the scenes, 3D technology is now used in the design process for several product groups to deliver cost and time savings as well as less material being used.

But the stores remain the elephant in the room. And an elephant that needs better integration with online to create the elusive omni-channel balance. Persson says:
We’re also working hard to further improve the shopping experience for the H&M in the physical stores, as well as online…If we look at the shopping experience online, we’re making improvements to the dot com sites and our mobile app where we have made improvements in terms of stability and speed. We’re also improving in terms of navigation, product presentation, improved delivery times and new payment options just to mention a few examples. Then we are also working hard when it comes to further integrating the online and the physical stores. We are improving and rolling out features like returns in-store, Click & Collect, online purchases in-store, our In-Store mode, just to mention a few examples.
All of which is great – if you happen to be in one of the handful of markets that is open to such features.
As for that unwanted inventory, that’s a logistics and supply chain management shortcoming that is being addressed, according to Persson:
When it comes to improving the supply chain, we continue to invest a lot in the supply chain. One example of that is our investment in new fulfilment centers. We have opened three new fulfilment centers…Together they add a total of two 230,000 square meters of logistics area. We have also automated our logistics center in Poznan in Poland. Good improvements from this will release the capacity constraints that we have had before during the year, especially during the second half of the year and also in the first quarter and also enable a range of other improvements for our customers. For example faster deliveries in a number of European markets, including Germany. Further ahead towards the end of the year, we will also open two more fulfilment centers one in Madrid and one in London.
There’s also – inevitably – an AI angle, which brings Wylie’s appointment back to center stage. Persson argues:
When it comes to the product flow as well, AI is becoming an increasingly important tool for us and thanks to our vertically integrated business model. We can build – we can build AI models with algorithms designed to address various parts of the product flow from trend detection to quantification, allocation, pricing to mention a few examples…the AI initiatives will help us as well when it comes to being more precise in how we buy, how we quantify and allocate the product.
My take
All the right words and spending that’s focused on some critically-important areas, but H&M is so behind the curve on omni-channel that a rapid acceleration is badly needed. Persson inevitably argues that some of the “challenges” in transition and transformation that H&M faced in 2018 have provided learnings that will avoid a repetition in 2019 and beyond. That being so, he needs to be considerably more ambitious in the scaling up of roll-out. For a retailer with a primarily young and fickle demographic in 2019 to present the fact that it can now offer Click-and-Collect in 7 of its 47 operating markets as an achievement tells the story of how H&M got into its current mess.
Image credit - H&MRead more on: Analytics planning and data analysisCRM and customer experienceDigital and content marketingInfrastructureRetail e-commerce and the omni-channelSocial 