
The H&M Group’s world is much more complex today compared to five. ten years ago.
On the face of it, that’s the proverbial statment of the obvious from Karl-Johan Persson, CEO of the fashion retailer. But it’s indicative of the dilemma that the chain faces. While on the one hand, it’s caused ripples in the European and US fashion retail sectors, putting pressure on the likes of GAP for example, it’s not immune to the challenges of the omni-channel world. Persson says:
As we all know, fashion retail is going through a big shift, with increased digitalization and rapidly changing customer behavior, where more and more shopping is moving online. Like most companies, we see this in our business as well. Our online sales continued to develop very well. Growth is fast and profitable. In some established markets, online already represent 25% to 30% of sales.
Looking ahead, we estimate that online sales of the H&M Group will grow by at least 25% per year. Based on the potential we see, we will broaden our online assortment considerably in the coming years. In parallel, we continue to develop the functions and capabilities of our online store, and this includes, for example, navigation, improved checkout and personalization. We also see that our digital features, such as image recognition, #HM Gallery and My Style, are being well-received by customers.
That’s all positive news then? Well, yes…but there’s an uncomfortable downside, as Persson admits:
Even though we have good online growth, it did not fully compensate for the decline in footfall to stores in several of our establish markets. Therefore, total sales so far this year have not reached our targets.
So what’s to be done? The answer to that is the pursuit of what Persson calls “seamless shopping” as an H&M goal:
We have an omni-channel strategy, meaning that we are integrating our stores and digital platforms in order to create a seamless shopping experience across our channels. After many years of investing in infrastructure, we are now able to implement a lot of good things for our customers. We are rolling out and improving omni-features, such as click & collect, scan & buy, online returns in stores, mobile payments and many other services.
To really make shopping more convenient for our customers, we are putting a lot of work also into improving delivery services. We are improving standard deliveries. We are introducing next-day deliveries in more markets. We are testing same-day deliveries, testing 1-hour deliveries and also time-slot deliveries, which we have rolled out in some markets.
There are also big plans to expand the online footprint globally, adds Persson:
This year alone, we are opening eight new online markets, which means that we would be in 43 H&M online markets by the year-end. Expansion will continue to more markets next year, including the launch of H&M online in India. Further ahead, we plan to offer online shopping in all our store markets and in other markets too.
Stores and tech
None of this is to say that the focus is entirely online. H&M’s store network remains a priority:
We will have a big focus on continuing to broaden the assortment online and to expand with online stores. We have a very healthy online business, and it’s growing a lot and we see fantastic opportunities to continue to develop there as well. But we also believe in physical stores, as we said earlier.
We still have a strong belief in expanding with physical stores. The new stores that we are opening are doing well, profitable, good payoff times and good conditions. So we will continue to expand the physical stores, but the main focus will be on new markets and growth markets. In more established markets, especially now with the shift going on in the industry, which is quicker than I think most people anticipated, we have to be even more disciplined with the expansion and also to work more actively with the existing store portfolio in some of the existing markets.
In parallel to developing our online stores, we are also testing new visual expressions and digital solutions to create a more inspiring and seamless experience in our physical stores. In a growing and rapidly changing market, we see many opportunities for future expansion. Our plans include expanding digitally as well as through new stores and by – but also by optimizing our store portfolio.
To support that ambition, there’s going to be some seriosu tech investment to drive the internal rebalancing that’s required operationally, adds Persson:
The H&M Group has grown quickly, and the world around us has become increasingly complex compared to a few years ago. As a consequence, we must continue to change our internal processes to become faster, more flexible and more efficient. And therefore, we continue to invest in new technology such as advanced analytics. Advanced analytics and other tools will enable us to improve in areas such as quantification, allocation of products, pricing, design and personalized communication.
A roll out of RFID tech across the store real estate is also on the cards for next year:
We will not have all stores with RFID in 2018, but many stores, it will be rolled out to, and then the rollout will continue during 2019. It will help us to ensure that we have good size availability in stores. It will also lead that we can – and at the same time, have less articles, less spaces in the stores, raising the quality of the stores. It will also help in the whole supply chain, connected back to what we spoke about earlier, ensuring that we can have a leaner inventory level.
Leaner and faster are two key concepts for the back end of the H&M operation. Persson explains:
Digitalization will speed up our buying, allow us to shorter lead times and connected to that, increased precision in our assortment planning. As a result, we see potential to reduce the inventory level going forward. The effects, however, won’t come overnight as this work will bear fruit gradually.
Automatization will help to improve to speed up the supply chain. And then we are changing our internal buying processes, so we’re changing that. We’re stepping up production capabilities across the world to make sure that we can shorten lead times. And then we are investing a lot in advanced analytics. That will mean that we can quantify with much more – much better precision and also allocate with much better precision. So all these things in combination will mean big improvements when it comes to better precision, more flexibility and speedier buying.
That said, Persson concludes that this is all a journey where, even if there is a general destination in mind, it’s very much a step-by-step process:
Where we will end up, it’s very hard to say, but we know it will improve.
My take
One of the issues that H&M has faced of late is accusations from investors about lack of transparency. Its reluctance to drill down into data about the current and future online v offline expectations is seen as a case in point. Joacim Olsson, chief executive of the Swedish Shareholders Association, told the Financial Times last week:
H&M has not been sufficiently transparent in its information to shareholders. There are several examples of this, and the most obvious is their unwillingness to tell the market about how ecommerce develops in general and in different markets, and what margins they have in this part of the company. The fact that H&M gives very scarce information about its ecommerce development creates suspicion about how bad it really is. Growth by 25 per cent does not impress and does not say anything as long as H&M does not communicate the total volume.
That’s got to change – and there are some signs that it is – but it could end up being the case that the biggest omni-channel challenge that H&M faces is its own internal culture.
Image credit - H&MRead more on: Retail e-commerce and the omni-channel 