
Taking the Pledge
Tomorrow (Saturday 7 May) diginomica celebrates its third birthday. This year to mark the anniversary, we’re giving, not receiving, a gift. 
Over the years, we’ve covered the philanthropic efforts of the likes of Salesforce, Google and most recently Sage, with their 1/1/1 initiatives (or 2/2/2 in the case of Sage). These have been highly-laudable programs and indicative of a healthy new set mindset of social responsibility in the digital economy. 
Here at diginomica, we’ve made various philanthropic donations on an ad hoc basis over the lifetime of the company, but as we enter our fourth year, we’re putting that on a more formal basis by becoming a signatory to Pledge 1%. 
Pledge 1% is an effort spearheaded by Atlassian, Entrepreneurs Foundation of Colorado, Rally for Impact, Salesforce.org and Tides to accelerate a shared vision around integrating philanthropy into businesses around the world. Pledge 1% encourages and challenges individuals and companies to pledge 1% of equity, product and employee time for their communities.
We’re very pleased to be the first pureplay business technology media organization to sign up to Pledge 1% and hope that more businesses in our market will follow our lead.
Amy Lesnick, chief executive of Pledge 1%, says:

We are incredibly excited that diginomica has taken the pledge. [It means] diginomica can play a pivotal role in building this movement and promoting a new normal in which all companies—big and small—integrate giving back as a core value in their business.

Suzanne DiBianca, EVP of Corporate Relations and Chief Philanthropy Officer, Salesforce, adds:

We’re excited to have diginomica join the Pledge 1% movement. Diginomica is an international media brand with an incredibly important voice in the technology industry—and we believe that their participation will have incredible impact on inspiring even more media companies to join in and make the world a better place.

Here at diginomica we’ve been proud to take progressive leads in areas such as gender, racial and sexual equality, and to support digital leaders and organizations in their positive actions around these. See Phil’s excellent article explaining our philosophy – Why does a tech media site have a focus on diversity?
With that in mind, we’ll be allocating our Pledge 1% financial contribution to charitable initiatives related to education and diversity in London and San Francisco.
From our PoV:

One of the founding principles of diginomica was to disrupt the traditional online media model in favor of one aligned with the digital economy. Philanthropy and a commitment to diversity and social responsibility have been key parts of our business model from the beginning. As we celebrate our third anniversary, diginomica is delighted to sign up to Pledge 1%. We hope our peers will follow in our footsteps.

Our take
This is the right thing to do and we’re doing it. 
If, in the process, we can encourage other media organizations, especially those with deeper pockets than our own, to step up to the mark, so much the better.
In the meantime, as we move into the next phase of our growth, we’re pleased to add our own efforts to the growing social awareness of those driving the digital economy.
Image credit - Pledge 1%Read more on: Digital skills and trainingDiversity 