
Youth unemployment is a big problem in many countries of the world – but in South Africa, the figures are particularly alarming.
According to 2017 figures from the World Bank, a staggering 57% of young people aged 15-24 in South Africa are without work. That puts the country ahead of others with similar, serious problems, including Bosnia and Herzegovina, Swaziland, Oman, Macedonia and Libya.
Non-profit organisation Harambee, a youth employment accelerator, is on a mission to tackle this issue head-on, by working with young people and finding them job opportunities that best suit their skills, preferences and locations.
In Swahili, Harambee means “all pull together”, reflecting the African tradition of community self-help, and the non-profit means to support this ethos through some interesting uses of sophisticated cloud-based technologies from Google Cloud. Already, the organization has notched up some impressive results, according to Harambee CIO Evan Jones:
Seven years on since we started, we’ve now got six hubs across South Africa. We’ve had 1.3 million young people register with us. We’ve had 350,000 come through some sort of intervention with us. And we’ve placed 55,000 young people with 450 very reputable employers.
These candidates have been placed in retail stores, call centres, coffee shops and cruise ships, among others. Plus, says Jones:
Through some of our innovative assessments, we’ve been able to identify candidates in our network who show particularly high levels of fluid intelligence and cognitive ability, but lack of schooling certification, enabling us to branch out into software development, data analysis.
All together now
Demand among job seekers for Harambee’s services is generated in two key ways: via in-person visits with community and church leaders, and through its mobile sites. Through these routes, jobseekers join the Harambee candidate network, after filling in an online questionnaire that is used to build a profile of them and subsequently to match candidates with vacancies. The data is added to in a short follow-up phone call to a jobseeker from a member of Harambee’s team.
This is where the cloud platform that Harambee has built on Google Cloud comes into play. Since April last year, Harambee has rebuilt its operational platform here, keeping one eye firmly on the possibility of scaling to other African countries – and beyond – in the years ahead. According to Navid Erfani, Harambee’s enterprise architect:
In the first seven years, we spent a lot of time in manual effort on a legacy, on-premise platform with a lot of aggregation of data and manipulation of data in Excel. We were very much tied down by this set-up and it was a lot of effort. That was when we were just growing up. But we needed to rethink the technology. 
Working with Google Cloud partner DotModus, Harambee has used the Google Cloud App Engine environment to develop and host its web and mobile apps, in which instances run within Docker containers on Compute Engine virtual machines, explains Navid Erfani, Harambee’s enterprise architect. Data, meanwhile, is stored on Google Cloud Storage and in MySQL databases on the Cloud SQL service.
Deep data dives
The operational side is important, of course, but it’s the analytic capabilities that Google Cloud offers that could truly make the difference in Harambee’s ability to scale the work it’s doing for unemployed young people.
To analyze large data sets, Harambee now uses Google Cloud’s BigQuery and Google Data Studio. It also uses Google Maps Platform to help calculate the distance between jobseekers and prospective employers, so that candidates can be matched to jobs they can easily reach on a day-to-day basis. When employment opportunities arise in a given area, Harambee runs algorithms that extract location coordinates from all nearby candidates and calculates their potential commutes.
Harambee is also using machine learning to predict behaviours among candidates, including identifying those who are most likely to leave a job within the first year of employment. Transportation plays a big role here, of course, but Harambee also wants to promote candidates whose track records point to long-lasting relationships with employers. With this in mind, it has used TensorFlow models on the Google Cloud to pinpoint potential star performers as well as those at risk of leaving the workforce, says Erfani:
In terms of analytics, we’re now taking a lot more opportunities now to study candidates, and to ascertain what makes them successful in a particular role or at a particular place of work. We have an emerging competence for machine learning and it’s really helping us to understand these attributes.
TensorFlow allows us to do much of the bespoke models involved, but there are also pre-trained models there to help us, too. And in the geo space, we’re also quite interested in using some more aspects of BigQuery, because that will feed our calculations still further, making them even more efficient.
But above all, Harambee is building a model that could be exported to other regions suffering from youth unemployment. Says Jones:
Just this morning I had a long call with the Ministry of Communications in Egypt, asking whether we could bring our model there. And a few months ago, we had people in our office asking if we could take our model to North America. This isn’t just a South African question. It’s a global question – and it’s asked frequently. I feel that, Harambee, we’re building a good answer to that question.
 
Image credit - Harambee Read more on: Cloud platforms - infrastructure and architectureDigital enterprise in the real worldUse cases 