
Are we all becoming so dependent on our digital devices that we’re developing pudding brains? According to some headline grabbing research, that’s increasingly the case – and Google’s getting blamed for it.
In a survey of 1,000 people aged 16 or older in the US, researchers at Kaspersky Lab found that people increasingly rely on their devices for information and seem lost without digital assistance.   So far so obvious. You don’t have a dog and bark yourself.
But what the Kaspersky boffins are claiming is that we’re starting to suffer from ‘digital amnesia’ – AKA the ‘Google effect’. This is characterised as a dependence on digital devices connected to the internet, that has the knock-on effect that leaves most people unable to commit simple information to memory.
The researchers suggest:
The ‘Google Effect’ likely extends beyond online facts to include important personal information. Many consumers are happy to forget, or risk forgetting, information they can easily find — or find again online.
Chris Doggett, managing director of Kaspersky Lab North America, argues:
Connected devices enrich our lives every day, but they have also caused the prevalence of Digital Amnesia in our country. As consumers, it is important for all of us to understand the long term implications of this effect, and why it reinforces the need for us to diligently protect our valuable information and precious memories.
What can you remember?  Source: Kaspersky Lab

To back this up, the researchers wheel out some not entirely convincing evidence. It’s claimed, for example, that 70% of those surveyed couldn’t remember their neighbor’s telephone number. And the conclusion here is what? Not knowing my neighbor’s phone number is nothing to do the fact that I have a smartphone, an iPad and an Apple Watch on me most of the day.
OK, 91% of respondents say they regard the Internet as an online extension of their brain. Fair enough. But only 44% say they rely on their smartphones for information they needed to remember.
More people over the age of 45 said they searched online to find the answer to a question, and more older adults (68.5% compared to 58.7% of young adults) said they didn’t need to remember facts they found online, but only needed to remember where they found them.
The report notes:
Contrary to general perception, it is surprisingly prevalent among older respondents. For example, respondents aged 45 and older are more likely to head straight for the Internet for the answer to a question, and write the fact down or choose to forget an online fact once they’ve used it on the assumption that it will always be out there somewhere.
Global issue
This so-called amnesia isn’t just limited to the US of course. Kaspersky also polled 6,000 people aged 16 and older in six European countries. Here it found that most respondents can’t remember the phone numbers of their children (71%), children’s schools (87%), place of work (57%) or partner (49%).
More than 51% of US and 40% of European respondents (especially women and younger people) say the loss or compromise of data stored on digital devices, and smartphones in particular, would cause immense distress.
Panic attack Source: Kaspersky Lab
Over a quarter of women surveyed in both regions and over 34% of younger respondents say they would panic if they lost their devices.
What is interesting is that close to half of all respondents can still recall their home phone numbers from they were aged between 10 and 15. This apparently means that in the past we were better at remembering the key numbers in our lives, but addiction to digital devices has robbed us of that faculty.
Dr Kathryn Mills, UCL Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience, University College, London, said:
The act of forgetting is not inherently a bad thing. ‘We are beautifully adaptive creatures and we don’t remember everything because it is not to our advantage to do so.  Forgetting becomes unhelpful when it involves losing information that we need to remember.
One of the reasons consumers might be less worried about remembering information is because they have connected devices that they trust.  In many societies, having access to the Internet feels as stable as having access to electricity or running water.
This is a view supported by another academic, Dr Maria Wimber, Lecturer, School of Psychology, University of Birmingham, who states:
Forgetting is in no way a bad thing! Quite the contrary, forgetting is a highly adaptive way to help our memory retain the information that is truly relevant, and get rid of information that is irrelevant. Our brain seems to work under the premise that the things that we frequently use and remember are the things that are truly valuable for us. Our brain appears to strengthen a memory each time we recall it, and at the same time forget irrelevant memories that are distracting us.
This way, we might not be able to remember everything in the long term, but our memory system is adaptive in that it makes sure we remember the most relevant information. There are plenty of memories that have become outdated (e.g. our old bank details as soon as we open a new bank account), or memories we may wish to forget (e.g. traumatic or embarrassing events). In all those instances, our memory becomes more efficient and adaptive because humans are capable of forgetting.
My take
It’s a nice spin on a phenomenon that we can see through the ages. When I was at school, pocket calculators were coming into vogue. Our school wouldn’t let us use them as apparently we’d never learn arithmetic if we could just punch in a calculation. To which my response I recall was if there is a tool that fits in my pocket and can do the job, why wouldn’t I use it? That said, I’m glad in retrospect that the school’s policy was the way it was.
I’ve been less fortunate when it comes to handwriting. I used to have really elegant handwriting, but after 26 years sitting at a computer keyboard nearly every day, it’s now essentially illegible. Have I forgotten how to do decent handwriting because I don’t need to use it every day? Perhaps.
So there’s definitely some merit to this study’s conclusions. The pragmatic reality is that if we want information these days, the first thing we’ll do is look on our phones. The information is there, so why wouldn’t we? But the study’s right to caution on this dependency. It does leave us vulnerable if one day the internet isn’t there.
A few years ago, I was asked to cover for an editor in a newsroom at a magazine I’d once run. I did it as a favor. When I worked there before there was always a lot of noise, with phones ringing all day as reporters chased up stories. This time around there was a library-like silence as everyone hunched over their computers, browsing.
By noon, there were no stories coming in. I asked why? One baby journalist looked at me as though I was stupid. “The internet’s down,” he said. “Well, pick the phone and get some stories.” i said. Now the baby journalist knew that I was stupid. “Who would I call?” he said.
Read more on: Analytics planning and data analysisCRM and customer experienceInternet of Things 