
Good advice for B&N?
It’s traditional to blame pressure from Amazon for the ongoing decline at bookseller Barnes & Noble, but could it really be the fault of Donald Trump? Or Hillary Clinton?
That’s the thesis currently being pitched by company founder Leonard Riggio, who says that the retail sector isn’t in a good pre-US Presidential Election state:

It’s terrible. To better put it, it is more than worse I have ever experienced in 50 years I have been in this industry. 
I believe the current trend can be traced precisely to the current election cycle, which is unprecedented in terms of the fear, anger and frustration being experienced by the public.
The preoccupation with this election is keeping them in home, glued to their TVs and at their desktops. Retail traffic by any measure and across all segments is close to a historic low point.

Hmmm. It’s possible that Trump v Clinton is a contributory factor to economic uncertainty, but it’s not as though Barnes & Noble’s problems began as recently as the current election campaigns kicked off. The mis-steps in strategy – from the ill-fated venture into the Kindle-killer NOOK through to general lack of direction and sophistication in digital thinking and e-commerce – have been well charted. 
The latest twist came last month with the ousting of CEO Ronald Boire, who didn’t last a year in the top job and was canned as being “not a good fit” for the firm. This decision followed a shareholder meeting back in June at which Boire pitched a turnaround strategy that reportedly included the idea of developing in-store restaurants with waiter service as a differentiator. 
So Boire is out and Riggio’s looking for his fifth CEO in four years. In the meantime, the problems continue to mount up. Yesterday’s latest quarterly numbers provide some indication of the scale of the issues: 

Retail sales decreased 6.1% year-on-year to $882 million for the quarter. 
Online sales were down 1.6%. 
NOOK sales decreased 25% to $41 million for the quarter. 
Digital content sales decreased 19%.
Device and accessory sales decreased 37%.

Chief Financial Officer Allen Lindstrom offers a different thesis for the declines, suggesting that as a book seller, Barnes & Noble is dependent on there being new books around that customers want to read: 

The prior year included stronger bestselling titles such as Go Set a Watchman, Grey and What Pet Should I Get?, breakout books such as Girl on the Train and All the Light We Cannot See, and media driven properties.
Sales trends are expected to improve in the back half of the year, which includes a stronger title lineup with new releases from authors such as Bruce Bernstein, Megan Callery J. K. Rowling, Amy Schumer, Joel Osteen, Nicholas Spark and Bill O’Reilly.

Lindstrom insists that despite the fall-off in online business, progress has been made on the firm’s digital strategy, including fixes to the company website: 

In regards to BN.com we have addressed many of the new site implementation issues we faced and made significant SEO advancements, which coupled with promotional spending has led to improved traffic trends.
The team is now focused on a refresh of the site that is expected to enhance the customer experience ahead of the holiday season. The refresh will reduce visual noise, raise the most important elements of the page and simply make it easier to shop on BN.com.

Nostalgia ain’t what it used to be
Nonetheless, for Riggio, it’s a case of trying to save one of the best known brands in the US. He notes, perhaps with too much nostalgia: 

We were the first superstore of any type in America. We came before Staples, before Home Depot, before Best Buys, before Michaels, before all of them and it was amazing that we did it with books.
In fact, when we started with our superstores, we were the only one. We had to actually buy land and develop our own sites, because there was no such thing as a super-center. Over the years, super-centers came to be and they were populated by us, next to Staples, perhaps next to the Michaels, Best Buys and on and on.

A problem here is that the super-centers become ecosystems of mutually dependent, shared footfall. Someone who came in to shop at Best Buy, popped into Barnes & Noble and vice versa. So if other retailers start to see their traffic under pressure, it has a knock-on effect, suggests Riggio: 

Those retailers I mentioned are pressured by the same lack of traffic and they are also pressured by online activity. Each one of us was mutually nourishing one another with our traffic. What you have now is a place where each of the stores is experiencing less of what I call demand traffic, and that is having a snow ball effect on the others.

What that means to Riggio, is a need to rethink the firm’s offline real estate locations, with a belief that only the ‘supermalls’ will survive the next 20 years: 

The B or B plus or C or C plus malls are basically gone. There is a shift in the country.

Then of course there is the pressure from Amazon – not just online, but potentially offline if the firm pursues the idea of opening its own stores. Riggio isn’t being drawn on that subject, admitting that he doesn’t know what might happen here: 

It’s pretty impossible for me – or for anyone for that matter – to speculate on what Amazon might do. Their economics are entirely different than ours, their strategic plans are unknown to us, and clearly different than ours. I don’t know where they go, how fast or far they do. We will have to play it by ear. We are certainly looking at what they do very closely.
We obviously hope to have at some point a response to what they do, but I just have no idea, are they going to open up a chain of bookstores, will they open up a chain of office supply stores, a chain of sporting good stores, will they build their own malls. I mean, who knows what they might do?

While he’s quite correct in what he says, those aren’t exactly reassuring words for Wall Street to hear, coming from the interim head of a damaged brand. In the meantime, until the latest CEO comes along, Riggio can only declare his intent to turn around his baby: 

Make no mistake about this – we will be smart about what and where we spend, but we intend to grow this business. We remain the best at what we do, we have great people throughout the entire organization and we look forward to a great holiday season, which will begin this year in the post-election period when I expect what I call this retail malaise to be over.

He concludes:


I am more than willing to put the time and effort into all the tasks in hand. This company is too important to the tens of thousands of great book sellers who work here, to a millions of loyal customers and to the publishing industry that falls short of no goals.

My take
What to do about Barnes & Noble? It’s an iconic US brand, albeit one with no international expansion presence, unlike Amazon. No-one wants it to suffer the fate of Borders, which went bankrupt. 
One interesting idea that was posited recently rather appealed. US bookstores introduced the concept of coffee shops inside their retail outlets. That lead Barrons to come up with the idea that perhaps Starbucks, Barnes & Noble’s coffee partner, might want to take over the book side of the business. It’s a nice idea and certainly Starbucks would bring some much needed digital savvy into play, but is it a step too far for the coffee giant? 
Whatever the outcome, Riggio, who’d hoped to retire this year, finds himself back at the helm and looking for the latest person to save the day. Whoever that person he or she is needs to have the digital clout that’s been lacking to date as well as the nostalgia for the bricks-and-mortar book retailing experience upon which Barnes & Noble was built.

Click here to check out diginomica’s Special Report on the retail sector and the challenges and success stories of the omni-channel age. 
Image credit - Barnes & Noble/Regenery Publishing Read more on: Digital enterprise in the real worldRetail e-commerce and the omni-channel 