

With monthly expenditure nearing the £40 million mark ($62m), the UK’s G-Cloud framework for public sector cloud purchasing is nudging close to a half-billion-pound annual run rate. While that’s still a relatively small percentage of the UK’s total public sector IT spending — which the government itself estimates is around £16-17 billion ($25-26.5bn) — its impact could be more significant than the raw numbers suggest.
Here’s how some contacts at industry trade organization EuroCloud UK have been parsing the figures (disclosure: while I’m writing this from a diginomica perspective, I do act as chair of EuroCloud UK in a voluntary capacity so please make allowances for any unconscious bias on my part):

The G-Cloud team have estimated that purchases made through the framework cost on average 50 percent less than through other methods. Thus it’s possible to argue the impact of any G-Cloud spend is double that of other spending.
The G-Cloud numbers are based on monthly billing for services, whereas traditional IT spending is based on upfront capital expenditure. Thus a year’s new cloud expenditure (not so much for Lot 4 consulting services but certainly when applied to software, platform and infrastructure spend) is equivalent to 3 to 5 times as much in conventional IT spend. With G-Cloud growing as rapidly as it currently is, at least half the total is new spend and therefore you can again arguably double its impact.
It’s often said that 90 percent of an established organization’s IT spend is taken up with ‘keeping the lights on’ leaving just 10 percent discretionary spend available for new projects. Although some G-Cloud projects are replacements, the nature of cloud services is that the majority of the G-Cloud spend is going into new projects.

Starting from these premises, my contacts at EuroCloud have come to the following conclusions:

G-Cloud spend is at least 3 percent of total UK public sector spend (higher if, as some do, you consider the $16-17bn total is an overestimate) and already as much as a quarter of the discretionary spend going into innovative new projects.
The real impact of that 3 percent is equivalent to as much as 12 percent of traditional IT spending because it is delivered at half the price and on a pay-as-you-go basis.

If you believe the figures, then G-Cloud is already having a momentous impact on the UK landscape of public sector IT spending. So what do participants think of its performance so far and its future prospects? Last week, EuroCloud UK hosted a member meeting about G-Cloud which included speakers from the Government Digital Service as well as industry. The discussions took place under Chatham House rules so individuals cannot be identified but there were several clear takeaways from what was said at the event.
What’s working
G-Cloud has hugely broadened access for SMEs to sell their wares into the public sector. The point was made that IT is one of several industries — the others being construction, facilities management and professional services — where economies of scale don’t deliver value in procurement. Buying the right thing matters more than buying in volume. This is especially true at times of rapid change, when the adaptability that SMEs can offer is crucial to delivering the kind of savings that G-Cloud has achieved.
EuroCloud presented results of a survey of G-Cloud participants that showed there’s strong supplier goodwill towards the initiative. This had around 80 respondents and although this was a self-selected sample that therefore is skewed towards those with an interest in G-Cloud, the overall picture was highly positive.
4 out of 5 said it had given them greater access to the public sector and a third have taken on staff because of G-Cloud. Almost 9 out of 10 are supportive although 5 out of 10 say that there’s still much scope for improvement.
Although there’s been criticism of the lack of take-up of G-Cloud outside central government, there was evidence at the meeting that diffidence among local government buyers may have been exaggerated. Several examples of successful local authority projects were mentioned, demonstrating significant savings on expenditure or deployment times.
What still needs work
It’s evident from several comments made by attendees that ingrained processes in public sector procurement are a huge obstacle. There are still buyers who refuse to look at G-Cloud, citing spurious worries about the process — when they discover they can complete a purchase in hours or even a few minutes, many simply can’t believe they’re allowed to.
Other buyers are focused on saving money in how they buy (which is how their success is measured) and refuse to consider potential savings by buying something different. In some cases, earlier IT procurement decisions have left organizations with legacy resources that they feel they must continue to use even when they now offer poorer value for money.
There are various issues still to be resolved over the operation of the G-Cloud framework and the Digital Marketplace. The onboarding process, the frequency with which updates can be made to catalog listings and the ways in which products and services can be presented and found were all areas that were thought to be in need of further attention. There’s also a lot more still to be done in terms of getting the word out to maintain momentum and overcome some of those buyer prejudices.
My take
In my experience of watching cloud adoption across almost two decades now, people tend to underestimate the initial impact until one day everyone suddenly realizes that it’s become mainstream. It has a habit of creeping up on people. It seems very likely the same pattern is happening with G-Cloud.
Of course there’s still much to do to ensure the continued success of the initiative — it could still be killed off, even as it begins to bear fruit. But so long as the momentum can be sustained, it seems it will not be long before its effects begin to be felt in earnest across the UK public sector.
Disclosure: The author serves as chair of EuroCloud UK and acted as moderator of the discussion at last week’s meeting.
Read more on: Cloud platforms - infrastructure and architectureG-Cloud and the Digital Marketplace

