
For a wide range of thoroughly understandable reasons, the enterprise IT community are amongst the most ‘small c’ conservatives around, and never more so than when it comes to database management systems (DBMS). And why should it be any different? After all, the DBMS is the repository of every enterprise company’s Crown Jewels.
So the established legacy vendors of proprietary relational database systems have continued to hold on to most of the enterprise marketplace, despite the fact that the combination of new open source applications and cloud delivery of services have been attracting enterprise users in new and different directions.
But the latest survey into this sector from Gartner shows that the hold exercised by this natural conservatism is now starting to loosen. According to its latest State of Open Source RDBMSs 2015 report, authored by analysts Donald Feinberg and Merve Adrian, they have now become a core part of the standard armoury for enterprise operations.
The cloud in particular is becoming a key driver of this change. Feinberg and Adrian point to open source RDBs finding a major role as the databases associated with new applications, many of which have been in pilot projects over the last year or so and are now moving into mainstream production roles.
The predominant new uses are seen as running transaction-based applications and, to a lesser extent for now, data warehousing and analytics.
That figures, as many of the new applications are aimed at some form of direct interaction with end users and customers – be that online consumer retail systems or real time helpdesk, support and maintenance operations. All of them have a heavy transaction component and a need to scale rapidly – both up and down –according to demand.
The data warehouse and analytics combination is one that is likely to grow because, though big data analytics is the topic that has got the column inches over the last few years, it is quite likely that much of the real ‘grunt’ work of day-to-day analytics, the type of work where measuring specific business functions as part of a management process, will be an everyday, every hour occurrence working with (relatively speaking) smaller, faster changing datasets of a Terabyte or so.
But the Gartner report suggests that something more is happening than just enterprises adding new database systems to run new, previously unavailable applications and services. There is evidence that open source databases are now starting to be used to replace old legacy systems.
In the view of Feinberg and Adrian, OSRDBMS now match the capabilities of many legacy relational databases for both non-mission-critical and mission-critical applications, and while still a tad deficient in terms of available database administration tools and resources, this is now only just a tad.
Banging the nail
There is a big nail that is starting to be driven into the coffin of legacy database systems: the new open source alternatives win hands down on Total Cost of Ownership, as the report makes clear:
When skills were at a minimum, management tools were few and the software was relatively immature, the TCO was not necessarily lower than those of commercial vendor offerings. That has changed to the point where we now believe that the cost of managing OSDBMSs and the availability of skills are now close to parity with those of the commercial DBMS offerings. We therefore believe there are clear savings in TCO for the OSDBMS. With software costs skyrocketing, this has become a major focus of IT management and is a major impact of the OSDBMS.
The analysts wrap this theme up succinctly:
Add an open source RDBMS to your organization’s DBMS standards for new uses, and to replace commercial RDBMS where commercial RDBMS and specific functionality are not required.
In other words, unless there is a damned good operational reason for continuing to work with a proprietary database, it is now cost effective and operationally sensible to make the switch.
Got the message?
This comes at a time when the proprietary database market is slowing down. The research shows that the overall DBMS market only grew at about 5.4% in 2014. While the total open source DBMS market was $562.0 million, representing almost 31% growth over 2013. The total open source RDBMS market was $253.6 million in 2014.
The leading contender in the open source RDBMS is still MySQL, but it is now being chased down by two rivals, EnterpriseDB and MariaDB, which is particularly bullish about its chances as the DBMS market becomes more of a commodity. EnterpriseDB grew its market share 46.5% year-on-year last year, while MariaDB’s market share went up 55.6% according to Gartner.
Feinberg and Adrian believe that as much as 80% of the in-house developed application portfolio may be candidates to migrate, and 50% of existing commercial RDBMS instances will be converted by 2018. On-going costs out into the future are seen as becoming the major driver behind this move, especially when it comes to the time when users feel the need to upgrade, as the report points out.
Assuming a 50% discount for the Oracle EE licenses (net $236,550), this would still represent a cost 15 times greater than MySQL and almost six times greater than EnterpriseDB, yielding three year cost savings of $221,550 and $195,150, respectively.
My take
More years ago than I care to remember, a Gartner analyst said to me:
Gartner speaks and markets move.
To me, that showed the company to be an ultra-conservative amongst ultra-conservatives. So if Gartner is signalling the beginning of the end for proprietary databases then it must already be well underway – at least in the minds of CIOs the world over. This won’t happen quickly, and open source will not have a total victory. But the writing is now officially on the wall.
Read more on: Infrastructure 