
It’s taken me a couple of days to get to this but you’ll understand why as I lay out an argument that suggests the ‘Amazon Healthcare’ announcement represents an opportunity to recast the delivery of U.S. healthcare in a way that fits with the direction of colleague Denis Pombriant’s Age of Sustainability.
Settle in because some of this is half-baked, some of it is attempting to peer through the proverbial glass darkly but mostly it is speculative.
When I read the minimalist press release covering the joint Amazon, Berkshire Hathaway and JP Morgan Chase venture designed to tackle U.S. healthcare issues, I could not help but wonder if what we’re witnessing is the first step in redefining core socially essential services.
I don’t know anyone who believes that U.S. healthcare is in good shape. The list of problems is legion and despite the ongoing political posturing over attempts to repeal the Affordable Care Act, the impression given is one of tinkering with a broken system rather than endeavoring a reset with which U.S. citizens can happily live.
The UK isn’t in much better shape. the UK’s National Health Service which, while largely funded through taxation, is being systematically, if covertly dismantled, through the creeping privatization of non-core medical services. Be that as it may.
Enter three of the U.S.’s most admired investor mavens in the shape of Jeff Bezos, CEO of Amazon, Warren Buffet, CEO of Berkshire Hathaway and Jamie Dimon, CEO of JPMorgan Chase. Their rather hazy idea is to:
…address healthcare for their U.S. employees, with the aim of improving employee satisfaction and reducing costs.
It didn’t take news pundits much more than a few nanoseconds to conflate this to mean that the triumvirate is out to wreak havoc on the healthcare industry. Surprise, surprise – healthcare stocks took a $30 billion haircut. Those same pundits may be right but, listen carefully to Jeff Bezos’ words:
Success is going to require talented experts, a beginner’s mind, and a long-term orientation.
(My emphasis added.)
Note also that the release said:
(The joint venture) will pursue this objective through an independent company that is free from profit-making incentives and constraints.
Some interpreted that to mean the group plan to operate a not-for-profit venture. That is NOT what was said and, in any event, does not fit the American model of healthcare delivery by for-profit businesses. But the announcement signals a willingness, no doubt lobbied for by Bezos, to prepare for very high levels of investment with no profit for investors in the immediate future.
If Bezos track record is used as a yardstick, that no-profit period will almost certainly last eight years if not longer. Even then, profits might be meager but my sense is that will be secondary to the waterfall benefits the joint venture companies enjoy. In any event, Bezos, Buffet and Dimon can usefully draw upon decades of experience in playing for the long haul.
Are large-scale network effects enough?
How might this apparently unlikely venture work?
Ben Thompson at Stratechery was eager to punt this as a perfect example of how his pet Aggregation Theory plays in this market. I give Thompson credit for assembling a reasonable argument when he says that:
Amazon could not only open up its standard interface to other large employers, but small-and-medium sized businesses, and even individuals; in this way the Amazon Health Marketplace could aggregate by far the most demand for healthcare.
Consolidating demand by offering a superior user experience is how aggregators gain power; given the scenario I just sketched out, Aggregation Theory has a prediction about what might happen next.
According to Thompson, that prediction pans out this way:
Amazon doesn’t create an insurance company to compete with other insurance companies (or the other pieces of healthcare infrastructure); rather, Amazon makes it possible — and desirable — for individual health care providers to come onto their platform directly, be that doctors, hospitals, pharmacies, etc.
The shorter version is that by removing friction between buyers and sellers and applying its network pulling power, Amazon sucks out inefficiency and cost from the market, profiting accordingly. Perhaps.
But I sense he overplays the point:
Amazon’s goal is to basically take a skim off of all economic activity
In 2016, Healthcare accounted for 17.9% of U.S. GDP or $3.3 trillion according to CMS.gov, so it is clearly an attractive market for any serious investor but I would be very surprised if grabbing a significant slice of that pie is the long-term ambition. Why?
Problems for Amazon
Amazon is already feared as the great disruptor in retail. It is estimated to control about 4% of the whole U.S. retail market. That’s a fraction of Walmart but it still gives everyone the jitters. And while Amazon is far from occupying monopoly status, it is not hard to envisage the company growing into a trillion dollar revenue business in the coming years. No-one knows what that might mean in terms of market control or, indeed, whether the company would face regulatory issues. But it could act as a disincentive for Bezos and Co to appear rapacious in healthcare.
That said, Amazon’s market power does not necessarily translate into a better deal for customers. There are many, many examples where products available on Amazon’s retail site provide no greater cost benefit to consumers than your traditional retailer and, in some cases, represent a worse deal.
Where Amazon scores is on offering convenience and service. After all, why go out in inclement weather to hunt down products when you can load up on a website and have ‘stuff’ delivered? How does this fit with healthcare?
On its face, it doesn’t work because in order to bring the medical care cost benefits this group is considering, the venture will need some measure of control over the supply side of the equation. That would be extremely difficult in a market where services are often localized and where large-scale operators like United Healthcare Group play both sides of the fence, acting as both insurers and providers. Put another way:
The worst thing the joint venture could do is try to use its bargaining power to bring down costs within the existing system. It’s not really big enough for that. The three partners have a combined 1 million employees; the health care industry is the biggest employer in the U.S., and even if you add in the family members of Amazon, Berkshire and JPMorgan employees, that won’t be enough to go head to head with the medical juggernaut on doctors’ and nurses’ pay and the cost of pharmaceuticals. The partners need to start from scratch.
Upending the current healthcare modality
There are, however, a slew of other ways that this group could bring a better service quality at lower cost and that comes through using data as a way of presenting people with alternative choices, bolstered by incentives.
Clifton Leaf at Fortune, drawing on the thinking of Hal Wolf, CEO of the non-profit Healthcare Information and Management Systems Society, (HIMSS) comes up with this thought bubble:
Start with the more straightforward behavioral changes that might be needed to develop a healthier lifestyle or quit a bad habit. An employee who smokes, for example, might be given a dozen webpages’ worth of options for help in quitting, with each offering rated by fellow users (say, the employees and family members of the three companies). But instead of paying for a program—as you would a book or movie on Amazon—you’d get an incentive: a credit, maybe, to be used against your health insurance premium, or a free download at Amazon, or a discounted checking account at Chase.
There are plenty of other ideas on which to speculate. But do those ideas sound plausible? Absolutely. Wolf is quoted as saying that:
“Getting employees engaged [in prevention and wellness efforts], I’m sure, will be a part of the upfront model,” says Wolf. “The second piece of it—and this gets to the extension of digital wealth and connectivity—is how different an ecosystem they can create.” Where can they define best practices? “How can they create not only prevention and engagement in terms of the physical space of healthcare,” asks Wolf, “but also in the virtual space of healthcare?”
Been there, done that, know it works
If you’re British and reading this then you might be smiling faintly because, for all its failing, the UK’s NHS has, in recent years, delivered a broad range of preventative care programs. Heck – I’m a grateful recipient of same for the prevention of developing Type 2 diabetes and early detection and treatment of Wet Macula Degeneration.
Women in the UK are routinely screened for breast and cervical cancer. And on a day to day basis, I see more and more colleagues interested in monitoring a variety of personal health topics ranging from general wellness to diet and beyond through a slew of apps that work on smartphones and smartwatches.
It is not therefore hard to imagine how this new group might turn the U.S. healthcare modality on its head, using technology that already exists. And that it is where I believe this group will have the greatest impact and, in turn, force the existing – or should we call them legacy – providers into taking a hard look at the way in which healthcare is delivered across multiple dimensions.
In that context, I see this group as less of a market threat and more a driver of innovation that has the potential for delivering significant social benefit. That makes it a ‘big hairy problem’ solver in my mind.
My take
I’ve been awaiting the emergence of a solution to a ‘big hairy problem’ for some time. This is it.
Forget AI, the blockchain, and IIoT. We’re not seeing transformational innovation among the more traditional enterprise providers of this kind.
This is the first time I’ve seen the glimmerings of an innovation that has the potential to materially improve the lives of people and at scale. From Amazon et al’s perspective, this holds the promise of making them more attractive as employers of choice since they are effectively owning the healthcare problem on behalf of their employees. If you accept that, then it doesn’t take a stretch of the imagination to see that others will want to follow suit and/or help move this project forward apace. Or attempt to compete.
None of this will be easy. The way Americans view healthcare consumption is very different from countries where it is part of the social contract between governments and their people. For example, U.S. citizens are encouraged to make specific medication requests through relentless advertising. In order to succeed, this new venture will have to provide persuasive alternatives that encourage a cultural shift that positions health as a joint responsibility. That in itself will be an interesting experiment.
That just leaves the thorny problem of what happens to all those million Americans who cannot obtain health coverage and are reliant on Medicare and Medicaid. I hesitate to open that particular Pandora’s box but then it is not beyond the realms of possibility that emerging benefits have a nationally beneficial impact.
As an endnote, if you think this argument makes sense, then you might also see that it fits with my colleague Denis Pombriant’s notion of an age of sustainability.
Oh, and by the way, if you’ve got this far, you’ll also know I’ve barely scratched the surface of this topic. There is much more to come.
Image credit - via fotoliaRead more on: Healthcare transformation 