
GDPR compliance is exercising the minds of many in the media industry as we all try to figure out the extent to which we are (or are not) compliant.
A big part of the problem for many media sites comes in their dependence upon Google and/or Facebook for ad-related traffic. We don’t have that problem since, from day one, we’ve never carried advertising in any form.
However, we do use some of Google’s tools for analysis purposes which, in turn, might mean Google is hoovering up personal data for its purposes. I say ‘might’ because Google hasn’t exactly been as transparent as everyone would like. Indeed, media groups have been sharply critical of Google’s approach to this thorny problem.
Google’s problems can quickly become our problem so we’re monitoring the situation and will tweak what we do as events unfold.
Overall, we think we have a much easier path to follow than many other media businesses. We don’t, for example, depend upon readership to drive third-party marketing activity and, as I’ve said, we don’t carry advertising. So, many of the things that GDPR is aimed at don’t apply to us.
But – we do undertake a LOT of analysis around site usage, including the examination of email list activity both in aggregate and at the individual level. And so while we never disclose individual user details to anyone outside the core team who have access to the email list, we are keenly aware that diginomica has a duty to protect individual privacy. From that perspective, nothing changes.
In the meantime, we’ve developed a plan for GDPR compliance, the rollout of which starts today and which is based upon best advice combined with the need to be seen as eating our own dog food.
This plan is aimed squarely at both current and future email sign-ups and ongoing list management. Like many others, we actively encourage email sign-ups as a way of reaching a well-qualified and interested readership. Among other things, the idea is to ensure we’re delivering what people want to read. That’s never a simple task and becomes exponentially more complex as more people demand increasingly personalized content. Be that as it may.
We’ve taken the time and effort to ensure that not only do we understand our role as data controllers, but that we also understand how to both get into compliance and remain compliant.
The biggest part of that exercise was to revisit our dusty ‘terms‘ page and revamp it to reflect GDPR needs and address in more detail the GDPR specific issues with which we need to comply. That work is complete and you can find that page here. Please note that these terms cover both the main diginomica and government subsite at this time since both are managed by diginomica Ltd. It will also cover future diginomica subsites.
The next step is to make sure that all our email sign-ups are fully aware of our privacy policy and the various elements of GDPR with which we need to comply. Again, that work starts today and may mean that over the coming weeks, you receive an email from us asking you to confirm your desire to remain on our mailing lists.
Our email list management system has tools that assist in working through this process though I have to say that they’re not as comprehensive as I would have liked and, in places, are downright clunky. (Don’t you just love technology?)
We fully expect that many of you who are on our lists will choose not to confirm – at least in the initial stages. If you’re like us, then you’re likely getting inundated with such requests, some of which make no sense, others of which seem like overkill. Personally, I’ve used this as an opportunity to dump out of lists in which I’ve no current interest. If that applies to you as regards diginomica, then we bid you a fond farewell but will always leave the door open to your returning. If you are on one of our lists and want to update your preferences in advance of receiving an email from us, then look up one of our recent email blasts which include links for that purpose.
In the longer term, this may mean that we delete email subscribers who are no longer active in the sense of opening emails. From my point of view, that represents a great opportunity to clean up our lists and be more current while reducing the administrative burden of managing emails. In that sense, GDPR is a good thing and we welcome it.
Finally, we know that GDPR is a movable feast. It was cobbled together at a time when the troubling topic of fake news didn’t exist in the public consciousness and when the sophistication of algorithms used by giant media outfits was nascent. We believe that as both governments and businesses start to discover how well (or not) GDPR is working, that the governing legislation will be tweaked. As those changes come along, we will be at the front of the line, commenting on changes and reflecting that in the policies we apply. We will, of course, be transparent in what we do since we’ve always held the view that sunshine provides the best disinfectant.
If you find any flaws in our approach then please feel free to contact us. We’re not perfect but we are determined to ensure that we do the very best we can as we continue to drive the delivery of top class content to the informed buyer.
Image credit - © Stanislau_V - Fotolia.comRead more on: Data privacyGoverning identity privacy and securityRegulation 