
Car rental company Hertz saw its share price drop 50% earlier this week after investors were told that the company’s third quarter profits fell from $237 million in the same period last year to just $42 million.
The fall in profits was accompanied by a missed savings target, as Hertz failed to realise the benefits of its technology overhaul within the year.
The financial woes resulted in Hertz’s executive team telling investors that there was “no choice” but to undergo a complete and company-wide re-platform of its technology, and that the benefits of this ‘could not come soon enough’.
In the middle of last year Hertz signalled that it was going to undergo a huge IT transformation, following the appointment of new CIO Tyler Best. According to reports, the investments were going to focus on new cloud-based systems, mobile development, less third-party tech spend and overhauling back-office technology in a bid to become more efficient.
CEO John Tague told investors this week:
I want to acknowledge and take personal responsibility to the fact that I underestimated the depth and the breadth and the complexity of the transformation we are now undertaking at this company. I firmly believe that that does not change the full potential that we have laid out for this company.
Clearly, we are behind schedule and we are challenged earlier than we thought.
Tague explained that Hertz had expected to ‘over deliver’ this year on cost reductions, when in fact, this quarter the company was not successful in realising its cost saving benefits. It had aimed for an additional $75 million savings on $350 million for 2016, but failed to achieve this. However, chief financial officer Thomas Kennedy said that Hertz is still aiming for significant savings over a longer period. He said:
Unfortunately, the pace of the incremental savings for this year has slowed as the next level of savings require a significant process reengineering our technology enablement to achieve.
While it’s disappointing we had to slow the pace of expense takeout, we remain committed to our full potential savings of $800 million to $950 million over a three- to five-year period. The annual cadence for savings will vary depending on investment and timing of the technology delivery and rebalancing priorities with what we are able to accomplish each year.
It is our expectation that the level of savings will slow somewhat in 2017 and then accelerate thereafter as we bring technology online that will enable additional reductions in costs all the while asserting quality in our front of house and back office operations.
CEO Tague reiterated the point the “technology enablement” is key to the company’s success in this area.
Re-platforming
Part of the problem associated with the costs for Hertz is that it isn’t able to properly manage its fleet of cars and is in the process of implementing a new fleeting system. CEO Tague said that the company currently lacks the systems to “put the right car in the right pool with the right brand for the right customer”. It is hoping that this will be fixed by next year and will be helpful to revenue and cost savings going forward.
The company is also working on new revenue systems and is re-implementing an Oracle system that will touch all corners of the organisation, according to Tague. However, told investors that he under-estimated the timeframes and the scale of the challenge – but when live and working, should bring benefits for the company. Tague explained:
I suppose if I look to the peak of my naïveté, the first day I walked through the door, I thought we could get the revenue systems up and done within a year, it’s taken two. And I’ll also point out with those systems they’ve got to be in market both in terms of analyst learnings, but also the data that causes the system to learn, so I don’t really expect full effectivity – I expect benefit but not full effectivity for 6 to 12 months. So, I’m a year behind in that regard.
The fleeting system will come in next spring. That’s probably six months behind what I had hoped, not what Tyler [Best – Hertz CIO] had promised me. But before I met Tyler, I had a hope that didn’t involve him. That’s probably six months behind. That will have real value for us.
And I would tell you the first day I walked in here, I thought we would need new tools but not an entirely new platform. I learned in the coming months that this was going to be end to end and it goes back even to, I’d say, original understanding that the company “installed Oracle”. But really all we’d done is made Oracle middleware. We’re going through in the next 12 to 18 months at a cost of over $50 million of finance transformation alone to get Oracle fully embedded and get all the benefit of that system. So, I didn’t think I was going to face literally everywhere every corner system.
And frankly, I wouldn’t choose an everywhere every corner system if they weren’t in the space they’re in. The space they’re in simply leaves us with no choice. So, I think we underestimated how much it was going to cost and the time it was going to take to work our way through this. I’ll also tell you that my own hypothesis is when we plug all the last wires together between all these systems, we’ve probably vastly underestimated how it can change the effectiveness of the company and it cannot come in a moment too soon.
My take
A tough few years ahead for Hertz. One to watch closely.
Image credit - Images sourced via HertzRead more on: CRM and customer experience 