
The latest round of government security regulations– the banning of laptop computers on flights coming from airports around the Middle East by the US and UK governments – has been met with the usual mix of reactions in favour or against.
Whatever the strength of the intelligence that originally kicked it all off, there is a collective opinion that it is likely to be bad for business all-round.
It is likely to be bad for the airlines, which some pundits suggest are already teetering on a knife edge.
It is likely to be bad for international trade, for the old ways of meeting face to face with customers, suppliers, and business partners still seems to prevail as the chosen option, despite the growing availability of high definition video conferencing capabilities.
And it will be bad for road warrior. Taking the laptop is a key essential of the business trip. Without it road warriors are defenceless.
Yet that very defencelessness now opens up a business opportunity for all of the cloud service providers, for they have the tools to provide business users with the ultimate, unthinkable, alternative…….leave the laptop behind.
Indeed, while in the mood for heresy, how about we don’t bother having one at all?!!?!?
CSP opp
This current security situation, coupled with cloud-delivered services and the use of that old established technology, the virtualised desktop, it would be possible for execs to travel anywhere without a laptop.
All it would require is the ability to rent a suitable `dumb terminal’ device at the other end of the journey.
This would create a wide range of business options in its own right. For example, the major client device brands could get into developing their own cheap dumb screen systems – as stylish as anyone might fancy. They could have swish outlets in the arrivals halls of airports and execs could pre-book them as part of their trip plan. Real road warriors could have annual accounts.
It would also be a business opportunity for the airlines and their seat system suppliers, for they already have the guts of such systems built into passenger seats. But the chance to sell extra services on the basis of ‘your office flies with you’ or some other tag-line could prove attractive.
But for people not in those leagues there would also be a business opportunity for local entrepreneurs to buy up old laptops and tablets, clean them up, and rent them out as dumb screen systems at airports or town centre outlets.
Hackles will no doubt already be rising at the notion of using a system from some ‘fly-boy’ back street operator who has quietly loaded some interesting malware to run in the background: key loggers would no doubt be the least of what might be tried.
But it can’t be beyond the wit of man or woman to come up with software that, as a user logs on to the system, the dumb screen is scanned and scoured as necessary.
Anyway, the virtual desktop would be running on the cloud servers, not the dumb screen itself, which would only be getting an image of the user’s desktop running on the server to present on the local display, so most security issues would be handled on the server not the dumb screen.
The key issue then would be the authentication process for each individual user. This would become part of the service provided by the cloud service provider, and could be at any level of security the end user felt appropriate, from a simple password at log in, through to multi-level authentication using passwords, USB dongles, finger print and/or retina recognition etc. And all of the authentication would be done back on the server, not the dumb screen.
As a side issue, businesses could find themselves getting much greater levels of security because the inherent risks of travelling laptops being penetrated in some way would be removed. The exec loses a laptop and much damage can done, and even if no data is actually lost, there can be significant costs laid out on fast remedial action to make sure the business is defended.
Lose the dumb screen – even if it still has the USB dongle installed – and it is what? A $40 hit on an insurance policy.
My take
Regardless of what one might think of the reactions of both the US and UK Governments (and others if they follow suit) in banning laptops from the passenger cabins of flights from certain countries, it has raised an important issue: which is more important, the laptop itself or the person who uses it?
If the same results can be achieved by such people doing things in a different, arguably safer and certainly more secure way, using an approach where the cloud service providers could then add a whole raft of additional service bells and whistles, then maybe the `laptop bomb’ saga will have a positive, even happy, ending.
 
Image credit - GoogleDisclosure - Written on my laptopRead more on: Collaboration sharing and digital productivityFuture of work 