
Recently, I joined fellow diginomica trooper, Den Howlett, and a veritable who’s who of ERP analysts at Oracle’s Headquarters in Redwood City. We received a major update (Release 11) on Oracle’s Cloud ERP solution set.  Looking at my notes, here’s my assessment:
Briefly, the Cloud ERP product line is a broad suite of Financial, Supply Chain, Procurement, Project and other applications. This product line is different from the JDEdwards, PeopleSoft, E-Business Suite and other product lines. This suite was designed for cloud deployments and runs on an Oracle technology stack in Oracle’s cloud centers. The product line supports a significant number of languages, currencies, etc. HCM (Human Capital Management) and/or CX (Customer Experience) functionality is supplied via other Oracle product lines. Those HCM and CX solutions are pre-integrated with the Cloud ERP suite.
Customers apparently are buying these solutions by functional mini-suites (e.g., SCM) with many buying two or more mini-suites (e.g., PPM and SCM).
From a macro sense, Oracle has borrowed great thinking/IP from several product lines to make these enhancements. This wasn’t a NIH (Not Invented Here) development effort. The EPM (enterprise performance management) products for example  were clearly influenced by Hyperion functionality. The PPM (Project Portfolio Management) modules benefit from cross-fertilization of the Primavera solutions. It appears this re-use had two beneficial effects:

It shortened development timeframes and,
It allowed a lot more functionality to end up in these upgrades.


My takeaways

The volume and depth of enhancements to R11 and the next three releases to come are substantial. In virtually each mini-suite briefing, Oracle shared product roadmaps that are ambitious and with genuine depth. As subsequent releases enter the market, the product line’s competitive position will be materially enhanced.
The product line’s sweet spot is well suited for mid-market ERP buyers particularly those in services, high tech, retail and other industries. Oracle will release a set of manufacturing applications for this suite very soon and this should make the solution more attractive for a much larger segment of the ERP space. Oracle reported a number of deals where the product displaced divisional solutions in larger firms. Likewise, Oracle appears to have beaten a number of small business solutions for the lower end of this market.
A number of their deals have been replacements of Oracle applications at existing customers. Others have been net-new deals. Oracle Cloud ERP competitors run the gamut of ERP solutions and include firms like Infor, Sage and many others.
Oracle has recently booked a lot of new deals for the Cloud ERP apps. Many of these recent sales have not gone-live as yet simply due to the recent timing of the deal closings.
Implementations of these solutions often occur faster than on-premises solutions. Oracle executives reported many deals routinely converting in 90 days or less. This is helping the TCO/ROI story for them in selling against on-premises solutions. However, the kinds of deal Oracle is closing should fit that kind of timeframe. We will need to revisit this topic as Oracle moves up market and encounters the inevitable problems of data migration, especially from non-Oracle systems.
Oracle has seen a number of smaller, cloud-focused implementers involved in these deals. However, they stressed that several large integrators are starting to undertake Cloud ERP installations, particularly in places where Oracle’s Cloud ERP will be a divisional/business unit solution to a larger (e.g., ERP) corporate/global ERP solution. Oracle is claiming hundreds of partners in something like 65 countries. Many of these are very large integrators/outsourcers. While I absolutely believe that Oracle has these partnership agreements in place, large integrators might find it more profitable to push more of the higher-end, on-premises/private cloud Oracle solutions instead of Cloud ERP. For software buyers of Cloud ERP, I’d recommend you see exactly what experience your partner (and the team they’re proposing) has with this specific product line before signing on the dotted line. This product line is distinct and you’d benefit from a partner with intimate knowledge of this solution.
The Financial Management applications saw big improvements in the R11 release, especially in cash collection functionality and revenue recognition compliance. Some of this capability may come from EBS or Fusion products (see graphic below).



The Procurement applications will soon be enhanced to support direct materials. Previously, the product’s strength was in indirect spend. For now, it appears contingent labor (e.g., 1099’s) is not supported in this module and may not be well integrated with the Cloud ERP PPM products for now.
The Supply Chain Management solution will be getting its largest single infusion of SCM functionality in one upgrade in Oracle’s history. You’d need a good set of glasses to read all the new features/functions crammed into the slide they shared with us.
The EPM product is targeted against products from Anaplan, Adaptive Insights, Host Analytics and others. Oracle reported that they are approaching 1,000 customers of its cloud planning and budgeting module. A big data capability for this product is not in the stock solution set for now but may be possible via other Oracle technologies. 2016 will see a lot of big functional enhancements to the EPM modules.
Project Portfolio Management (PPM) has been enhanced to compete as a standalone solution against solutions from firms like Planview, CA, etc.  Oracle PPM Cloud’s project execution modules can be implemented independently of its project financial management modules, if customers desire. Customers can also deploy Oracle PPM Cloud applications alongside other Oracle Cloud solutions (e.g., HCM) or other Oracle non-Cloud solutions (e.g., Primavera). The PPM modules now possess more functionality for New Product Development (NPD) and internal IT projects (e.g., waterfall development). As always, software buyers should look to understand data flows and integrations in cases where functionality may be coming from outside the Oracle ERP Cloud suite.
Oracle’s touting something called ‘virtual tenancy.’ I’ll leave it to you, the readers, to get briefed on that. 😉


Time with Safra
In a first for me at an Oracle event, we got to spend time Oracle CEO Safra Catz.  She used half her time with us to make a set of opening/positioning remarks. In that time, she shared a number of well-known Oracle positions re: cloud and the choices they give customers as to when they should move to cloud solutions. She also even cracked a good joke in the middle of it all.
Safra also discussed with us a number of historical touch points within her time at Oracle. These included the network appliance that Larry championed and, I believe, Safra had a hand in developing. She also touched on a couple of internal projects: Halo and Radiant.
I didn’t get a chance to ask her my questions because of time. Maybe next time….in the meantime, Den has a write up of her session coming soon.
Closing thoughts
Mark Smith at Ventana Research got off one of the better questions/observations in when he noticed the rather silo-based way the solutions were being developed and marketed to-date. Interestingly, one of the Oracle executives immediately indicated that this was to be his new charter: to bring everything together as a cohesive product line/mega-suite and brand.
As for me, I realized:

The suite has matured significantly in recent years. This is always tough for an ERP vendor: how to get enough solid apps so that buyers see a solution that has critical mass. So, the product line has more applications and the modules are deeper.
The user experience and mobile support were all good. The analytics, while solid, utilized internal transaction data – not big data stores. I suspect this will have to become a priority for Oracle soon as the market will demand solutions that have pre-built analytics that utilize internal transaction data as well as external and IoT (internet of things), social and third party data.
The suite should achieve some measure of success in the market now but the best days will be in the future. That’s a good thing. The new manufacturing modules will open up more opportunities. New functionality in the other modules will also serve to broaden the market appeal of these products and answer the question of comparison with mature legacy solutions.
NetSuite, Microsoft MBS solutions, Intacct and others will see more competitive situations coming from this part of Oracle. Plex should see more competitive situations in time, too.
Oracle is slowly adopting a more cloud-friendly posture. It wasn’t that long ago that we were still hearing a lot of talk about how customers don’t want to move to cloud or that multi-tenancy was a bad thing. As Oracle’s solutions have matured in more cloud-y ways, the tone is much less strident, more inclusive with plenty of soothing talk about choice. That’s a positive development.

Image credit - Featured image: creative commons via wikipedia, main story: via Oracle Cloud ERP slide deckDisclosure - Oracle is a premier partner at time of writingRead more on: Analytics planning and data analysisCloud ERP financials and supply chainCRM and customer experienceFinancialsHCM and the digital future of workSpend management 