
The UK tax office has been publicly shamed by an influential select committee, which has said that HMRC’s customer service is so poor that it may be having a direct impact on the amount of tax being collected.
HMRC has said that the solution to its problems is the effective transition to new IT systems and digital technologies, via its change management programme. However, as we have noted previously, HMRC’s shift to the use of better systems and more innovative contracts presents “significant risks”.
To put it simply, there is a lot at stake here.
Anyone that has had to ring the tax office knows just how bad its customer service is. For example, I had a VAT query earlier this week and decided to call HMRC to speak to someone directly. First of all I was greeted with voice recognition software that seems very hit and miss. And then I was placed on hold for well over half an hour before I got the chance to speak to someone.
But it seems that I was one of the lucky ones. At least I finally got through to someone. According to the Public Accounts Committee report, in 2014 to 2015 HMRC responded to just 72.5% of calls. Over the first half of 2015 this response rate had dropped to an embarrassing 50%.
This is despite a previous committee report calling HMRC out for having “an abysmal record on customer service”. HMRC had put in place a target of answering 80% of all telephone calls within five minutes, but the previous committee (rightly so) recommended that the tax office “set a more challenging short-term target for call-waiting times and a long-term target that is much closer to industry standards”.
The report released this week by the committee notes that customer service is so poor that the UK’s revenue balance could be worse off as a result. It said:
HMRC has consistently refused to set more demanding targets, however, and in 2014-15 it answered only 39% of calls within five minutes. HMRC did not provide us with any indication of when or by how much its customer service would improve, beyond a vague aim to improve year on year.
It acknowledged that people are more likely to pay the right tax when they find HMRC easy to deal with, but, in the words of its own Chief Executive and Permanent Secretary, “we are still struggling”. We are concerned that customer service levels are so bad that they are having an adverse impact on the collection of tax revenues.
The solution
 The Public Accounts Committee has recommended that HMRC should identify what impact its poor level of service is having on tax revenues and produce a detailed plan setting out how and when it will provide an acceptable standard of customer service. This should include a “clear plan for the efficient management of its change programme and introduction of new IT systems”.
HMRC told the committee that it intends, through the implementation of its change programme, to modernise the services it provides to customers through the better use of technology – for example, by introducing an online renewals system for tax credits claimants, amongst other things.
The report this week notes, unsurprisingly, that new IT is a “key part of HMRC’s plans to deliver service improvements to customers”.
However, as we have said previously, a lot of HMRC’s new IT and digital plans hinge on the successful transition away from its monolithic, multi-billion pound outsourcing contract – Aspire.
Aspire was let in 2003-2004 and so has now been running for in excess of 10 years. It is led by Capgemini and Fujitsu and has cost well over £11 billion. It represents everything that the latest wave of digital thinking in government is against – it’s large, it’s cumbersome, it costs a lot and it doesn’t allow for agile innovation.
Moving away from it is key to future success, according to HMRC. However, it admits that some of the services that it plans to break up and bring in-house under Aspire, may also later be outsourced. The committee’s report notes:
HMRC intends, through the implementation of its change programme, to modernise the services it provides to its customers through the better use of technology, for example, by introducing an online renewals system for tax credits claimants. Introducing new information technology is therefore a key part of HMRC’s plans to deliver service improvements to customers.
We asked HMRC how it was mitigating the risks associated with the replacement of its Aspire contract, through which HMRC has managed its IT capability since 2004. HMRC told us that it was breaking up the Aspire contract in phased steps and bringing the different services in-house in stages in order to mitigate the risks to customer service and tax collection. Some of the services that will be brought in-house may subsequently be outsourced.
Equally, the National Audit Office recently said that HMRC’s plans to phase out Aspire “presented significant risks” the the department’s technology strategy. At the time the National Audit Office said:
HMRC must change more radically than it has in the past to achieve this transformation. HMRC’s previous change programmes had focused on increasing efficiencies, improving processes and investing more in pre-existing compliance activities.
This time the change programme is more ambitious and more complex: making planned cost reductions while moving millions of taxpayers to digital customer services and decommissioning old ones.
My take
Embarrassing, to say the least.
Read more on: Digital government and public services

