
Even though you communicate every day, people will always claim there is a lack of communication.
Which is one of the reasons why multi-national cement, aggregates and concrete organization, Holcim, introduced the Beekeeper social media app earlier this year.
According to Susanne Sugimoto, head of communications and public affairs at Holcim:
Social media is a perfect fit to do something more with communication.
The need for effective communication was particularly pertinent because the company was on the cusp of a merger with Lafarge, creating a joint organization with over 115,000 employees in 90 countries in July.
Although it’s a big company with a large geographical spread, the cement industry is a local one, and it is usually only delivered within about 100km radius of a plant. The social media app was tried out in the central European hub, which covers Germany, Switzerland, Italy and France and has about 2,500 employees.
In this region there are lots of small works units, which can range from quarries, construction sites, ready-mix concrete plants, in addition to more regular offices. One of Sugimoto’s key challenges is to find ways to communicate with employees in these different types of locations, particularly as about 1,000 of them don’t use email. She explains:
So the challenge is how to reach the people, the blue-collar people in our aggregate plants, our ready-mix plants where there is sometimes only one or two people working.
Holcim recognizes the importance of keeping employees connected and informed. It used letters, emails, lunch talks and ‘infoflash’ bulletins prior to the merger and there are many other channels, such as an in-house magazine, which it uses to reach employees.
Adding a social media channel, Holcim Talk (Beekeeper) into the mix was both another way of communicating information to staff but also for staff to communicate with each other and with management.
Adoption issues
Rather than try and coerce or force people to use social media, it was left entirely voluntary whether people joined or not, but it was made clear that there would be lots of useful information on the app.
There were a few worries initially that this would add to their workload but these fears were so dismissed, says Sugitomo:
We had some resistance when we went to our first to our first management meeting, because people thought it was another information channel they had to go on; another thing they had to think about.
Making it voluntary as just going on Facebook or Instagram – and as easy to use – stopped this negative way of thinking and made it attractive to employees.
Although not mandatory, Holcim was obviously keen to encourage people to get involved. One of the ways it did this was to get the new chief executive to post, according to Sugimoto:
At the beginning we didn’t have so many people, but when they heard the CEO was giving answers and that everybody had the possibility to ask him something, it slowly started. Now, people are brave enough to ask a question and he is answering within an hour. This is really engaging people.
When diginomica caught up with Holcim, at the HR Tech World Congress in Paris, the company had 720 users contributing – almost a quarter of the workforce, and the number is growing constantly. Posts are made from all departments and employee levels.
Sugimoto is pleased that the take-up is so high and believes that its softly-softly off approach has helped. She explains:
We don’t have any restrictions on postings. We don’t control anything and I think that’s a key for success.
It enables the company to post important information about job advertisements, make announcements or talk about health and safety, which is a topic that is extremely important in their industry.
But it obviously a place where people can post more everyday stuff and videos and staff can talk face to face. In fact, it’s when workers, rather than managers, started posting small snippets of information, that she realized it was becoming a success:
I was really happy when I saw the first post of a worker in a quarry and took a picture and ‘beekeeped’ [posted] it and that was really great because then we knew it was starting to work.
Read more on: HCM and the digital future of workSocial 