
When Anne Jaakke, director of global HR at Hunkemöller International, joined the lingerie firm a year ago, there was a key question she wanted answered:
How can we disrupt HR to become one of the key success factors to becoming a global, successful brand?
One of the areas where the lingerie chain, which started in the Netherlands, has made big changes is in its recruitment and on-boarding process. The key for Jaakke, she told the audience at Paris HR Tech World Congress, was to ensure that what they were doing internally for employees was a close match to what they were doing for customers:
One of the things that I strongly believe makes a big difference from an HR perspective, is not to start with the people, but to start with the customer. To really understand who the customer is, what makes her kick and truly understand who she is.
A typical customer, who Hunkemöller calls a ‘shero’ – a combination or she and hero – is about 28, lives in a metropolitan area and is sporty and fun. So, Jaakke wanted to ensure that the employees were as fun, passionate and “in touch” as the customers.
But, as Jaakke concedes:
That’s a nice Christmas wish list, but how do you go about it? And where do you start?
For Hunkemöller, the answer was to start with the hiring profile for store workers. Instead of looking to recruit retail staff with sales experience, they decided to hire based on attitude and how much they embodied the ‘shero’ values.
Recruitment is a key focus for Hunkemöller as the organization has an ambitious expansion program, launching up to new stores every month. It plans to increase store numbers from 700 in 2015 to 1,200 in 2019 and expects to handle an estimated 600,000 applications.
With the shero profile in mind, Jaakke and the HR team decided that the best way to reach the YouTube, social media-savvy generation was to use video recruitment:
It gave a lot of opportunity to attract those people that were a match because the shero is on social media, she’s not afraid of anything like this. Those individuals who apply through video recruitment are a perfect match for the profile that we’re looking for.
Video recruitment was first launched in the Netherlands, followed by Denmark and Sweden and Germany is next on the hit list. Jaakke confirms that as a result, the application to hiring ratio has been reduced considerably, because only those who already embody the brand will make the effort to record a video.
Motivation is highest after someone has signed a contract and before their first day, so Jaakke next thought about how the organization could harness and nurture that enthusiasm:
We started thinking, how can we try to help them to actually get people up and running before their first work day.
The result was to scrap sending out dull and dry handbooks and policy documents on what not to do, in favour of a Welcome App.
This gives new starters an insight into the company as well as loads of practical information, such as what to wear on their first day. It also asks them to visit Hunkemöller stores, try on the products and comment on what their experience was like. Jaakke explains the HR team took a proactive role in creating the Welcome App:
This has all been made by the HR themselves. They’ve downloaded stuff from the internet on how to make it and actually the girls in the video are part of the team.
The next step on the onboarding process was to soup up the training. Hunkemöller didn’t have an LMS and training was all classroom based, but again Jaakke wanted a more modern approach that fitted the brand:
If we wanted to deliver world-class service across 16 countries every moment of the day …we needed consistency.
The company created a Hunkemöller Academy – not a new idea, but “what you put in it can be totally different”, says Jaake. The HR team was not particularly technical and at that point there wasn’t even WiFi in the stores, but the team chose to set up learning tablets in store and to create regional trainers and brand ambassadors.
Jaakke’s team began to create product videos, which show fashion and catwalk shows to improve employees’ knowledge of trends and products. It was an instant hit, with tweets and messages coming in immediately after the launch.
The final piece of the jigsaw was to introduce an employee app, to keep in touch with employees on a regular basis:
We started thinking about a social news channel – showing everything on the internet about Hunkemöller to educate employees about what our customers thought about products. We started doing polling, we started releasing product videos – lots of functionality to help us to become a social brand from the inside out.
Now, employees will keep up with what’s happening in the company and in the fashion world from home using their mobile devices.
My take
Video is becoming a key business tool and as this case study shows, a lot can be achieved with minimal technical knowledge.
Read more on: CRM and customer experienceHCM and the digital future of work 