
Minhua Eunice Ma
Holocaust Memorial Day takes place this week (27 January), an annual commemoration timed to coincide with the anniversary of the 1945 liberation of Auschwitz-Birkenau, the largest Nazi death camp.
Seventy years on, there are thought to be around 800 Holocaust survivors still alive in the UK, most of whom are now in their nineties. Although many are still able to give their personal testimonies, it’s becoming increasingly urgent that their memories of Nazi persecution and death camp experiences are preserved for as a reminder and a warning to future generations.
This is the focus of project Interact, which uses natural language processing (NLP) and human-computer interaction (HCI) technologies to create ‘mixed-reality, virtual’ survivors, projected in 3D and capable of responding realistically to questions posed to them by an audience.
Once installed, Interact will be an important feature of the UK’s National Holocaust Centre and Museum in Nottinghamshire. The museum’s partners in developing the system were design consultancy, Bright White, based in York, and Professor Minhua Eunice Ma, a leading expert in the field of ‘serious games’, who provided research expertise in NLP and HCI. Says Professor Ma:
The purpose is to provide audiences with the rich experience of a human interaction. And it means that in the future, when all the survivors have passed away, we can keep this experience and help future generations better understand the history.
It’s all made possible by the cooperation of survivors, who volunteer their time to take part in 3D high-definition stereoscopic video recording sessions, each typically lasting five days. They first provide their personal testimonies and then respond to questions from a pre-determined list. They are then 3D laser-scanned and this output, along with a large number of photographic reference images taken in the studio, are used to generate a 3D model of the survivor.
What’s created from these sessions, Ma explains, is an ‘Embodied Conversational Agent’  (ECA). This is a computer-generated virtual avatar that can be represented in 2D or 3D and displays human-like behavior while interacting with the user.
Because Interact depends on a mixture of both real and computer-generated media, hence ‘mixed reality’, it avoids the problem of the ‘uncanny valley’ – the characteristic dip in emotional response that tends to occur when humans encounter an entity that is almost, but not quite, human. In the case of the Interact ECAs, each one has all of the facial expressions, gestures, body postures and gaze of the original subject.
Technology
The NLP technology processing at the back end of the system, meanwhile, works like this: a member of the audience asks their question and this is scanned, in real time, for recognized exchangeable terms in the system’s semantic ontology and standardized, based on the ontology’s contents. An information retrieval component then uses a statistical relevance model to match the question to one of the question/answer (Q/A) pairs recorded with the survivor. If a selected answer, identified by a unique asset ID, is a good fit, this is played back to the audience. Says Ma:
We discovered that the system was capable of dealing with unexpected questions. Due to the asymmetry of the Q/A data set, the answer data includes more information than required by the questions. When subjects asked about the professions of parents after the war and the favourite food of the survivor, although we didn’t ask these questions in our filming sessions, the answers were present inside their answers to other questions and were successfully retrieved.
A fully working prototype of the Interact application is now up and running and is ready for installation at the National Holocaust Centre and Museum later this year.
Meanwhile Ma’s own work on serious games continues. She’s already developed an application for kids with Cystic Fibrosis (CF), who rely on daily physiotherapy sessions to clear their lungs and airways of health-threatening mucus. This connects a PEP mask used in their breathing exercises to a computer game running on their PC, thus ‘gamifying’ a process that many kids with CF find a chore. This year, she’ll also be using her research on serious games to develop services for domestic violence education. She explains:
Serious games based on mixed or virtual reality is a part of computer science that can be applied in many, many different application domains. I feel very lucky that my research in this area leads me to such interesting and important projects.
A video presentation describing and demonstrating Interact can be watched here and Professor Ma, along with Sarah Coward of the National Holocaust Centre and Museum and Chris Walker of Bright White, have published a more in-depth article about the technology behind the project, which can be found here.
Read more on: Best of archivesUse cases 