
Craig Menear
When tracking the omni-channel thinking at US DYI retailer Home Depot (see below), a theme that has emerged over the past year or so is the use of digital tech to target a specific strand of the firm’s customer base – the professional home improver.
Sitting alongside the enthusiastic amateur, the Pro customer is an individual with regular needs and a different, more specific, set of requirements. As such, they need to be targeted with particular care, argued Home Depot CEO Craig Menear at the Goldman Sachs Global Retail Broker Conference last week.
Digital is at the heart of this, he said, with personalization the key:
The marketing that we do to the Pro customers is now beginning to take advantage of the digital capabilities that we have. Instead of broad-brush marketing to the Pro as a Pro segment, it’s individual marketing to a specific type of customer within Pro with defined messages that meet their needs.
The Pro customer wants to engage with Home Depot via digital channels, added Menear, and in ever greater numbers:
Clearly, the customer is changing in terms of how they engage with the Home Depot, and we have to change and be relevant to that customer if they choose to engage with us digitally. We have been investing in that. We stepped back several years ago, looked at categories that we felt were at risk [in the] move to the digital world versus the physical world.
We began to build very specific strategies, including the merchandising team and extending some of our exclusive relationships to the digital channel that we had in the physical channel. We have been building out capabilities to allow the customer to engage with us, no matter how they choose, whether that be buying online and picking up in stores.
He added that Pro customers are looking for very specific things from digital engagement:
The thing that customer responds to is enhanced capabilities. Visual capabilities on the site are hugely important to the customer. The data that you provide around the product is important. We have seen strong engagement with the video content at a product information page level helps drive conversions. So the customer is definitely guiding how you engage with them in the digital world. And they are requiring upgrading content.
One of the things that we have built into our app and mobile web is the ability for a consumer or a Pro to look up inventory in-store. We get a lot of feedback from our Pro customers that this is something that they value and benefit. So we are seeing the Pro engage. We are seeing the Pro engage in what we call BOPUS- Buy Online, Pick Up in Store. So they can be home at night, take a look at some things that they need, they can place their order and we have that ready for them for pickup the next morning when they swing by.
This is delivering beneficial results, said Menear, online and offline:
Almost 40% of all orders that happen on homedepot.com, the customer is actually choosing to pick that up in our physical store or [through] the direct fulfillment network that we built over the last couple of years. With these direct fulfillment centers, we can hit 90% of the U.S. population with parcel shipments, in 48 hours or less at a very cost effective method.
We are trying to make sure that we build up the capabilities to engage with the customer, no matter how they choose to engage with us. In many cases, the shopping experience starts online in the digital world, but finishes in the physical store itself.
Limited expectations
But Menear was keen to emphasise that there are limited expectations for the firm’s app play:
We don’t believe that that the Home Depot app is going to be the first app that people are going to go to. But we also have to be relevant and continue to offer the app. But everything we put on the app, we also try and migrate to our mobile website as well as tablet and PC as well.
In fact, as Ted Decker, Executive Vice President, Merchandising, pointed out, Home Depot had released the latest iteration of its app just 24 hours earlier, complete with functional enhancements:
More video, more 360-degree turns of product, inventory availability. We now have live chat on our app. We are always trying to enhance that experience.
Decker doesn’t use the term omni-channel, but instead choses a different word:
While we drive e-commerce, we purposely use the term interconnected. We are very proud of our e-commerce business. We have been driving over $200 million in sales growth each quarter. We are a Top Ten e-commerce dollar volume site and have terrific rankings. But everything we do, when we think about e-commerce and digital is with an interconnected hat on, because we know [when] our customers are using anything on an e-commerce platform [it] is [as] much to enhance the store experience and actually make an e-commerce purchase.
Decker argued that when it comes to pitching to the Pro customer base, there’s an inherent advantage that the firm can exploit:
What we have with the Pro business is many of our Pro customers have our private label credit card. We have quite a bit of information. Other than digital marketing, we haven’t done a lot of individual marketing.
In data overall, we have always had a tremendous amount of data. And we are continuing to build tools and processes and in teaching our merchants and marketers how to better price the product and look at elasticities by market, how to assort our products, constantly looking to leverage that data map across the enterprise.
We are increasingly contacting through e-mail campaigns those customers based on more in segmented customers as opposed to an individual customer. So we know someone is more engaged in garden, for example or may know someone is looking at a kitchen remodel. We will approach them as a segment, not so much individual.
One other segment that Home Depot is pursuing is the Millennial, but the firm has found that the supposed digital native generation has some very similar needs to its predecessors, as Menear explained;
We are somewhat surprised at the feedback that we got from this group in terms of how important the store is to them and the relevance of our associates to them. What we see in the research that we have is that the millennials will in fact follow previous generations in their patterns. It’s just a 6-year delayed cycle.
If you look at new household formations over the past six months to eight months, roughly a third of all new household formations have come from the tail end of the millennial age group. So that’s a very positive sign, reinforces the research that we have with the millennial groups.
This research provides its own learnings from millennial respondents, concluded Menear:
What they do tell us is that don’t stick technology as the forefront of what you do. Technology is an enabler in the background. It’s really all about the product, which makes total sense if you think about any retail business.
We know that they engage digitally in a strong way. So their shopping experience starts in the digital world in most cases and so that’s part of what we are doing to improve the overall content. We also know, and they tell us, that they don’t have the same knowledge base as their parents do. So part of what we have to do for them is make projects simple.
 
Image credit - Home Depot Read more on: CRM and customer experienceRetail e-commerce and the omni-channelSocialUX and application design 