
The Home Office is falling to effectively lead the criminal justice system in the collection of proceeds from crime, which is being undermined by struggling ICT systems, ageing databases and poor information.
The influential Public Accounts Committee (PAC) has issued an update to a previous 2014 report on the failings of the confiscation orders system, which states that the Whitehall department is failing in a “spectacular fashion” to address the concerns of MPs.
It has said that this is sending a terrible message to the criminal community, which stands to benefit from crime, as well as victims and taxpayers.
Confiscation orders are the primary way in which the government carries out its policy to deprive criminals of the proceeds they make from crime. The Home Office is responsible for this, but it is a complex operation that involves many other bodies – including the police, the Crown Prosecution Service and HM Courts & Tribunals Service. It is also overseen and governed by the multi-agency Criminal Finances Board.
To give you an idea about how ineffective the system is – between 2015 and 2016 the amount confiscated was just £175 million, with £1.9 billion outstanding at the end of March of this year. To make matters worse, the annual cost of administering confiscation orders is some £100 million.
The latest report out this week says that the number of confiscation orders imposed has fallen “from an unsatisfactory 6,392 in 2012–13 to 5,839 in 2015–16 when over a hundred times as many offenders were convicted of a crime”.
Poor performance
In March 2014, the previous Committee concluded that poor implementation of the confiscation order system meant that it was not being as effective as it could be. The Committee put together six recommendations at the time, which were accepted by the Home Office and were promised to be implemented by the end of 2015.
And whilst the Home Office claims that five of the six recommendations have been implemented, the Committee has rejected this assertion. It has said that “it is clear” that many of the specific actions proposed by the previous Committee have not been taken and that it is “disappointed” by the lack of progress in improving the system.
It pointed to the fact that whilst the amount confiscated has increased from £133 million in 2012-13 to £175 million in 2015-15, the number of confiscation orders has fallen and debt has soared to £1.9 billion.
Meg Hillier MP, Chair of the PAC, said:
Two years have passed since the Government committed to address PAC’s serious concerns about confiscation orders. It has failed to do so in spectacular fashion.The number of orders imposed has fallen and, according to unaudited figures provided by the Home Office, only a tenth of the huge debt owed under such orders is realistically collectable.
This sends an appalling message to criminals who stand to benefit from crime—and, equally importantly, to their victims and taxpayers. Such relatively meagre returns do nothing to alleviate public concerns about crime, nor to encourage the perception that justice is being done.
Taxpayers will question whether devoting limited crime-fighting resources to the use of such orders is money well spent. The lack of clarity in government and law enforcement about how best to use confiscation orders, and to what end, indicates they are right to do so.
This vague approach to spending public money is unacceptable and must be addressed by the Home Office urgently. If confiscation orders are to have a meaningful place in the Government’s strategy to combat crime then it must act now to improve and better demonstrate their effectiveness.
Poor systems and data
The previous Committee found that the system was in part being undermined by outdated ICT systems and poor data management, which leads to errors and time consuming rekeying of information between different systems. This is something that is still a pain point for the Home Office and the bodies it manages.
For example, the previous report found that an estimated 45 hours a week are wasted by HM Courts & Tribunals Service staff just opening, saving and downloading data into the Confiscation Order Tracking System. The report stated:
The need for substantial re-keying of data had resulted in data errors, which, together with some incomplete and erroneous information provided by financial investigators and Crown
Courts, had acted to slow progress further and reduce enforcement rates
The 2014 Committee was also told that a multi-agency group had been established to identify required changes to the Joint Asset Recovery Database (JARD) and that they expected improvements to be in place quickly. And that the HM Courts & Tribunals Service was working with the Crown Prosecution Service to deliver a new shared ICT system, which would be fully interoperable with the JARD and police forces’ ICT systems.
However, the latest Committee was told that the Home Office was “still working on developing measure for the disruptive effect on crime of using confiscation orders” and that improvements to JARD had taken longer than planned and would require a further 18 months to complete.
Not exactly the progress that is required.
Furthermore, the Home Office has also said that it does not have a national performance dataset to help inform the more than 160 bodies involved in the confiscation system on where best to invest confiscation orders. And according to the latest report, the Home Office isn’t keen on putting one in place – despite demand. The report notes:
Bodies still also lack the necessary detailed information, for example, on how much different enforcement activities cost, how successful they are and how much is realistically collectable in different cases.
The police told us that there was some local data available that could be used to start building up an evidence base on national performance and the Crown Prosecution Service also reported that it had developed internal performance metrics.
The police acknowledged that the College of Policing, with its central research function, could play an important role in improving the evidence base although it had not yet conducted any work in this area.
The Home Office, however, told us that it did not see value in providing consistent and comparable information of this kind across police forces.
My take
Another day, another Whitehall department not taking the necessary steps to put a system in place that would save the taxpayer money and better serve citizen needs. This is no doubt a complex system that requires input from a number of bodies and agencies – all of which are no doubt grappling with their own poor data and systems. However, the Home Office’s reluctance to do things as obvious as provide comparable and consistent information suggests that it isn’t motivated enough to get a system in place that works. That needs to change.
Image credit - Images sourced via fotoliaRead more on: Digital government and public services

