
Getting set
For those retailers that have suffered data breach incidents and worried about the impact on their long-term prospects as a result, there’s some comfort to be taken from yesterday’s numbers from Home Depot.
A little over a year ago, 56 million customer credit card numbers were exposed in one of the US’s biggest security breaches. But in the midst in a property improvement boom across the country, the possible damage to the firm’s reputation and bottom line hasn’t been felt to date.
For the third quarter, the company just posted a profit of $1.73 billion, up from $1.54 billion a year earlier, on revenue up 6.4% to $21.82 million. There was a 4.4% increase in customer transactions, while the average size of each purchase rose slightly to $58.03 from $57.55 a year earlier.
So has the firm dodged a bullet? CEO Craig Menear is careful not to overstate the case, noting that each month since the breach has seen “positive transaction growth”.
But he admits:
We know that there are customers who were upset based on the emails that we got. So there had to be some impact. It’s just really hard to quantify.
We’ve lost some visibility in the small Pro with our data breach that we’re working to regain.
The final cost has not been fully realised yet of course. Target’s $10 million settlement in class actions following its 2013 data breach serves as a reminder of the tally that may yet have to be settled.
For its part, Home Depot has been on the receiving end of over 50 law suits to date, which it has attempted to have squashed, arguing last month in court that they should be dismissed. The plaintiffs claim injuries as the result of the breach, whereas Home Depot argues the allegations of injury are not backed up with evidence.
As of October, Home Depot had racked up $232 million in expenses, with $20 million of legal and litigation-related expenses related to the breach incurred in the past three months. That was enough to drive overall operating expenses $14 million higher than expected.
Digital spend
But for now, the firm appears to be riding out the storm as the all-important holiday season looms in which the firm’s digital investment will play a major role. Online sales grew approximately 25% in the third quarter and now represent approximately 5.1% of overall sales. About 42% of all online orders are picked up in local stores.
This is the direction of travel, says Menear:
The retail environment has been and is changing. Our customers, both Pro and DIY, are changing the way they shop for our products and services. Our goal is to provide our customers with the convenient and fulfilment options they require. Whether they buy products online through a personal computer, a tablet or their mobile phone, we’re enabling them to pick up product in our stores or have products shipped to their home. We’re investing in making the process easier and frictionless.
We continue to focus and invest in our supply chain to drive productivity and to deliver a better customer experience. As our customers are transacting more frequently through our online channels, we have invested in creating the right fulfillment options to support that growing business.
Menear points to a number of recent key digital initiatives:

An e-commerce site in Mexico
Re-platforming of the Canadian website.
A third online contact center has opened in Arizona
The firm now has three direct fulfilment centers in place which means it can now each 90% of US customers within 2 days.
In 108 stores Home Depot is offering Buy Online, Pick-up In Store (BOPIS). This will be rolled out across the US in 2016.

My take
A much-needed boost to confidence levels in the US retail sector.
But the long-term impact of the data breach may yet have to be reckoned. If the law suits become class-action suits, it’s a whole new ball game.
Read more on: Analytics planning and data analysisCRM and customer experienceDigital and content marketinge-commerceRetail e-commerce and the omni-channel 