
Jeremy Corbyn – Labour Party Leader
The British political community is reeling from the shock landslide victory of Jeremy Corbyn to the position of Leader of the Labour party in Opposition. Corbyn has never held a senior government or opposition post despite being a UK Parliament veteran of more than 30 years’ standing. He romped home on a radical reform program that has sweeping tax reform at its heart.
UK government leadership have been scathing in their attacks on Corbyn both during and after his election. Prime Minister Cameron went so far as to say that Corbyn is a threat to national security. Mass media that is supportive of the current government have been downright vitriolic. Former Labour PM Tony Blair pleaded that Corbyn be defeated, but to no avail. In short, Jeremy Corbyn is a lightning rod for attacks and will continue to be so until his policies are fleshed out. Even then you can be sure the attacks will not lessen.
What is Corbynomics?
Richard Murphy
Corbynomics is the invention of self declared political economist Richard Murphy, a colleague from way back in the day when I encouraged him into the then emerging trend of blogging.
Murphy has written about tax reform and tax justice for many years, much to the ire of the political right who variously paint him as either barking mad, an enemy of business, and pretty much everything in between.
His thesis is simple: eliminate the money that is lost to the UK Treasury via various forms of tax fraud and avoidance and you end up creating a much more just society. Murphy sees this mostly coming from large corporations and high wealth individuals he accuses of working the UK tax system to avoid or evade billions in taxes. There is much more to Corbynomics than that but better tax management is at the core of how a future Labour government would fund its social programs under the current proposals.
Regardless of your views on taxation, I am more concerned about what this agenda means for UK government IT, assuming Corbyn is elected on Murphy’s economic agenda (PDF).
Highs and lows
We have written extensively about the highs and lows of UK government IT. Most recently, we published a story about ‘government as a service’ that demonstrated Treasury commitment to the business case but not providing information we believe is important to understanding what is going on behind the scenes:
It’s disappointing that the Treasury has chosen not to provide any further information about the scope. Saying it supports the business case is one thing, but the level of funding it approved is another matter. Sources at the time of Bracken’s departure were adamant that he was leaving because of a lack of backing from the Treasury and civil service chief executive John Manzoni – which I’m inclined to believe.
In my terms, UK government was making good progress and continues to do so on some fronts. But it is back to being something of a mess in key areas. Not that is news to those who have followed the many public IT failures of the past.
One of Murphy’s key planks for fixing the tax issue is a restaffing of the British revenue and companies regulation departments after years of cuts. That’s a fine idea in principle but what about ensuring that the systems upon which they rely work as intended? A pile of crap only becomes a bigger pile of crap when you add people to the mix. You have to solve for root cause issues first.
Solving for the customer
I take the view that if you are going to view government economics from the tax collection point of view, you must also look at the spend element. You need to start hunting down and eradicating inefficiencies and ineffectiveness among and between operating departments.
Murphy’s agenda does not yet provide us with insights into how this might happen. I have some advice to offer.
I am with Derek duPreez when he says: 
Questions have been raised about how much political support there is for the [GDS] department’s efforts from Number 10 and the Treasury and whether or not we could be returning to practices of the past where everything is outsourced and projects routinely fail. I’m inclined to believe that’s taking assumptions a bit far, but it wouldn’t hurt if Cameron put his/our money where his mouth is and announced his political backing for GDS.
I hope that Corbyn’s advisors take note because this could become a strategic battleground in support of Corbyn’s objectives.
While government is not a business, it is meant to serve the nation as a whole and the national interest. That puts it firmly in the court of services provider. Corbyn has virtually said so but there is no prescription for getting ‘from here to there.’
I believe for example that applying modern thinking about outcomes and shared risk should be mandatory. Case studies I see from the commercial world conclusively demonstrate that when outcomes are put at the center of IT projects, then everyone wins. The days of patting oneself on the back for achieving green light SLAs for IT operations will not cut it.
The good news is that Murphy is well aware of the good things that a solid IT can bring. The extent to which his thesis can be informed by those who don’t have a vested interest in the status quo remains to be seen. It will for example be of little use bringing in the ‘usual suspects’ providers. That way lies the path of ossification as those vested interests expend energy on maintaining their lucrative contracts. It doesn’t have to be that way and I think we can see the inkling of how this might work from one of Murphy’s recent writings on the topic of public versus private sector.
Another fruitful area for exploration might be in the French and US government departments’ use of open source as a way of dramatically reducing spend. There are plenty more examples but I will leave it here for the moment.
Regardless of what I or others might think, Jeremy Corbyn has yet to be elected to power and so anything said today is speculative. Nevertheless, I believe that if his reforming proposals are to become reality then the IT spend topic should be a central part of that debate.
Endnote: Political opponents will accuse Corbyn of ‘old tax and spend’ tactics that failed in the past. Perhaps if it was turned around to be ‘fair tax and wise spend’ then things might be more palatable.
Featured image via Sceptical Scot
Read more on: Digital government and public servicesG-Cloud and the Digital Marketplace

