
When Snap and Amazon announced their new ‘visual shopping’ partnership, it became clear that a future of ubiquitous retail beckons.
Under the new Millennial-focused deal, Snapchat users will be able to point their cameras at an item and receive instant pop-up data from Amazon, with an option to click-through and buy.
With 78% of 18-24 year olds using Snapchat, the deal could suggest a brewing romance between the digital retail/cloud services behemoth and young adults’ mobile best friend. Such a deal would certainly be better for Snap than being just another checkout item in Facebook’s basket of acquisitions, for example.
That aside, ubiquitous retail is what omni-channel experiences are evolving towards. It’s no longer just about linking bricks-and-clicks, via innovations such as smart changing rooms, Augmented Reality, and AI; it’s about embedding the option to buy things in everything from a camera to a chat app and a pair of smart glasses.
Simply look at something in the street – a passing stranger’s coat or shoes, for example – and the network will tell you what it is, where you can buy it, and let you check out the item on the spot. That’s the promise of ubiquitous retail.
Privacy be damned, middle-aged shoppers everywhere! This is a millennial’s impulse-buy dreamworld, suggesting that the hottest purchase in the years ahead may be a student’s mounting debts.
JDA worldview
But Snap and Amazon aren’t the only companies banking on ubiquitous retail – even as Amazon ponders opening 3,000 real-world convenience stores, according to reports last week and finally becomes the thing it was set up to put out of business – a chain of high street shops!
Enterprise supply chain management and retail planning provider JDA Software also has this retail future in its sights, judging by an event last week at its new London headquarters.
When JDA completed its acquisition of Blue Yonder in August 2018, it brought onboard a suite of retail-focused AI solutions. On the back of these, JDA launched its Luminate suite of tools last week – barely a month after the deal.
Among these, Luminate Replenishment and Luminate Pricing are designed to help retailers “embrace the power of AI and machine learning” to drive increased profits and revenues from their operations, said the company. Meanwhile, Luminate Assortment and Luminate ControlTower were demonstrated at the event, putting machine-learning based assortments and oversight of operations at retailers’ fingertips.
In short, the new tools illuminate what’s going on between the supply chain, the stock room, and the shelves in store, and help retailers optimise their operations to better serve the customer.
At the Retail Connect event, JDA brought together spokespeople from its own ranks, from its Blue Yonder acquisition, and – intriguingly – Google Cloud to set out its new strategy to a room full of leading retailers.
First to speak was Wayne Snyder, JDA’s VP of Industry Retail. Snyder walked the audience through the past 25 years of ecommerce, from shops to static websites, and from omni-channel retail to click-and-collect shopping. But that’s just the story so far, he said: mobile-first experiences and immersive, augmented commerce are where the industry is now heading, bringing us to a future of “commerce everywhere”.
The rise of subscription services alongside “irritable, disloyal” consumers, who shop little but often, creates big challenges for retailers, especially when set aside the 50% of people who still like to visit stores. The problem, said Snyder, is that this creates “thousands of different versions of the supply chain”. So JDA is here to help companies sort out the mess.
And if that’s not a big enough challenge for retailers who are trying to fend off Amazon (current spending on R&D: $26 billion), voice-enabled services are also on the rise. Indeed, sales via digital assistants such as Alexa are forecast to account for up to 30%  and  of all purchases in the next five years, he claimed.
Into this maelstrom of conflicting choices comes AI, which most retailers believe will be crucial to achieving a lasting market advantage, said Snyder. But there’s another problem, he added – most of them have no idea what AI is.
So what does JDA think AI is?
According to JDA’s strategy, AI is about pulling together the pattern recognition ability of machine learning, deep learning’s insights, the chatbots facilitated by natural language processing, voice search, visual search, and the Internet of Things, to create a cloud-based system that thinks more like a human does.
The point was rammed home by Scott Penberthy, Google’s Director of Applied AI in the CTO’s office at Google Cloud. He flew all the way from California to London to explain tensors and the human brain to a room full of worried shopkeepers. As good a description of current US-UK relations as one could wish for.
With such an intuitive, intelligent system, continued JDA’s Snyder, retailers can gain greater efficiency and new insights, because data is everywhere and customers should be driving these companies’ plans. As for the real driver for JDA, Snyder bluntly stated:
We have to do these things, because retail has changed, but retailers have not.
The implication – they’re all stuck in the past.
My take
Whether JDA’s retail guests appreciated Google’s detailed picture of how the human brain can be reproduced by tensors, or JDA’s narrative that retailers don’t know what they’re doing without AI’s help, is open to question. But something else has certainly changed other than customer behaviour: the real advantage of AI when applied to retailers’ supply chains is that the technology recognises the difference between an average and a scale of probabilities.
This point was brilliantly explained by Dr Christian Scherrer, Principle Data Science Consultant at Blue Yonder. No longer will retailers’ supply chains be guesswork based on market averages, he suggested; AI can reveal a whole spectrum of probabilities, based on reams of historical data.
With access to all of that data, weighted towards or against different outcomes, retailers can start to predict what will – or should – happen in their supply chains in countless different circumstances. Much better than crossing their fingers and hoping the customer clicks ‘buy’.
Image credit - Augmented reality application for retail business concept. © Montri - Fotolia.com.Read more on: CRM and customer experienceRetail e-commerce and the omni-channel 