
Dennis Andrucyk
For most organizations technological change can be daunting for management, at NASA this is an even greater task with missions that last far beyond the life of most commercial software and hardware. How NASA deals those challenges has lessons for most executives and managers.
Dennis Andrucyk, the Deputy Associate Administrator At the agency’s Science Mission Directorate, spoke to diginomica at the Australian CeBIT show in Sydney this week on how they manage projects which can span decades and technology cycles that can leave them working with superseded or even antiquated equipment.
Andrucyk, an Electrical Engineer by profession, was the agency’s Chief Technologist before taking his current role. Prior to joining NASA he worked with various US defense and aerospace contractors, giving him a broad overview of private and public sector organizations manage technological change.
I’m the number two person in NASA for science, I really have a great time in that job. I have had a great career building spacecraft, instruments, ground systems and aircraft systems all pursuing NASA science.
One of the things I found as a technologist that I found was missing, was an overview of all the technologies being used.
NASA has a ten year planning period and with its role in driving and developing new technologies, design is a lot less certain and with some projects, like the Voyager program, running for decades it’s important managers factor in standards, media formats and technology which will almost certainly be superseded during a mission’s life.
All these different spacecraft and missions are operating simultaneously and our job as scientists is to make sense of it all. Because any one of these taken by themselves is usually pretty interesting but when you take them all together it’s spectacular.
Communicating with them all, pulling them all together is not as straightforward as you would think, all these have to be scheduled.
Part of the management process is to bring collaborators and stakeholders on board early in the planning process to ensure there’s industry and academic support for the chosen technologies.
We have several different advisory groups for each of those areas and those science groups help create partnerships, not just in managing the data but in building the spacecraft and the instruments in the first place, it’s a very structured process in the beginning in identifying the science pursuits we’d like to go after.
Every ten years we have the Decadal Process which tells us what the science priorities are for each of thsoe areas. We form teams that help advise us on the science.
Each one of those groups talk about the science they need and the beauty of the decadal survey is they don’t tell you exactly how to make those measurements so we can include technology as we need to.
One of Andrucyk’s key responsibilities is to build new ideas into missions and he sees pushing the technology envelop as being a key part of NASA’s overall purpose.
We’re trying to enforce a process where every mission will have a new technology or process that’s going to enable a new mission. We’re doing that deliberately – it’s easy to build to requirements. If you do that you may get what you’re looking for but you’re going to miss opportunities.
Figuring out which ideas should be incorporated into missions has its own expensive processes which again relies upon the agency’s partners where NASA tries to share costs and expertise with other organizations such as the European Space Agency and its Japanese equivalent.
Technology Readiness Levels range from one to nine, one just being ‘I Have a new idea,’ two is ‘how can that new idea being applied’ which runs up to nine where it’s ‘flight validated’.
As you progress through those levels it’s cheap up front to say I have a new idea but if I’m going to prove it in a thermal vacuum chamber or make sure it’s going to work in a relative environment than it might cost millions of dollars.
To get through that ‘middle technology hump’ we need to work with partners that will help support it’.
While virtual reality, 3D Printing and other emerging technologies are shortening development cycles, deciding what’s ‘ready for flight’ still can be an expensive process.
It helps tremendously but we’re finding in some areas, that if it’s truly a new technology the models we depend upon to provide that verification aren’t as accurate as they need to be. So we still need to run the tests. Does it streamline it? Absolutely. But can we take a technology directly to flight in a brand new area? Maybe not quite as much as we’d all like.
Additive manufacturing though holds promise to really simplify how systems are constructed in the future.
Andrucyk also sees artificial intelligence changing how NASA plans and designs missions with it making equipment far more robust and reliable.
In the past we’ve focused on having systems that are deterministic and testable so that, given the same stimulus, they operate the same way every single time. And we wanted that because that’s how we had a reliable system.
But as we add more intelligence, more capability, it’s almost impossible to identify almost every different combination and permutation – what every outcome will be for a given output – so we need to be sure our systems are robust enough to be able to handle new ways of doing things.
For management Andrucyk has some straightforward advice in dealing with change and staying ahead of a rapidly evolving technology world
Stay the course and understand what some of the challenges are. Don’t be afraid to lean forward, take the steps and be proactive. Don’t become complacent.
Change is not our enemy, change is our friend and it will help you reach for the stars.
My take
It’s hard to argue with a person who has enjoyed such a long and distinguished career inside such a prestigious organization. I was especially taken with his advice about collaboration, a topic that continues to befuddle many a commercial organization today. Lessons for everyone – or rather for those who have ears to hear.
Image credit - via NASARead more on: Digital government and public services

