
I have been fortunate to work on a number of content marketing teams in my consulting life and what I’ve learned is that the process to create a content marketing plan and see it come to fruition is hard, regardless of the size of the team.
Even when you have a good understanding of who your customers are, designing the right strategy and following it through doesn’t always yield the results you expected. Much of the challenges of a content marketing plan relate to the content development lifecycle.
The Invisible Key to Content Success: The Importance of Data Consolidation, Collaboration & Workflow, a research report from the Content Marketing Institute and SEMrush, brings to light many of the challenges organizations face in the area of content development.
The paper defines a four-step workflow process for the content lifecycle as follows:

Planning and Ideation
Creation and Optimization
Distribution
Performance Tracking and Audit

The report looks at each of these stages in the process and the challenges certain members of the content marketing team face.
Planning and ideation gets the least budget
One of the key takeaways from the report is the lack of budget and focus put on parts of the content development lifecycle you can’t see:
The digital marketer’s instinct is to make sure that as much of the budget as possible is spent toward things that the audience will see. But a focus on “standing out,” especially when combined with limited time, budgets and headcount, can lead marketers to, unfortunately, deemphasize some of the things that need to be designed well, but don’t initially appear to help the brand stand out in the marketplace of ideas.
The content strategist leads this stage. In this research, they identified their biggest challenges as “developing content pieces that resonate with the target audience” and “developing an ROI plan.”
My POV

I believe every part of the content lifecycle is important, but if you don’t get the planning and ideation stage right, the rest won’t be right either. So, it’s odd that this stage often gets the least budget and is the most challenging.
Let’s talk about content that resonates. Coming from the technology industry, it’s hard to figure out what the right content is. If you’re like me, you spend a lot of time reading about the industry you write content for. You look for content that is shared over social media, has the most traffic or gets a lot comments on LinkedIn. But writing another version of that content isn’t going to work. And what if you don’t see content that is popular? You’re starting from scratch then and it takes even longer.
You have to find your content tilt – your perspective on a topic, an angle that is unique to you and that you focus on consistently in all your writing. When you understand what that is, you look at all this content other companies produce in a different light. And that should start to give you plenty of ideas on what you can write about.
From here you have to consider if your perspective resonates with the people or companies you want for customers. Ask questions, runs some tests and adjust your perspective as you learn what’s working.
Content ideation and planning isn’t a one-time deal; you must evaluate and evolve your plan regularly. Content ideation needs to be evaluated even more often and adapted as you monitor the performance of the content you publish.
Content creation and optimization: quality over quantity
Content writers and editors need to focus on the quality of the content they create and not get wrapped up in the number of content assets developed. But there’s a bigger challenge in this stage: balancing the creative aspects of writing with its optimization for search engines. Another challenge, “understanding target audiences and their problems.”
A few key points here:

Optimization goes beyond basic keyword research
Content ideas require deep analysis around audience interests, particularly topics they like and questions they ask
Writers and editors need to figure out how to structure a content idea and the right vocabulary to use
Semantics used in text

My POV
Maybe I didn’t understand this part of the process in the report right, but if you’re at this stage and you still aren’t sure you understand your target audience and their problems, something is wrong. That work needs to happen in the planning and ideation stage and communicated clearly to the writers and editors before they create the content.
If I could, I would put a huge picture of my target audience in front of me when I write, so I didn’t forget who I was writing for.
It does, however, make sense a writer would struggle with structuring an idea and knowing the right vocabulary to use. These things tend to be more fluid and change a lot. You can write to a certain structure continually – there are core formulas everyone follows – or you can play with some creative ideas that capture attention because they are new or different.
You can also spend time on forums and in communities where your audience hangs out. There, you’ll see the vocabulary you should use, as well as the kinds of questions and topics your audience is interested in.
Distribution gets harder every day
Everyone should play a role in helping distribute and share content across social media channels, but there are other locations where your content should be placed so your audience can find it.
The research identifies three ways to determine the best distribution channels:

Who’s writing about the market? Media sites (with a good brand reputation and solid monthly traffic for your audience) and influencers
Where is the competition publishing? Can you find out how well their content is performing?
What resources worked best in your previous campaigns?

My POV
Beware the media sites who willingly take your content but give you little in return. Sure, they can promote your piece on their social media channels, but that doesn’t drive traffic to your site, and I bet it doesn’t necessarily help build your thought leadership profile, or that of your company’s either. Most of the time your piece is lost in the shuffle of a dozen other pieces going out that day and promotion doesn’t happen more than once or twice.
You should look for media sites with a strong brand reputation, but you should also know what you get in return for giving them your hard-earned content. For example, a profile page that shows all the content you have developed and lets you give a summary of yourself and your company.
There needs to be a way of measuring the impact of distributing content on a media site. It has to help you build awareness. Otherwise, you might as well publish the content on your own blog and promote it yourself on Twitter and LinkedIn. I don’t have an answer for how you do that, but I aim to figure it out.
Performance tracking and auditing
Another stage that every member of the content marketing team should be involved in. But what are the right metrics to track?
Content writers look at traffic, social shares/likes, the position of the content in SERPs. Truthfully, these are the same things editors and content managers look at too.
My POV
Performance tracking is an area I’m trying to place more focus. One client I work for is happy that we develop content for brand awareness and is happy that we are simply producing content that is slowly helping them gain attention in their market. But I feel this is letting them, and the content down. Another client doesn’t seem to measure performance much at all, and they produce some really great content.
The metrics you need to track depend on the type of content you develop – whitepaper, infographic, video, blog post – as well as its purpose, and, I believe, the audience.  Type of content asset seems obvious – track downloads for a whitepaper, views for a video (including how much was viewed and where the drop is), blog posts are traffic, social shares. SERP position applies to all, assuming SEO is optimized properly.
Purpose and audience are a little harder to work with. Certain audiences aren’t as likely to promote content they like because they want to keep the information to themselves, or legally they may not be able to promote content. Content performance for these audiences is harder to track, and you may be limited in the metrics you use, some of which may be qualitative.
I also think we have to go beyond the basic metrics and starting tracking how a piece of content fits into the purchase journey. I’ll point to the example from Silicon Labs who created a piece of content for actual customers, that ended up being a key decision driver. Look at how content assets might be leveraged throughout the journey and how they contribute to an actual purpose (attribution is a topic I’ve covered but needs more attention).
Final thoughts
I’ve raised almost as many questions as I tried to answer, proving content marketing is a continual learning process for everyone. I would like to throw this out to my fellow content marketers – what’s working for you, and what hasn’t? Share in the comments.
Image credit - Rollercoaster Ride (against blue sky) © leeyiutung - Fotolia.comRead more on: Analytics planning and data analysisContent marketingDigital and content marketingDigital skills and training 