
Zach Nelson, CEO NetSuite
The traditional user conference is often a very passive experience for attendees. Organizations sending employees to such events have one single goal, and it’s a worthy one, knowledge gathering – whether it’s to gain more information about the future of the product or service with perhaps a little sales prospecting thrown in and for individuals potentially a little job prospecting. The company hosting the conference disseminates the wisdom and the users imbibe it – end of story. It’s a show, but that’s it, just a show.
To my mind, any time a company has the distinct honor of being able to interact face-to-face with its customers is an opportunity for meaningful two-way engagement. It’s a case of ‘you can learn from me, but I can learn so much from you too.’ That includes business success and challenges, strengths and weaknesses of the product, new features or services that are in high demand. This engagement is the beginning, not the end of an ongoing conversation.
In fact, I’d go further – a user conference is a mobilization and a coming together of consumers, users, providers, implementers, administrators, developers and all manner of other partners. Perhaps, we in the enterprise software world, in particular, tend to draw a distinction between our customers and our partners but, if you think about it, enterprise software vendors are partners with their customers and with their customers’ customers.
I think the industry has become fatigued with the traditional conference model, whether it’s the automotive industry, the gaming industry or enterprise software. People are ready for a more authentic, more relevant set of content and they want to be part of a community that helps improve the product or service. Not just at that moment in time, but really incorporating their aspirations for the future.
Let’s engage and build a relationship
Today, there are so many different channels for us to engage with each other – by phone, by email, by instant message and over social media – that often when we meet in person, we’re not really meeting as strangers. We have already made some connection – often by following each other and interacting over Twitter or LinkedIn and other social networks – so when we connect in real-life, we can build on that existing relationship. We often know where these connections went to school, their previous employers and their interests – we may even know exactly what they had for dinner last night and what it looked like. And once we make or deepen connections face to face, we have the opportunity to easily continue that engagement via the communication channel or channels of our choosing.
We are emotional beings and emotion plays a strong part in every decision we make including the buying decision. Making and building connections lays the groundwork for future engagements. Being a trusted source of information on Twitter may well play a role in you later choosing to buy my company’s enterprise software over other organizations where you have no pre-existing connections.
We’re about to test out this philosophy at our own SuiteWorld conference where we’re reimagining customer engagement at the conference and indeed at every customer-facing event we are involved with. We will highlight and focus on customer success and have our customers share and tell their own stories and those of their customers. That’s an emphasis for the entire conference – sharing experiences with fellow users, partners and with us. At the same time, all of us are aware that we face many business challenges, which can be neatly summarized in a single word ‘disruption.’ For that reason, the theme for SuiteWorld is how companies and industries are being impacted and will continue to be impacted by a wide variety of disruptive forces and we will all share advice on how to meet that disruption and survive it and actually thrive on the sea changes it brings in its wake.
No more talking at users
Attendees at SuiteWorld 2014
For me, the traditional conference keynote, where a member of the C-suite at an enterprise software company would talk at an audience, is done. Instead, a keynote is a conversation – it’s us opening up to you and vice versa. SuiteWorld will feature some of NetSuite’s most interesting and innovative customers, including representatives from FitBIt, DocuSign, Pebble, Qlik and American Express Global Business Travel as well as inspirational speakers like Oakland A’s General Manager Billy Beane and Eric Wedge, former manager for the Seattle Mariners and Cleveland Indians and current baseball analyst at ESPN.
At the end of the day, SuiteWorld is the coming together of the entire NetSuite community and that’s why our events at the conference aren’t one-off engagements and then you’re done. Our Hackathon4Good and our Fitbit Challenge take place during the show, but we’re hoping those who attend the conference will continue on the good work raising money for worthy causes. We’ll stay in step and keep checking back with each other.
And yes, there are some elements of industry shows that should be maintained – namely the party. We think that part of the event always brings people together. The right celebration requires nothing less than the best. So SuiteWorld will include bands like international stars Nico & Vinz, indie pop duo Capital Cities and Dorothy, who just plain rock.
Light a creative spark
I’ve talked previously here about the importance of using events as a vast fireside conversation for our customers and our customers’ customers to share transformational, epic ideas about business and life. But, we have to keep that fire burning both virtually and in the real world around the globe.
I love the idea of the Olympic torch which is carried around the globe and then lights the flame at the next games. My hope is that everyone attending SuiteWorld carries away an ember of transformational thinking and uses that flame to light or stoke their own creative fire within their businesses to benefit their customers and their customers’ customers.
Image credits: People arms raised © Rawpixel – Fotolia.com; conference photos by NetSuite.
Read more on: CRM and customer experienceNetSuitePartner Zone 