
By the time this is published I’ll be half way across the Atlantic on my way to the UK so indulge me if you will as I go off piste and describe my two year American experience.
And now, the end is near
And so I face the final curtain
My friend, I’ll say it clear
I’ll state my case, of which I’m certain
I’ve lived a life that’s full
I’ve traveled each and every highway
But more, much more than this
I did it my way
Those famous Sinatra lyrics played out as Donald and Melania Trump took to the floor for the first dance at his first inaugural gala. I wonder if the irony of the opening line meant anything to Mr Trump? For my part, I’m offering that same song now to readers after just shy of 20 years away from my homeland only a couple of which were spent in the US. It’s time to go home.
The last couple of years have been quite the ride and to be frank, I’ve no idea where the time went. It seems like yesterday that we were scrambling to find furniture which has now gone to charity along with pretty much everything else we had at the apartment.
What was the outcome of those frenetic two years?
diginomica added four US based analysts who, between them get to around 100 events a year. It’s not up there with Holger Mueller’s near non-stop travel but then our people are focusing on specific areas of study rather than attempting to cover everything that’s going on in technology.
We also brought on additional partners and renewed virtually all of the existing partner portfolio. Being here to meet and talk to people in more or less the same time zone made a difference and it was good to know that I could restrict travel mostly to locations within a two hour flight distance while others toiled up and down the east coast.
Most important, I got to spend time with those who both live and work with technology in a different environment to that we see in Europe. Some things were a surprise, others were confusing.
The US continues to be wedded to the three part check (cheque in the old tongue) and only now is getting to grips with chip and pin or the latest new thing, tap and pay. Having to settle my taxes by way of cashiers check was a novel experience. I’ve not written a check in over 15 years and never had a check book in the previous country we lived.
Bureaucracy is visible everywhere. The list of regulations governing pretty much everything is mind numbing. It is the visible embodiment of the nanny state. But then food labeling is a shambolic disgrace. I defy anyone to truly know what is in most packaged food. Legs and regs will keep ERP/MRP/Payroll system admins busy for years to come.
The definition of someone who is ‘senior’ is fluid. As someone who is over 60 years of age, I qualify for reduced cinema and local public transportation tickets. If I was a US citizen or someone paying into the US ‘version’ of social security, I could have retired on reduced benefits at 62. The good news is that it doesn’t matter I am not a US citizen or permanent resident, those benefits are available to me as someone living in the area. For most purposes ‘senior’ seems to mean 65. But then with the hollowing out of the middle class, it is increasingly likely that people of my age may be the last that can afford to retire completely.
The US is a nation of rabid shoppers that brands are only too keen to encourage. There is no celebratory event too insignificant for the invocation to shop. Our mailbox was regularly stuffed with offers of all kinds and coupons by the score. To me, it is an incredible waste of dead tree technology. The choices available are truly mind-blowing but then not surprising for a nation of immigrants.
Online shopping channels cover just about everything. One month, we tried to see if we could order everything we need online and get it delivered. We would have made it if it hadn’t been for the fact we were going stir crazy. We need never have left the apartment. That includes food, booze, general groceries, dry cleaning services and toiletries. Needless to say, our Amazon Prime accounts were extensively pillaged for offers, digital books and streamed video, along with Netflix, Tribeca and (for a brief period) HBO. Just about all the business equipment I need was bought online. I even took to getting clothes made to bespoke sizes via online services. No wonder fewer Americans cook at home than ever before.
Speaking of Amazon, on our last full day, we stumbled across a bricks and mortar Amazon store. Amazing place. On one side is a layout any Waterstone’s user will recognize. On the other side, there is an Apple-esque layout of all the cool toys Amazon has to offer. Knowledgeable and friendly staff are everywhere and the tills were regularly ringing up purchases. Payment can be made through your Amazon phone app. A real 21st century experience.
While we indulged in buying a 42 inch TV, we only switched it on a handful of times. Whether by design or otherwise, we’ve become a house of “tablet/laptop as TV” users. We didn’t invest in a sound system. Why would you when Amazon Echo and Spotify can meet most of your needs?
I stopped driving over 18 months ago. We used either public transport – which is pretty darned good in San Diego – or Uber. I’ve not worked out the totals but I doubt we spent more than $150 a month on transportation. That’s an order of magnitude less than if we’d been financing a car. And, I had the benefit of meeting many drivers to fuel my first party data research into the Uber economy.
Entertainment is expensive where we lived. Unless you go at happy hour which was too early for us, or know the spots where things are cheap, then booze in downtown San Diego is going to set you $6-8 a pint of beer or $9 a glass of wine. The upside is that there are numerous craft breweries to sample, some of which turn out mighty fine beers. If beer is your thing then San Diego is a slice of heaven.
I was surprised to find that there is no choice of power supplier in San Diego It’s SDG&E, part of Sempra Energy or nothing. Who knew monopolies could survive in this day and age?
The demand for quality housing in San Diego outstrips supply and that means relatively high rents, especially in the small downtown area, although rents are nothing like the nose bleed stuff of San Francisco. Rents around here rose 9% on average in 2016 and we have watched as four new towers came out the ground in the immediate area. There is choice but I’d say that unless you are very fortunate, apartment living is a bland experience.
Living close to the Mexican border (35 minutes by trolley) meant I could go to Tijuana for medical and dental care at a fraction of the cost it would have been in the US and still cheaper than many places in Europe. The only downside was having to tolerate the pedestrian queues to get back into the US and the (mostly) sullen border agents who seem to have ‘asshole’ as a prime job requirement.
Speaking of which, cost of healthcare is insane. One colleague told me a story about needing a stitch astroturfing the hospital and getting a $700 bill for the experience. Some colleagues say that’s the price of a high quality system. I say it’s a ripoff and a cost I know troubles many who are in their late 40s and early 50s. Unless you have a very good plan in place or are sitting on millions in ready cash, getting sick is to be avoided wherever possible.
Americans love their sports, moving seamlessly between baseball, American football and ice hockey with a bit of cage fighting or boxing thrown in. Whether you choose to turn up in person or frequent one of the many sports bars, your sports diet can always be sated. Be prepared to meet sports stats freaks. Americans love measuring things and then quoting stats on almost anything. Yet there’s a shortage of ‘data scientists?’
Living in the US has been an interesting experience but one that’s tinged with sadness. The tragedy I saw as routine comes in two forms.
First, the number of people I met who are holding down two jobs to meet their commitments is staggering. It seems almost routine for people to have two or sometimes three jobs. I don’t know how they switch gears but they didn’t complain and seemed optimistic. I guess the American Dream is alive and well in the imagination if not in the reality.
The second comes in my town’s inability to solve its homeless problem. Panhandlers are pretty much everywhere and small tented communities spring up a few blocks from our apartment and remain for a while before the police move them on or worse still, destroy them. I cannot understand how one of the wealthiest countries on earth fails to deal with this highly visible problem. I’m just glad we could do a little thing by donating our ‘stuff’ to a charity that is dedicated to helping these unfortunate folk.
Regrets? Sure. We didn’t get out as much as I would have liked and rarely traveled far. Event travel drains your appetite for that kind of thing. I would like to have found more time for socializing but when you’re on a clock and have hectic travel schedules then the energy levels are just not there. Besides, having a dozen bars to choose from inside three blocks of our apartment mostly solved for what passes as socializing. The Americans I met were mostly friendly, chatty folk, willing to share an anecdote but keen listeners to those who come from afar.
Will I return to live and work in the US? San Diego has been very good to me. It is vibrant and attractive as an alternative to Silicon Valley. But much as I have enjoyed and benefited from the experience, and with many fond memories to cherish in the time ahead, I won’t be back any time soon. At least not on a semi-permanent basis. While the circumstances are very different, the unease I sense among colleagues and friends is similar to what I saw in the immediate post-9/11 weeks in New York City. Back then there was a sense of panic arising out of a direct assault on American soil. Today, a similar assault is happening from within.
What I see unfolding in today’s political arena is deeply troubling. In a nation where the number of guns in the wild exceeds the population, you never know what might be around the corner. The egregious manner in which Trump’s administration singled  out Muslims is but the start of what I fear will be much worse to come and at my age, I’m just not up for being caught in the thick of whatever that means.
Image credit - via the authorRead more on: Retail e-commerce and the omni-channel 