
Until Dr Barbara Zesik joined Santa Fe Relocation Services as Chief Human Resources officer in August 2014, HR had taken a bit of a back seat – the company had been too busy growing, chiefly through merger and acquisition.
Today, the global relocation firm employs a mix of 2,000 white collar workers and 1,000 operational employees, such as drivers and packers, in 47 countries and counting.
Zesik’s plan was to make the company a great place to work, but to do that the company needed the right HR systems to support its workforce and managers and to drive change. That led them to Cornerstone OnDemand’s door. Zesik explains:

A lot of what is common practice in HR is in the early stages at Santa Fe because it’s never really been part of what the organization did…There wasn’t really a culture of HR and people management and we are changing that – quite rapidly changing that – but you have to work out how to bring people with you, so by putting in a piece of technology like Cornerstone that’s easy to use and easy to engage with is hopefully one of the avenues  that will help us do that.

But the aim initially was not to put in a full-blown HR IS at all, but to find a performance management solution, says Zesik:

There was very little if any performance management in Santa Fe. We had pockets of excellence where people went through the process every year of capturing goals, but this was more about the bonus at the end of year than managing performance.

The company needed to turn these pockets of excellence into consistent, standardized excellence across all regions.  But that couldn’t be done in isolation, explains Zesik:

We quite quickly realised that trying to do that without having an HR IS in the background to support us from a data perspective, line management and change perspective would have been an utter nightmare.

Alongside performance management, other key areas of focus were learning and talent management. While it didn’t exactly have a full-blown Learning Management System (LMS), the company did have a cloud-based social learning platform from Fuse Universal. 
Designed as a learning interface, the Fuse system had grown into an interface for absolutely everything, with 250 communities. It was clearly popular, but trying to pull out data for reports had become an arduous and time-consuming task. 
Other issues influencing the decision to invest included the fact that the company had different data management systems across the globe from Excel spreadsheets to Sage databases, as well as separate payroll systems. Together, this meant that accurate employee data was very difficult to come by, according to Zesik:

There were an awful lot of spreadsheets flying about the business. So trying to get that globally holistic view of our employees was quite a challenge.

In a way, Zesik believes the fact that it didn’t have lots of HR systems in place made the Cornerstone implementation easier:

We don’t necessarily have the challenge in Santa Fe that we have dozens and dozens of systems becoming obsolete that we need to phase out.

Deadlines
Once the deal with Cornerstone was signed, things had to move fast. Santa Fe had two deadlines looming fast: the contract with Fuse Universal was due to end 31 August 2015 and in October that year the company wanted to run its first global engagement survey, and that required a complete organizational hierarchy needed to be downloaded from its HR system. 
The clock was ticking: eight weeks and counting.
Each of the 46 (at that time) markets had to complete data logs and get those spreadsheets uploaded into the new system.  In practice, that proved a tough nut to crack, as the information was littered with multiple errors. It was “very, very painful,” concedes Zesik and the company enlisted Tribridge HCM to help with the data clean-up and uploading.
At the same time, the learning management system was also going live, requiring data out of both the Fuse Universal system and Cornerstone. That meant that they were pre-populating the LMS as they were configuring it and the HR IS. 
Keen to include and involve everyone in the new system, managers in each region were given the download fields in Cornerstone and asked what else they needed. Zesik now says this was a “huge mistake”.
It was a mistake because it meant that lots of customization and complexity were added by people requesting features. As a result, about seven months ago, they went back into the system and started to disable some of these customized fields to reduce that complexity. Zesik says:

You try to please the people you will be working with and you want to engage them with the system as much as you possibly can, but in doing so you have the potential to create such a problem for yourself… That was one of the biggest lessons we learned in that implementation.

Despite the time and data cleansing constraints, the system went live as planned and there haven’t been any glitches since, though, as Zesik notes, the fast turnaround was a scary prospect:

We were quite literally holding hands before we pressed ‘send’ to the entire organization.

While the fast implementation time was without doubt a challenge, Zesik points out that having a non-moveable deadline does at least focus the mind: 

I think the danger is that in some companies things just drag on and the more people you get involved in it the more difficult it becomes. But we just cracked on with it and got it done.

Performance management followed a few months after the initial launch and there are plans to bring succession planning and on-boarding online in the future, as well as Connect, Cornerstone’s social collaboration tool. Initially, Connect was due to launch with the HR IS, but as the company was also going live then with Yammer, they didn’t want to confuse people. 
Despite the fact that performance management had sparked the whole Cornerstone implementation, the company is taking a cautious approach to rolling it out, because of the culture shift required. Rather than launch to everyone, it has started with its global leadership team and other senior executives – about 400 people in total.
Zesik acknowledges that there are number of big changes in attitude in performance management going on at the moment. Some companies, for example, are scrapping rating systems altogether as well what are thought of as traditional performance management approaches in favour of culture of continuous feedback.  But Zesik notes: 

The big consultancies put out stuff about not doing performance management and say they do continuous feedback, but continuous feedback is performance management!

Santa Fe is trying to combine the best of the ‘old-style’ performance management, as Zesik believes that people still need goals and something to work towards:

We are very much encouraging the concept of continuous feedback. We want our managers to spend more time talking to their people. The way we’re addressing that is we’re still going to have managers set goals at the beginning of the year, give them a six-week time timeframe in which we would like them to have that conversation and put the data in to the system.
It is keeping the performance management system open all year round, which means that as people progress through the year and their goals change managers can go into the system and update it:
So instead of including the latest consultancy fad around the ongoing feedback, we’re still doing it within the structure of you actually have concrete objectives and achievable for the year and the ongoing feedback is checking how you’re doing.

The company is very clear on the type of behaviors that support those values and included them in the 2016 performance reviews. 
In part two, Janine Milne looks at how performance management investment has led to wider HR changes at Santa Fe.

Image credit - Freeimages.comRead more on: Digital enterprise in the real worldHCM and the digital future of workUse cases 