
David Dadoun of Aldo at NRF 17
Historically, BI adoption rates are abysmal. So when I had the chance to catch an NRF 2017 presentation from Aldo on how they achieved a 90 percent adoption rate on their mobile analytics project, I grabbed it. The presentation went beyond user adoption, illustrating how mobile dashboards can support new ways of collaborating with data.
The presenter was Aldo’s David Dadoun, Senior Manager, Business Intelligence and Data Governance. Dadoun joined Aldo in the deep end of the pool. Dadoun was hired to improve data governance and performance – but how does a new employee pull that off?
His first week on the job, Dadoun sat down with Aldo’s VP of North American sales. The topic? How could they use BI improve the lives of Aldo’s sales associates, directors, and district managers? Like all retailers, Aldo’s competitive stakes are high. Aldo was founded in Montreal in 1972. Back then, Aldo was just a small concession stand outside of a bigger retailer.
That’s all changed now. Today, Aldo’s men’s and women’s footwear and accessories can be found in 2,000+ locations spanning 98 countries. Also first entered the U.S. market in 1993, expanding internationally in 1995. They plunged into e-commerce in 2005 with their first transactional web site.
Aldo has now shifted that e-commerce view into an omni-channel context. To Dadoun, that’s not about buzzwords. It simply means Aldo serves their customers better if they fuse the e-commerce and brick and mortar into a fluid experience. In 2015, Aldo launched their first “connected store.”
Aldo’s monster challenge – right-time data on the go
Like all retailers, Aldo has a monster challenge getting the right data to the right employees – in a form they can act upon. Dadoun:
Let’s face it, people are no longer sitting behind their desktops waiting for a report to come in. We have to make sure that we can provide them fresh and actionable data at any moment.
Aldo doesn’t want their sales teams bound to laptops, so they need a mobile view. But Aldo learned the hard way that mobile unto itself is not a solution. You can’t just give salespeople PDF data on their mobile and expect something good to happen:
When you have an 85 page PDF report with thirty columns across and a thousand stores going down, it’s not very conducive. It’s not very supportive making any kind of decision.
The PDF problem goes beyond a horrible mobile UX:
It really left us scratching our heads – what can we do? How can we improve this process, so that the people who need the data have access to it? And don’t forget, when it’s a PDF report, it’s pretty much dated by the time you look at it – especially when you’re in sales, and you need to be on the move, and you need to be able to take actions right away.
Aldo’s mobile analytics requirements
Drilling deeper, Dadoun met with his sales directors. Through that dialogue, a “natural partnership” emerged between the sales and operations department, and the business intelligence department, which was Dadoun – an “army of one.” That partnership soon expanded to include the CIO as IT was brought into the dialogue. Together, they defined their mobile analytics requirements:

Interactive mobile visualizations
Ease of use – “we wanted it to be very intuitive – setting up training for anything across the world is painful, if it’s even possible.”
Flat-form agnostic – must fit on current enterprise data warehouse and BI platform.
Lag-free/fast-performing – no 30 second waits for charts to load.
Offline capabilities – crucial for bad reception areas like underground malls, and executive use in airplanes.
Near real-time data – “We’re in sales, right? Our sales and Ops team needs to know what’s happening in the stores at this particular moment. If they know tomorrow, they can’t [address] it. If they know right now, they’re going to be able to call the store manager, to call the district manager, to make a move to change things up a little bit.”

That requirements list led Aldo straight to Roambi (prior to SAP’s acquisition). But Dadoun knew this wouldn’t fly without executive support. Time to show the proposed tool to management:
They were very excited about it. When we showed the president of the North American division the demo, he essentially asked us, “Okay. How much?”
Next up – requirements gathering and prototypes
Dadoun touched on two key process issues. The first? User requirements gathering. During the evaluation phase, Dadoun engaged the user community – “it was truly a team effort.” They also seized that chance to standardize on their most useful KPIs:
We had tons of Excel reports; we had tons of PDF reports. Everybody was talking about conversion, and items sold per transaction, and customer satisfaction – but with their own definitions. That didn’t really sit well with me being in charge of data governance as well. So I figured, “You know what? This is a great opportunity. Let’s all sit down. Let’s all define. We had workshops to define every single one of our metrics and our KPIs – which at the end helped us get better buy-in for the use of the tool, because people believed in it.
Another crucial step: create a prototype. “That’s critical, because then you can show people the tool with their own data and their own realities” Dadoun also built a business case that itemized tangible benefits. They put a project manager in place, and got it done.
About those results – and a demo
A year and a half after Dadoun’s first week on the job at Aldo, he can now speak to some results, including their 90 percent adoption rate (most analyst firms have calculated BI tool adoption in the 30-40 percent range). The CEO is a fan:
I didn’t expect 90 percent adoption. And by 90 percent adoption I mean I have a CEO that uses this tool [constantly]. He logs in and visualizes dashboards three to four hundred times a month, which is pretty impressive.
To drive home the ease of use, Dadoun showed off some Roambi screens (with sample data). He pointed out that Roambi is a freely downloadable application: “You can play with the dashboards yourself – I highly recommend you do that.” Dadoun is a fan of Roambi’s pre-built dashboard templates, which he says are quickly customizable. Dadoun presented this template (click right for bigger view),
“The reason why we use this one is we find it super interactive. It’s very easy to get a top level view of your business.”
Dadoun finds it effective to include daily and weekly views:
I can always see my best performers versus my worst performers. If I was to double tap on a KPI, I can go back in history. So, I can go back and look at historically how have I been doing in each one of my stores for weeks or days. We have a weekly view, which shows you cumulative data up until fifteen minutes ago for the entire fiscal week. And I have a daily view that shows me the same thing, but split by date, which gives us great visibility on our sales performance and all of our metrics.
He particularly likes the collaborative features. During the demo, he showed how you can annotate and share questions about KPIs with your team:

I can just select this as a screenshot, which will generate an email with a screenshot of the data. Our people use this so much, it’s incredible. They’re always sharing information. When they send this back to the store, the store knows, “Okay, this is where I’m at. I can respond. I can talk to my district manager.”
The wrap – on big plans, and the big blue SAP elephant in the room
Dadoun isn’t stopping there; big plans lie ahead. Next up: a major pilot with the aim of deploying Roambi in every store:
We want Roambi accessible to every single associate, so that they can see the exact same KPI at the same refresh rate, with the same calculation methods that our executives, our district managers, their sales directors uses. So when a district manager calls the store and says, “Hey, you’re only at x percent of conversion,” the store agrees. We all know the same data. We all speak about the same data.
Then there is the big blue elephant in the room – SAP. Dadoun is bullish on SAP’s acquisition of Roambi, which was announced after Aldo’s project was underway. He wants to see Roambi grow on a major BI platform: “We don’t want to be laggards. We don’t want to be following behind.”
Usually when I hear about “love and respect” during a corporate presentation, I’m already tuned out. But Dadoun said it with rare conviction:
I’m wearing the Aldo pin, and if you flip that pin over, on the back there’s “Love. Respect. Integrity.” And it’s what our company was built on. It’s the values of our founder.
Dadoun says those values are reflected in Aldo’s early stand on behalf of AIDS victims in 1985: “We broke the taboos around that.” (Aldo has since raised $10 million through its Aldo Fights Aids initiative). At a reception that night, I told Dadoun I respected the conviction shining through. You don’t see that often.
Image credit - Photo of David Dadoun and demo photos by Jon Reed.Disclosure - SAP is a diginomica premier partner. NRF provided me with press access to NRF 2017. Read more on: Analytics planning and data analysisMobileRetail e-commerce and the omni-channelUse casesUser experienceUX and application design 