
Letter from Nespresso president USA
This is a deconstruction of how Nespresso has not just won my loyalty but works to maintain it. It’s an object lesson in marketing that is very rare in my experience.
Yesterday on Facebook, my friend and fellow foodie Sameer Patel asked my opinion of the Nespresso Vertuoline. For the record – I love it.
The conversation meandered around the pros and cons of pod machines of the Nespresso type and on to using whole bean machines. These things always come down to trade offs between convenience and what people perceive as quality.
This morning a package arrived from Nespresso containing a letter, a couple of packs of capsules, a travel mug and a recycling bag. I’ve uploaded a photo of the letter to Facebook and reproduce it here.
The image is quite small so here’s what was said in a letter that predates the Facebook conversation:
Dear Mr Howlett
First and foremost thank you for your impactful, humorous and detailed article Keurig or Nespresso. My team and I enjoyed reading your thoughts and we thank you for your patronage and loyalty to our growing brand.
Please accept this gift on my behalf. Should you visit New York City, you’re most welcome to take a tour of our corporate office.
Again, many thanks, you will continue to see new products and innovation from us in the years to come.
Warm regards
 
Guillaume Le Cunff
President, Nespresso USA
I’d forgotten I’d written that piece and reading it again I can see where they’d find it amusing. It is always rewarding to know that something you’ve produced has an impact – however small – and especially here where we hope to make a dent in the universe.
The letter is intriguing in a number of ways. First up, someone, somewhere at Nespresso is actively monitoring content that talks about the brand and is responding to what they find. That’s a healthy start in a world where much of what we see whether good or bad is utterly ignored.
Next – I’d love to know how they found my address! I guess it must be through my registration at their US site as I will use that as my way of re-stocking capsules. But it is the letter, its content and construction that intrigue the most.
The language used is interesting. Nothing fawning or wasted, professional and to the point. Several words stick out: ‘patronage’ is top of mind as it has a very specific meaning in the context of consumer issues. In the 21st century, the best brands recognize the value of what consumers give to them and the earned nature of both patronage and loyalty. Expressing that sentiment directly is a solid affirmation of Nespresso’s understanding of lifetime customer value.
Meaningful gifts are always welcome and just for the record, the travel mug slides perfectly into the Vertuoline machine. That’s the outcome of well considered design thinking. Playing to the Nespresso consumer’s recycling sentiments is another great idea.
The offer to visit the corporate office is outstanding. I will surely take that up one day since I already know that the company is interesting in its use of technology for both front and back office processes.
The assurance that customers will see more innovation coming from the brand is what we all want to know and hear. It’s the affirmation that ‘we’ have made the right choice.
The letter bears the president’s signature. Whether he actually wrote it or has a super smart copywriter matters less than the fact it is written as a personal message. We often hear that CEOs are overly busy and I get that. Finding time on calendars is getting increasingly difficult. The fact that someone took the time out to write and acknowledge loyalty is an achievement of itself that brands would do well to emulate. Better still, they should make it their own.
What does this all mean to me?
I hate most marketing but the best marketing always induces a visceral response. This brilliantly crafted letter achieves that and then some. If you’re reading this then you’ll know that I think this is a superb way to acknowledge a person’s appreciation. It got the response that all brands crave.
Endnote: I posted the letter photo on Facebook and a number of friends weighed in. Some see this as super smart – I agree. Others seem unaware that Nespresso provides a recycling capability. Say what you want about the broader Nestlé brand, Nespresso is trying to be a good citizen in a way I see very few others even bothering. They’ve earned credit for that.
Sidenote: I’ve been a Nespresso customer for years. I have five machines of various kinds scattered around in Europe and now the US. The letter was an unexpected bonus.

Read more on: Digital and content marketing 