
Hear the term Trains as a Service’ and it becomes quite difficult to banish from the mind the concept of ‘Uber for Railways’, with  images of hundreds of trains rushing around just to pick up one passenger (who at least would get a seat), or trains turning up at your door in the tiny village of Upper Brafront in the Hedges.
Fortunately, it doesn’t take long for the illogicality of such whimsical thoughts to fade way leaving someone with the task of pinning down what does it actually mean. As the phrase was used by Wael Elrifai, Director of Enterprise Solutions at Pentaho, it is probably best that he explains:

This something we are providing as a service to train operating companies, to help them give a good service to their customers by way of reducing the number of unscheduled service breakdowns through failures of rolling stock.

In fact it is about providing the rail service providers, and through them the customers, with two important factors. One is an improvement in their ability to serve their customers’ needs reliably; the other is the corollary – the advantages of reduced prices and strengthened competition that comes from outcomes-based pricing.
Pentaho is doing this work for Hitachi Rail, a manufacturing and systems division of its parent company Hitachi. This, in turn, is providing new train units as part of the Agility Consortium, which has customers such as Virgin trains and GWR as customers in the UK. The trains are close to appearing on the public rail network, though they are currently still restricted to running on private test tracks.
Here, Elrifai and his team are busy gathering data from the sensors on each unit, building a profile of analyses on operations of key systems and components as the basis for preventive maintenance out in the real world.
The work shows how much this type of work has become a multi-disciplinary game, for he is an out and out mathematician, though his skills have recently been applied to areas such as machine learning and artificial intelligence.  One of the favourite applications for this skills set is in building preventative maintenance environments, where the goal is to reduce the number of actual breakdowns by predicting them before they occur and scheduling maintenance before the failure actually happens.
Bringing old technologies into the modern world
This is all rather new for the railway business, so the learning curve is currently steep. Indeed, even in the aviation business, where jet engines have been pioneering territory for preventative maintenance, such unpredicted failures are still quite common. Elrifai says:

It helps to identify those issues that are non-linear. For example, the data may identify that if an engine is running at 98% of maximum performance a failure will occur within two weeks, but if you run it at 97% the failure rate drops to one every 10 years. These are the type of outcomes that modern applied mathematics and machine learning can provide. And in practice, it means that the operator has to provide fewer trains, so the cost per ride comes down. So we are, with rail services, dragging an old industry into the modern age.

He didn’t want to be specific about such reliability improvements for the railway business, but did indicate that the general level is between 5% and 10% for unscheduled downtime across `industrial applications. This may not sound overly dramatic, but he did also point out that most of these types of business run on razor-thin margins, so a saving of 5% can be a real windfall for them.
And when competitors follow the same route and get the same windfalls the result is nearly always a price drop to the customer, as well as better products for that lower cost.
To be fair, of course, many such industries end up with very few competitors because the capital investments and razor-thin margins put new competition starting up, while old competitors have either withered away of been swallowed up.
Pitching at perfection
Elrifai also suggests that there is no reason why railways should not use predictive maintenance to pitch at achieving perfection with service availability. He cited the airline industry as a good example of how close it is possible to get, which is true up to a point. It does in practice only seem to the apply to airlines flying more recent equipment and with a very firm commitment to the ethos of applying the strictures of preventative maintenance. Old, soon-to-be-retired aircraft operated by cash-strapped airlines can result in the same level of minor equipment failures, delays and cancellations as seem quite common on the rail systems.
The objective Pentaho is pursuing is a good one, however, and one long term result being targeted is more modular design of train components and systems that provide richer, more comprehensive status reporting, and can be swapped in and out rapidly during planned downtime periods. In the train world, this often means over night.
One issue for Pentaho to deal with is the fact that trains are often subject to influences beyond upcoming, predictable failures to a component. Interactions with the weather and other natural phenomena can also be important factors, such as the UK train operator classic failures such as ‘the wrong sort of snow’ and ‘leaves on the lines’.
Elrifai is keen to make it clear Pentaho is not planning to get into rail service weather forecasting , as this is a very specialised area that borders on predicting chaos theory in action.  He sees this area – particularly outbreaks similar to the famed ‘snowflakes’ – as a problem that needs to be solved by engineering departments.
By the same token, however, there will be areas where weather conditions play a part in some failure modes and this will have to play a part in modelling maintenance predictions.  Here, the plan is that Pentaho will use complex event processing and time series analysis to determine that, for example, some climatic effects, especially when coupled with the use of specific on-board services or facilities, will raise the risk of a specific failure occurring:

So is the outside air temperature is high and the air conditioning system is running, and the train is running in a certain way – for example accelerating away from a station – it will be able to warn of possible problems, and the remedial actions that need to be taken.

This could even go so far as providing driver advisories  on the rate of acceleration, as well as increasing the rate at which the relevant components and systems are logged and changing the maintenance plan so remedial action can be taken at the next available lay-over.
As with many applications of analytics to predictive maintenance, this work by Pentaho stands amongst the first times it has been used in earnest. The company is therefore  facing a fair degree of ‘flying blind’ in collecting real data and analysing it  so the important failure modes can be identified and modelled:

We have to capture experimental data, then capture actual data, and over time we’ll be able to refine the process. It is hard to predict right now because it is the first time – without having the actual failure data it is hard to make predictions, because not all failures warrant taking a train off-line. But at least we know that it is not going to get any worse than it is now.

It’ll take time
There does seem to be an important lesson in this for any large business that, while predictive maintenance of what ever kind can be extremely value to the business in many ways, it will take time to not only determine which analytical processes are appropriate but also start collecting the relevant data . Indeed, deciding what sensor data is relevant and what isn’t may be one of the most important choices to be made.
This is pretty much where Pentaho is now in this particular project. There are only a small number of test tracks available on which to run the prototype trains, and they obviously have a limited set of environments in which to run them. In practice, therefore, that much of the real data collection can only start once the trains are out, running on the network. And even if only making test runs, any breakdown can cause significant disruption to other services, yet breakdowns are almost essential to know what is likely to break, notes Elrifai:

There is also the case that a one-year old train is different from a three-year old train. This has to do with the P-F Curve (which plots the rate of change from when a potential failure mode is first detected to when the functional failure occurs). The will vary between trains of different ages, so what the train operators are hoping to do is build data sets for different ages of trains.

This expected to help create improvements in  the design of systems and components, and well as improve the development of maintenance practices as these components and systems get older.
Elrifai stressed, however, that this is also an areas where machine learning can play an important part in the future, because using it will mean that building a full dataset on a component – which can only be collected over time – will no longer be needed:

The point of any model is to take complex reality, simplify it into the primary components, and make predictions. Of course, we are aware that this is not a true reflection of the real world, but that is true of everything. It is true of your own eyes, for when you watch the world that is not actually what the world is, it is a simplified version that your eyes capture and you brain interprets. That is what we do here, we have 3,000 sensors on a train with which we create a simplified model of that world, which allows us to make the predictions.

An interesting side issue here is that it is inevitable that the failure prediction capabilities will be a major part of the story when the trains go into service, and the press is bound to pick up on it. Then, when the first unpredicted failure occurs – and it will – it will be Hitachi’s fault and, ultimately, Pentaho’s. Elrifai concurs:

The first time something fails it is going to be someone’s fault, I agree. But in the end all improvement is incremental. If there is a failure it will not be through lack of trying, and the big gain we are all aiming at is outcome-based pricing, and we are getting there.

My take
Some of the back story behind Pentaho’s development of preventive maintenance tools for new trains should prove to be an object lesson on the background work that will be needed to establish any large service in this important area.
Image credit - Virgin Read more on: Cloud platforms - infrastructure and architectureCollaboration sharing and digital productivityCustomer service managementDevOps NoSQL and the open source stackIoT robotics and AI 