
One of the practical keys to how automation might benefit businesses is, these days, to be found in the limitations of human imagination, as can be seen from a fairly simple example that recently arrived in my inbox.
Autodata, a company that specialises in providing automotive technical data to automotive service businesses that need fast access to it has recently expanded the scope of the developer portal to its information service. It had taken to using TIBCO’s Mashery API management system to enhance its own API Delivery Platform so that applications developers can integrate a far wider range of services that are then driven by that underlying technical data resource.
The company has also extended its range of vehicle coverage by adding a wide range of new technical data on motorcycles. The addition of the motorcycle data widens the scope of possible business for such companies, and the chance of more widespread service capabilities for bikers.
Its workshop application is widely used in the vehicle service industry providing service staff with full technical information on the ‘how to’ of any individual task, ranging from periodic maintenance and fault diagnosis routines through to full service and repair operations. It also has information on all makes and models of manufacturers around the globe, making it possible for any competent mechanic to service and maintain any vehicle from anywhere.
Over 550,000 different service procedures are now available to service staff, covering more than 40,000 vehicle models of all types from 155 manufacturers around the globe. This data is already delivered to some 70,000 workshops, and is also to be found as the basis of some 800 industry-specific applications worldwide, ranging from diagnostic tools to parts catalogues. The company claims that it has also seen an 89% growth in developers working with its API set to create more new applications.
The Autodata APIs give developers the capability to select both the quantity and quality (ie the depth of technical detail) their application will require. In addition, as the APIs also work with vehicle vendor data sources to extract vehicle and component data, service management teams can be certain that their staff are working with the latest available information and will not have to go back to source in order to double check.
Using this basic model however, can now give vehicle service organisations considerably more power and flexibility, plus the opportunity to make their service capabilities more `sticky’ to their customers by giving them a better experience through faster, more reliable services at lower cost.
Potential
This is where the potential for increasing the levels of automation exploited can come into play. Underpinning the ability to provide good quality, reliable and fast vehicle servicing is the level of collaboration that can exist between the service organisation and not just the vehicle manufacturer but all the makers and suppliers of component parts and necessary consumables.
One area where this is already starting to be exploited is in the realm of predictive maintenance. Here, the increasing levels of digital vehicle systems management tools are reporting back, in most current cases, an on-board logging system that can be accessed at the time of service. It is but a simple step, and one now being taken on some up-market vehicles, to use mobile phone technology to report the logged events back to the service provider, so that they can assess issues and contact vehicle owners with advice and perhaps pre-book appointments for work to be carried out.
This model can then now be taken further. For example, it could now be used to directly drive a spares warehousing or ordering system to ensure that all renewable components, such as oil seals, are available when specific vehicles are coming in service. In addition, delivery logistics such as courier services can be established able to deliver relevant, pre-packaged service and maintenance kits, with all necessary renewables and replacement parts for that specific vehicle, to location X by date/Time Y.
It is fair to say that, with most modern vehicles, the need for specialist capabilities amongst staff is becoming less of a pre-requisite – back in the day many service businesses had one person skilled in the almost black-art of diagnosing vehicle electrical problems, and much of that is now met by automated diagnosis systems. But there is still scope to build collaborative services between individual vehicles and the HR department, so that maintenance staff with requisite skills/experience – or in need of specific training – can be identified for specific jobs and work schedules created for them.
One last application, which would bring together many of these capabilities, is the potential to use a service such as that provided by Autodata as the necessary data source, behind automated, robotic systems that provide maintenance of vehicles – and indeed a wide range of other machine tools – working in hazardous locations.
The company does recognise this potential, as made clear by the company’s Chief Technology Officer Neil Brooks, who tells me:
Yes, the Autodata API can be integrated with predictive maintenance services and richer collaborative services. Autodata’s APIs provide an innovation platform that enables developers who would like to build their own automotive solutions. To create the solutions that you have used as examples, developers would need to combine one or more sources of information to configure the solutions. The possibilities are endless similar to the Google Maps API, developers can combine other APIs with the Autodata APIs to meet their objectives.
My take
This is a useful example of how the ‘box’ that business managers, and the applications developers that support them, is getting wider and deeper for them. Such applications are no longer about thinking outside the box, for they are now all about a wider and deeper ‘core business’ for not just vehicle service and maintenance businesses, but to a much wider range of service providers. And this now swings two ways, for there is also scope for Autodata to move the core technology on the other applications areas where fast access to vast amounts of data can be the trigger to a whole range of service activities.
Image credit - Fotolia service conceptRead more on: Cloud platforms - infrastructure and architectureCollaboration sharing and digital productivityIT service managementMachine intelligence and AIProfessional services 