
Designer Shoe Warehouse (DSW), the retail powerhouse specializing in name-brand footwear and accessories for women, men, and kids, is on a mission to modernize and transform its shopper experience. To better serve its ‘shoe lovers’, DSW needed a retail engagement solution that could improve in-store efficiency with mobile software. This would empower its associates to better serve in-store customers with proactively served, up-to-date, and easy-to-access information on product inventory and availability.
DSW’s legacy systems were experiencing unreasonable downtime and weren’t resilient to issues in the store. And because the systems were all on-premises, the technology was extremely inflexible. Having already earned its reputation as an early technology adopter, DSW was in the market for a modern, mobile-friendly solution that would ultimately drive a better customer experience.
This led to DSW’s partnership with Infor Retail to co-innovate a next generation retail software solution. It was a win-win arrangement that would provide DSW with a tailored solution that didn’t currently exist off the shelf, while Infor would gain the knowledge and developmental foundation to iterate the solution for other top-tier retailers.
Embarking on the path to transformation
As diginomica’s Stuart Lauchlan recently described, Infor Retail was formed in 2014 in response to a real appetite among retailers for software that enables the best customer experience. At Infor, we don’t want to see salespeople with their heads buried in an app — and we’d wager the average customer (or employer) doesn’t either. We want to see store associates as ambassadors of the brand — ready to answer questions, assist in locating products, and facilitate interactions that build strong customer loyalty — no matter what the customer engagement model is.
We believe the next generation of retail software will make work easier and more satisfying for sales associates, and will enable them to create the kinds of relationships that will lead customers to embrace the in-store experience once again.
This was the foundation of our work with DSW, as Corey Tollefson, president of Infor Retail, explained to Lauchlan:
We are re-architecting the DSW in-store experience … The use case at DSW was built around improving both the customer and the retail associate experience.
The first step in crafting a shopping experience that’s seamless for the shopper and the store associate is to find out what your users do on a daily basis, where their problem areas are, and what types of functionality they prefer. For DSW, this initial research was performed by Hook & Loop, Infor’s internal UX and development lab. Our UX designers, developers, and digital strategists, took a design-led approach to arm ourselves with as much data as possible to solve DSW’s unique set of challenges. To get a view of the store associate’s view, we began with contextual inquiries, conducted user interviews, and visited DSW brick-and-mortar locations at various times of day to get a holistic understanding of store operations — exposing the team to a complete day’s journey at DSW, and all its points of friction and frustration, for both customers and associates.
During the discovery phase, we constantly compiled all the data we collected to build rich employee personas at a macro and micro level — analyzing tasks, role assignments, customer engagement models, and identifying areas of efficiency.
Our exposure at the store level surfaced up three core tenets that became the foundation of the Infor software solution for DSW: Guidance, Personal, Situational — which we call ‘GPS’ for short. We believe these tenets encapsulate the constant pivoting of store operations and customer requests that go on daily at DSW.
The challenge was to leverage consumer-grade experiences to create a sense of community and awareness, and also to aid sales associates in navigating through everyday challenges.

Guidance — Applications should be smart enough to guide you through processes without locking you into one pathway. We know there’s more than one way to complete a task, and we believe that each user should be given the autonomy to figure out her or his own, best one: A perfect balance of automation with autonomy.
Personal  — For applications to be easily adopted, they have to feel personal. By putting users at the center of functionality, we give them the ability to communicate with their teams, access schedules, and view task assignments as needed — as the center of their own universe. The experience becomes less about the task at hand and more about making work better.
Situational — Great software has contextual awareness of what a user wants to accomplish in the moment. We’re focused on making sure our retail technology is smart enough to anticipate a user’s next action, and serve up exactly what he or she needs when he or she needs it — capturing every micro-moment to serve the customer more successfully while driving value and purpose for the associate.

Where we are today: The evolution of Converged Commerce
The solution we built with DSW is called Converged Commerce. We chose this name because we see it as the next step after omni-channel, giving retailers a single selling system they use for all consumer interactions. This improves the customer experience with accurate and timely information across all touchpoints, while avoiding many of the costly integrations necessary with traditional omni-channel approaches. Here are some of the key principles, born of design-led thinking, that we used to build the current solution:

Surface over depth — Users shouldn’t have to dive deep into specific tasks, product assortments, or menus to surface the information that they need. We identify key foundational screens, or launchpads, to ensure users have quick access to deeper information just a tap away — omitting extensive levels of navigation.
Embrace the scan — It’s so much faster and simpler to scan an item than to perform a manual search on a mobile device. We design around the idea that one scan of a barcode can give associates a single version of the truth about any particular item — as well as information about other store tasks being activated with a similar pattern.
Innate and pure — Intuitive software means utilizing the design language of the device it’s on, so that users don’t need to be heavily trained on the UI or the device — it should just make sense. Our apps will follow platform guidance, while infusing each retailer’s unique brand through content and tone.

To ensure the solution remains best in class, we’re continuing to develop it using a ‘dual-track agile’ process. By running parallel paths to continually provide short-term updates at the same time as developing long-term enhancements to our solution, we’re able to keep DSW and our other customers ahead of the curve at all times.
The first track in this model is the development track, and it’s all about supporting the current roadmap build while defining the next roadmap list of features. We utilize the findings from every discovery phase to determine the features and functionality that DSW needs most, and every two months we release updates that are instantly available thanks to the cloud.
The second track is all about long-term discovery and product strategy, including ongoing research, customer studies, and retail market analysis to heighten the customer experience. On this track, the CX design team works to discover, define, and innovate, developing solutions that create lasting brand relationships and allow us to perpetually improve the Converged Commerce solution.
Where we’re going next: Our vision for the future of retail software
As we look to the future of retail and the future of Converged Commerce, it’s important that our solutions be device and micro-vertical agnostic. That means creating a design guideline that will bridge cross-platform tendencies, is visually consistent, and able to follow the native patterns and controls of whatever device retailers choose to run. Of course, we’ll suggest our ideas about the what the ‘right’ device is for each client to engage customers.
Over the next 18 months, we will be focused on testing the boundaries of configuration and building out mirco-provisions within the retail sector. This will allow Infor to offer out-of-the-box retail solutions for luxury brands, department stores, grocery, soft goods, and other retail segments to develop signature experiences for those customers who may want bespoke user interfaces.
Based on user and industry research, we’ve identified the following areas of application design to further explore and reshape the Converged Commerce roadmap moving forward:

The simplification of new hire training and on boarding
Loyalty programs and gamification that provide reciprocal rewards for store associates and shoppers
Automation for intelligent tech like beacons, geolocators, and sensory technologies
Extending control of the app to customers for self service capabilities like product location and checkout
Brand infusion for UIs including bespoke color and type, sound design, conversational UI, and sensory communications
Communication among store associates, mobile approvals, and image and video sharing across teams

The bottom line is, when you put the users at the center of development and design around their needs, it ultimately drives a stronger relationship between the store associate and the customer. With endless aisles and endless options for purchase, today’s shopper will choose the path of least resistance — and when shopping is an easy, or even delightful, experience, the retailers crafting those experiences stand to prosper in the next generation of the industry.
Image credit - via DSW IncRead more on: CRM and customer experienceInforPartner ZoneRetail e-commerce and the omni-channelUX and application design 