
Another day, another example of how management of personal data provided to digital companies can result in consumer trust being abused.
Last month Facebook was (rightly) in the firing line; this week it’s Grindr, the gay hook-up app used by 3.6 million people around the world every day, caught sharing users HIV status with third parties.
The issue came to light after Norwegian non-profit research group Sintef carried out tests in February into privacy leaks in the Grindr app. In the process, it found that the firm was directly sharing user data with two firms, Apptimize and Localytics. As well as HIV status and last test date, Grindr collected and passed on user locations, phone identification numbers, and emails.
Sintef also argued that Grindr was sharing such information via unencrypted channels, posing a potential security risk and opening up the risk of the data being accessed by malicious groups.
Pretty much a case of ‘gotcha bang to rights’ you might have thought. In the wake of Facebook’s public shaming, the correct crisis management response to this ought to have a full-scale mea culpa. Instead Grindr chose to front it out, at least to begin with.
In a Tumblr post, Scott Chen, Chief Technology Officer, took the tack that what Grindr was doing was just perfectly normal behavior in a digital age and nothing out of the ordinary. In fact, he tried, such activities were necessary for Grindr to improve and serve its user base better:
Recently, Grindr’s industry standard use of third party partners including Apptimize and Localytics, two highly-regarded software vendors, to test and validate the way we roll out our platform has drawn concern over the way we share user data…The inclusion of HIV status information within our platform is always regarded carefully with our users’ privacy in mind, but like any other mobile app company, we too must operate with industry standard practices to help make sure Grindr continues to improve for our community.
He doubled down on that rationale, insisting:
Grindr has never, nor will we ever sell personally identifiable user information – especially information regarding HIV status or last test date – to third parties or advertisers. As an industry standard practice, Grindr does work with highly-regarded vendors to test and optimize how we roll out our platform. These vendors are under strict contractual terms that provide for the highest level of confidentiality, data security, and user privacy.
Industry standard, industry standard. Nothing to see here. Industry standard.
Except this is medical data that we’re talking about, not what flavour of ice cream we prefer or whether we’re in the market for some home insurance cold calls. It’s different, it just is.
It’s the user’s choice
‘Nobody made you do it’ was the other angle taken. The phrase ‘should have read the small print’ wasn’t used, but it might as well have been as Grindr decided that pointing a finger at its customers was a viable response strategy:
It’s important to remember that Grindr is a public forum. We give users the option to post information about themselves including HIV status and last test date, and we make it clear in our privacy policy that if you choose to include this information in your profile, the information will also become public. As a result, you should carefully consider what information to include in your profile.
As an industry leader and champion for the LGBTQ community, Grindr recognizes that a person’s HIV status can be highly stigmatized, but after consulting several international health organizations and our Grindr For Equality team, Grindr determined with community feedback it would be beneficial for the health and well-being of our community to give users the option to publish, at their discretion, the user’s HIV Status and their Last Tested Date. It is up to each user to determine what, if anything, to share about themselves in their profile.
So, basically – it’s perfectly normal, “industry standard” practice and if you post your data on our platform then expect it to be passed on to third parties.
Oh and if you’re looking for the word ‘sorry’ – the first word that should be out of any spokesperson’s mouth when dealing with a crisis PR situation – then look elsewhere as it’s not coming from Grindr.
As a case study in how not to manage an emerging scandal, Grindr’s handling of this situation should be part of any future media training course for any organization. It’s up there with Uber in its lack of empathy and its cack-handedness.
Of course that couldn’t last. It didn’t take long before Grindr Chief Security Officer Bryce Case was telling BuzzFeed News that data sharing would no longer occur. Even then, sorry seems to be the hardest word as Case implied that critics were getting carried away in the wake of the Facebook mess.
He argued that Localytics is “being conflated with Cambridge Analytica” and that the only reason that Grindr has decided to stop sharing information is due to “a misunderstanding of technology” by customers.
To top it off, he was adamant that:
I will not admit fault in the regard that the data was used.
He later told Axios :
I understand the news cycle right now is very focused on these issues…I think what’s happened to Grindr is, unfairly, we’ve been singled out.
Boo hoo, poor you. Nicely done, Grindr, nicely done.
Wider debate
Over at Localytics, CEO Jude McColgan proved somewhat more conscious of the current climate surrounding consumer privacy:
We believe a broader conversation is at the heart of this, and is needed in finding the appropriate harmony in using the digital world (the Internet, mobile, social) with an ethical balance of technology capabilities. And perhaps, in light of the Facebook and Cambridge Analytica crisis, we’re all more sensitive to data privacy.
First, to be really clear, we are nothing like Facebook and we don’t sell or share customer data, nor do we provide third party access. We are a mobile analytics and engagement company with a direct commercial agreement with our customers. We have a purpose and obligation to help our customers (Fortune 1000 companies and mobile app publishers) make better applications and tailor mobile experiences for their users.
We protect customer data and we’re more like Apple than Google or Facebook.  We do not have an advertising-based model. We have a direct relationship with our customers and we treat their data as part of that agreement. We never sell our data to third parties or advertisers. We do not offer third party API access either. Any data that is collected within the mobile app is managed on our SaaS platform and protected by Localytics in accordance with our policies.
It’s down clients how their apps are built and which features are included, McColgan added, passing the baton back to Grindr. For its part, Localytics is entirely behind the recent attention given to how companies use personally identifiable data, he said:
We support all of the recent attention being given to how companies are using personally identifiable information. This isn’t a “new” thing to us. We consider privacy as a human right ahead of commercial gains, and have so for years. At Localytics, personal information is solely used to deliver more relevant mobile communications. We’ve had the opportunity to makes tons of money selling data and we just don’t do it because it’s not what we stand for.
Localytics is committed to respecting the privacy rights of our customers and their end users through our existing privacy policy, as well as through updates we are making to our technical and organizational approach to comply and support our customers in complying with the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR).
That’s a far more sophisticated approach to engagement with critics than has been demonstrated by Grindr to date. Whether the firm will get its act together remains to be seen, but this is a problem that isn’t about to go away. Grindr says that its data protection policies comply with US law. But reference to GDPR by McColgan flags up the fact that European law is in general considerably tougher than that of its transatlantic cousins – and European authorities are very fond of using data protection breaches as a big stick.
Already the Norwegian Consumer Council Forbrukerrådet has filed a complaint against Grindr for breaching data protection law, arguing:
European users of the app have the right to have their personal data protected according to European law. The Consumer Council cannot see that Grindr is registered under the trans-Atlantic data transfer agreement Privacy Shield, which is meant to ensure that personal data that is transferred to the United States is protected in line with European data protection law. The Consumer Council see this as a cause for concern regarding whether the privacy rights of European Grindr users are sufficiently respected.
It’s entirely possible that the Norwegians won’t be the last to air such concerns. The UK’s Information Commissioner’s Office (ICO) said it was investigating to “establish the scale of any impact on UK users”, while in the US two Democrat senators have written to Grindr demanding detailed information on the firm’s data policies and practices by 17 April.
My take
A use case that demonstrates the rising awareness among consumers of how personal data is being used – and perceived to be abused. Even though Grindr is correct that its terms and conditions make it clear that data can be shared, its cloth-eared approach to addressing a user outcry make’s Facebook’s handling of its own troubles look like a masterclass.
There are still 72 countries in the world that criminalise homosexuality. Many more have governments that actively persecute LGBT+ people. While Localytics and Apptimize were being used to optimize the Grindr app, as many commentators have said this week, the kind of data that Grindr has collected and shared could be put to very malign uses in other hands.
Image credit - Grindr Read more on: CRM and customer experienceData privacySocial 