

We understand we are still a ‘show me’ story with a lot to prove after a number of years of decline.

That’s the message from Weight Watchers Director Chris Sobecki, one third of a triad of management that’s currently acting as a gestalt interim CEO for the weight loss firm following last month’s sudden departure of Jim Chambers from the role. That was, apparently, a joint decision between Chambers and the board, but one taken and executed on so quickly that no successor had been lined up. 
The hunt for his replacement is now underway. What will be interesting to observe is how far his successor adopts or adapts Chambers enthusiasm for the digital transformation of the business. 
Chambers had a very strong view that the firm had lost profile and business to the flood of free health apps coming onto the market and spent around $25 million buying up tech to bolster Weight Watchers own capabilities in this area. He also fostered the firm’s celebrated relationship with Oprah Winfrey, hoping to exploit the media mogul’s brand and online presence, something that has delivered at best mixed results to date. 
For its most recent quarter, although the firm turned in an uptick in profits, online performance was flat in the US and down in the UK. Sobecki believes UK customers are more interested in the traditional offline meetings model that Weight Watchers pioneered: 

I think the UK is an interesting market because it really demonstrates the vibrancy of the meetings approach. It’s a market that still today has a much bigger meeting business as a market than even a digital business. The issue that we’ve struggled with in the UK is that we have a very savvy competitor there that is primarily an only-meetings business and, frankly, they’ve out-executed Weight Watchers over the last few years and they’ve taken share from us.
We think there is a lot of work to do there, but it’s not to be spontaneous. But if we get it right, we think we can take back our fair share of that meeting business as well as continue to grow the online business.

While offline meetings also grew in the US and Continental Europe, Sobecki seems to suggest that Chambers online and digital thinking will remain part of the company’s strategic direction when he says: 

Since I became involved with Weight Watchers in 1999, it has been amazing to see and be part of the transition from a meetings only, low-tech or, should I say, no-tech company with a pay-as-you-go model to an increasingly tech savvy, subscription-based business, complete with robust online offerings and mobile tools that it is today.
Despite its ups and downs, the company has grown and diversified tremendously over the long term. While it’s true the company was slow to adapt to the mobility age and suffered for it, it has recently made an enormous strides in improving its products with more to come which is certainly one of the factors driving the turnaround in our business.

Bringing back the tech veteran
The member of the interim CEO triad with responsibility for technology is Thilo Semmelbauer, part of the original design and development tean which built weightwatchers.com back in 2000. He left the firm back in 2008 to become Chief Operating Officer at Shutterstock, but has been back at Weight Watchers for a month now.  He says: 

My passion is building great products, putting the necessary infrastructure and platforms in place, and getting teams to work in a more agile fashion.
And after my first month back at Weight Watchers, it’s been very gratifying to see a strong product and tech team in place as well as a shift to a more agile innovation process that’s well underway. Throughout 2016 many enhancements have been made to our digital platforms and tools and I believe the foundation is in place to make tremendous progress with our products to further increase engagement with our members and to support their success.
As we prepare for the upcoming winter season, all of our key systems are already in place as our teams prepare for seasonally high-volume. This is a shift from the last several years where the company was implementing major architectural and product changes just ahead of the peak season.

Sobecki adds that the firm is learning from its previous digital slip-ups:


As we’ve progressed through the year, the product that we’re offering, particularly the digital product we’re offering, has been improving. I think we got off to a bit of a rough start at the beginning of 2016 with a few of the technology sort of hiccups that we experienced. And I think, as the team sort of began to improve the app, improve the web performance, I think what we’re delivering as we progressed through the year improved considerably, and we’re in a much stronger position today than we were earlier in the year.

As for Oprah, she’s still very much part of the picture, says Semmelbauer:


We look forward to prominently featuring Oprah in our winter season marketing campaign. You may have already seen that our cookbook, Food, Health and Happiness is launching in January. She worked closely with her favorite chefs and consulted with Weight Watchers to develop and share SmartPoints friendly recipes for her favorite foods, and we look forward to sharing these with our members. Our strategic collaboration with Oprah is just getting started. 

My take
Weight Watchers has been one of the most popular digital transformation use cases that we’ve been tracking at diginomica. The firm is now at an interesting stage in that journey. Chambers made some good calls on the need for online presence and increasing the firm’s digital footprint, but perhaps took the corporate eye off of some of the more traditional aspects of the business model. 
The tanking of Fitbit’s stock price this week might seem to support those siren voices that say that too much focus on tech is a bad idea. But whoever succeeds Chambers must continue to make digital a priority and the return to the company of Semmelbauer, a self-proclaimed technologist, is a good sign that the tech credentials of CEO candidates will be part of the job interview. But as Sobecki observes, it’s still a case of ‘show me’ for Weight Watchers in proving it has a long term future.
Image credit - Weight Watchers Read more on: Collaboration sharing and digital productivityCRM and customer experienceDigital and content marketingDigital enterprise in the real world 