
Ted Sarandos
Yesterday we took a look at the latest digital platform ambitions of Walt Disney CEO Bob Iger and commented on the potential threat to media disruptor Netflix. Disney has already begun to take back its licensed properties with a view to launching its own direct-to-consumer streaming services in the second half of next year. 

Of course this is going to be new venture into basically uncharted territory for Disney, albeit a path now well-trodden by the likes of Netflix. So who better to offer some advice to the former than the Chief Content Officer of the latter, Ted Sarandos. He’s certainly not fazed  in public at least by the oncoming storm: 

People always ask me like, where you surprised that Disney is going to go direct? I don’t know what took them so long, exactly.

Such is our familiarity with Netflix today that it’s all-too-easy to forget that it is a relatively new player in the global media markets. For his part, Sarandos can pick out what’s surprised him the most over the past decade or so: 
Probably the speed with which original programing has become so relevant and important to the business around the world. We kind of had an inkling 10 years ago when we first started doing streaming that the notion was very quantifiable – get people to watch a lot of stuff, have a lot of stuff, and best way to have a lot of stuff is not to have exclusivity and the whole. 

But then we have kind of quickly come to realize that it is a pretty quick race to the bottom if you are one [provider of] the same content. So, how do you differentiate yourself? We were five years into our business before we started doing any original programming and in just five years it has become our most important investment.

The thing I was most worried about at the beginning was that the speed with which the internet would bring such efficiencies to advertising, that advertising CPMs could get so big that a single ad would pay for a movie and that CPMs would get high and really challenge the subscription model. It turned out to be completely opposite.
Nonetheless there are still learnings to be had, not least around what Netflix talks about as “density of viewing”. Sarandos explains: 
It is something we are trying to figure it now, which is the value that a 1-and-1-equals-3 model of people watching at the same time versus watching over a longer period of time. If you could increase the density, you increase the word of mouth, you increase earned media, you increase the kind of zeitgeist volume of the show because everyone is watching at the same time or nearer the same time then they are now…There is nothing more fun than walking in and people are talking about the same [content]. Right now, what, many of you are probably watching Wild Wild Country and you can’t wait to talk to somebody about it. And next year everybody will have seen it, but in the meantime, you went to and watched it now.
There are generational and cultural shifts in the way that people watch TV that come into play as well, says Sarandos:
I think what’s happening increasingly… is this whole notion of the on-demand versus on-linear watching, mainly the appointment viewing. That gap is growing. What’s happening likewise is, that you can achieve the same level of volume just over a longer period of time. So, by not having our shows one a week or my Sunday night in my Netflix thing…people are just have watching different episodes of the same show. They are depending on the velocity that they are watching. Then over the course of the year, you end up with actually more volume relative to like social media posting, Google search trends and all those things. If you look at that over the course of the year, the cumulative benefit is much higher all at once than the week over week over week.
There’s another factor that kicks in, he adds: 
One thing that you will do on Netflix is that immediately after you watch a series is a movie because I think you probably don’t want to commit yourself to another 13 hours or 26 hours of the show. So the commitment is probably for a little while and I just watch a couple of movies and figure what I want to watch next. It is the way that my wife and I are never on the same episode of anything at the same time. If you want to watch together we watch movies.
Content revolution
As Iger confirmed this week, Disney is currently working on its own original content creation built around some formidable global franchises, including Star Wars, Marvel and Walt Disney itself. As Sarandos has intimated, the shift from having a business model based on licensing other people’s content to creating its own was perhaps Netflix’s most significant evolution.
The next step in this has been to sign up celebrated show-runners to come over to Netflix on an exclusive basis, with Sarandos citing Ryan Murphy, the creator of Glee, American Crime Story, Feud and Nip/Tuck among others, as a case in point. This puts more clout in the hands of Netflix, says Sarandos:
Prior to the Netflix deal, Ryan had a deal with Fox. So, if we wanted a Ryan Murphy show, we would have to buy it form Fox. The clearing price to get it from Fox kept going up and up and up,  because Fox would like us not to have a Ryan Murphy show. So, instead we will have, you know Ryan Murphy will make the shows for Netflix. A good thing.
It’s a good thing for creative talent like Murphy as well, he adds:
They are attracted to us because we have a bigger appetite for their output. So, normally whoever the deal is, the studio has a network that has a specific demographic that they program to. So, if Ryan wants to get a little out of his wheelhouse, so there was no place for him on the network and then they had to go out and sell it. And if he didn’t do that then he couldn’t make it. For Netflix, we’re going to have an appetite for the vast majority of the things that he wants to make, which we’re very excited about.
Licensed content still takes the lion’s share of the Netflix audience, but that’s as much for arithmetical reasons, explains Sarandos:
Of course the hours of watching would be heavily skewed towards license content because there is more of it. So, we may have 300 episodes of the [licensed] show versus 13 of one of our own shows. Licensed content is still there and it is migrating to as we do more and more original. We have 1000 original releases this year…470 470 of those happen between now and the end of the year, scripted series, films across all of our different content verticals. So, [while it] makes sense that the license content would be getting more viewing, it is moving quite steadily – 90% plus of our customers regularly watch our original programming. 
Netflix doesn’t yet disclose audience ratings in the way that a linear network would do, but Sarandos admits that some shows have small audiences, but it’s not sheer numbers that count – it’s about reaching specific demographics: 
Grace and Frankie was one where we didn’t have a lot of programming for older female demographics. Lot of people who join Netflix to watch Grace and Frankie, only watch Grace and Frankie. So, 100% of their subscription value is attributed to Grace and Frankie. So, their shows can be really efficient as a membership driver, even with smaller audiences, and then over time Grace and Frankie became a very big mainstream show.
The Mouse in the room
Of course any mention of mainstream brings the discussion back to the Mouse in the room. Sarandos doesn’t appear to have firm conclusions about how Disney’s rival service will do – or at least, not ones that he wants to share. But he does have questions, based on Netflix own experience of licensing Disney content: 
There is engagement, people watch them, but it wasn’t particularly passionate watching. Those films are widely available on a bunch of other channels, so we think this is the right move for us, to differentiate our programming better…I am not sure. I mean, it is new ground for them. So, we will figure it, they will figure out – they will find their way. 
Disney will be going from making “a ton of money selling all the stuff to a bunch of other channels” to having to face up to a new challenge, he concludes:
Turning that revenue into a content cost is going to be an interesting balance But they’ve got great brands and they will figure it out.

.
Image credit - NetflixDisclosure - Sarandos was speaking at the 5th Annual MoffettNathanson Media & Communications SummitRead more on: Content marketingDigital and content marketingSocial 