
Volac’s Large and Chapman at IFS World
Let me guess – when you think manufacturing ERP, your first image isn’t cows grazing in a pasture.
But that’s part of the ERP game for Volac, one of Europe’s leading manufacturers of nutritional whey proteins and lactose products.
Volac takes dairy nutrition seriously. That makes sense – when you break down the lofty concept of environmental sustainability, dairy nutrition is in that mix. At IFS World Conference 2018, I sat down with two Volac leaders who made the trek to Atlanta: Mark Large, Head of Business Systems, and Neville Chapman, Business Development Director.
A family dairy business with a passion for technology
Volac remains a family-owned business, owned by three brothers with a passion for modernizing dairy. But, as Chapman emphasized to me, “family-owned dairy business” doesn’t mean Volac is slow to embrace technology:
We’re quite technology driven in terms of innovating new products, maximizing the health and yield of the cows, if you like, with developing new products.
Volac’s core business is dairy farmers. They support farmers in three different ways: fats, which improve the yield and the fertility of the cow. Forage and silage additives, to improve grass grazing nutrition. And third: milk replacer for calves (humans get the cows’ milk, so the calves get a nutritious milk replacer).
Whey protein drives the need for… ERP?
Ten years ago, Volac had less than 100 employees. Now they are above 350. A big area of growth? Whey protein has become a big business for Volac in the UK and Europe. This may be the first time in history Whey protein has caused the need for an ERP system. Chapman:
Whey protein helped drive our growth. We’ve grown a lot over the last few years. That’s really why we ended up with an ERP system, because we were growing too fast. Unless we had an ERP system to tie the thing together, we would have suffered.
That growth problem surfaced six years ago. For the last five years, Volac has run its operations on IFS. So why IFS? During the ERP evaluation, Volac didn’t just look at functional fit. They looked at the caliber of the relationships. Chapman:
I think the key, if we pick one thing, was the culture of the company. And the fit with us. As you go through these things, there were one or two companies we really thought, “We can’t work with you guys.” The partners, at any rate. Whereas with IFS, we thought, “Oh, yeah. This will work well.”
The push to IFS Applications 10 – why become an early adopter?
Volac began with IFS version 8.2. But they’ve kept up to date; they are live on IFS Applications 10 as part of the early adopter program (IFS Applications 10 was announced in March and formally launched at IFS World 2018).
But “early adopter” programs bring risk. They require significant effort on the customer side – not to mention patience with bug fixes. So why did Volac sign on early to IFS Apps 10? Chapman:
We’d reached the point where we wanted and needed to upgrade. Also, we’ve got a good relationship with IFS. Mark and I have been to these conferences and we’ve seen about the early adopter program firsthand.
The chance to influence the software was a big incentive:
There were various things in 8, and then in 9, which almost fit our requirements, but not quite. So we identified that if we worked with IFS, which the early adopter program’s enabled us to do, then we could make the product fit us better.
Influencing the software wasn’t just a fantasy. As Large told me, Volac’s input has been pulled into prior releases:
We did some work R&D in 8 that is now standard in 9. So even in the beta 10 release, there were all those version 9 enhancements that we sort of half-developed with IFS.
Volac achieved their goal. One way they impacted IFS Applications 10? Bar coding. Volac has a complicated scanning and bar code requirement. All of their factories and manufacturing processes are different. This is one need where Volac couldn’t bend. Chapman:
If we were going to implement the IFS scanning solution, instead of a third party solution, it had to meet all our needs. It wasn’t any good if it only did three out of four factories. So we needed for them to expand the capability of the scanning functionality.
The other area Volac had impact was Aurena, IFS’s new UX that is rolling out on version 10. Being first has its advantages. Chapman explains:
This was largely because we were the first people to use it. IFS presented it on a plate and we said, “Actually, guys, there are various things you can do to improve it.”
IFS is rolling out Aurena gradually, with casual and self-service users as an early emphasis. So is Volac using Aurena now? Large:
Every employee has to use Aurena to put their holidays. In the States, it’s vacations, we had a discussion on that yesterday.
The wrap – on KPIs, IoT pioneering, and the value of user groups
Since all their IFS-enabled bar codes and scanners are live with IFS 10, does that mean Volac considers itself an IoT pioneer? Not quite, says Chapman:
I don’t think so; it depends what you want to call it.
Regarding IoT readiness, Chapman pointed to the benefits of moving from legacy spaghetti. When Volac implemented IFS, they also re-evaluated their IT footprint. Chapman:
If you go back a few years ago, our IT was rubbish. It just wasn’t fit for purpose. So, four or five years ago, we were able to say, “Okay, what do we want? What’s our footprint?”
Shrinking the IT footprint paid off. Beyond IFS 10, Volac only runs a few things: Office 365, a formulation tool, and SoftTrace, which is specific to the dairy industry. Chapman:
When you come down to scanning, we’ve got all the information about all our products, the location, the traceability, all the benefits you get from scanning right in your ERP system.
Adding the IFS scanning app to third party warehouses has been fast – with implementation times under a week. Large:
That’s a real big win for the business.
Another win? IFS dashboarding and KPIs. The dashboards help the 400+ IFS users stay on track, and the KPIs are becoming important ot managers. Chapman:
We’re using KPI’s quite a lot, so we, as a company, decide what our strategic KPI’s are, and then again, we want them on the dashboard, which we’re developing. Then, there’s a KPI element in IFS, and you click through, and it can give you the underlying data.
Chapman joked about the dangers of too many dashboards, or “over-KPIs,” but those are good problems to have. KPIs are, to some extent, secret sauce, but Large shared one IFS KPI that’s proven effective:
We’ve got live KPI’s with the engineering teams, so they’ve got it on a big screen. They log in now in the engineering workshop, and they can see how they’re doing against the KPIs and the jobs and the vending maintenance – that’s really worked well.
In its quest for modernization, IFS has another strength: dedicated user groups. Large and Chapman spoke highly of their involvement in the IFS UK user group, which has its own events. If you want to separate your ERP project from underachievers, nothing beats sharing war stories with peers.
Large and Chapman told me this goes beyond user group meetings. The UK IFS users have visited each others factories and kicked tires on their operations firsthand. Now that’s a terrific way to gut check your own project.
Image credit - Photo of Large and Chapman at IFS World Conference 2018 by Jon Reed. Read more on: Digital enterprise in the real worldDigital transformation - frictionless enterpriseUse cases 