
Orlando Machado speaking at Ignite
We’re talking about conversations at enormous scale.
As chief data scientist at Moneysupermarket.com, Britain’s largest price comparison website, Dr Orlando Machado looks after a database of 20 million individuals who at one time or another have sought a better deal on car or home insurance, finance or energy.
The brand’s conversations with those individuals take place at mass-market scale, ranging across TV campaigns, mass email mailings and self-service interactions on web and mobile apps. Speaking at Nimbus Ninety’s Ignite Summit in London this month and in conversation afterwards with diginomica, Machado explained how his team uses data analysis to maximize the impact of each interaction.
Even the TV advertising is painstakingly targeted to optimize its effectiveness. Last year’s #EpicStrut campaign, featuring a businessman twerking along a city street in hot pants and high heels, was voted campaign of the year by marketing trade weekly Campaign but was also 2015’s most complained-about ad. It’s carefully pitched to maximise engagement, explains Machado.
We’ve got a statistical model with 300 data fields feeding our media planning.
Consumers might see something wacky and creative, but at the same time we’re doing something scientific behind the scenes.
If you’re going to be successful you need to do both.
The purpose is to get consumers onto the website, into the mobile app or responding to emails, where the work of Machado’s team really comes into play. The data helps determine exactly what combination of factors will work for each micro segment. It shows that leaving the price off an auto insurance renewal email, for example, is most likely to get a response from better-off 40-55 year-olds living in the West Midlands whose car is worth less than £2,000 ($2,850). The more testing the team does, the more they learn about what works best for each segment, explains Machado.
We can move towards tailoring images, tone of voice, all sorts of things. We’re trying to shape our communications program to the individual customer based on what we know about them.
Focus on outcomes
The key to success is remembering to focus on the outcome rather than the technology, Machado asserts. People who are able to work with colleagues across marketing and elsewhere produce better results than those who are pure technologists, he believes.
People spend a lot of time thinking about the clever bit. People don’t spend enough time thinking about the important bit, which is how everyone works together.
These are all human problems that start with collaboration. These are teamwork problems — they start with people. Although the technology is really interesting, I start with hiring the right people …
What we don’t want is to create a backroom function. We want to create a team of people who are delivering commercial value by using data in intelligent ways. That comes from my team working closely with other teams to understand the whole of the business, to be immersed in the whole of the business.
Moneysupermarket.com has built its own data science platform rather than using packaged solutions or cloud services. In part that’s because of the intellectual property aspect of having a unique competitive advantage, but it’s also because the in-house resource helps inform the rest of the company, says Machado.
Data science is not well understood by many people. If we have an in-house capability we can be working in partnership with other parts of the business really easily.
My team sits next to our brand team, we’ve got a finance team there, we’ve got a CRM team, we’ve got our commercial teams who work with our partners and providers. We have the content people that develop content. My team works absolutely in an integrated way with all of those guys.
We’ve benefited from having that really tight integration between learning about our customers from the data and being able to act on it — whether that’s through content, brand development or developing KPIs internally.
Making it easy for consumers
Mobile is an important focus of experimentation, where the emphasis is on reducing the number of actions the consumer has to make before they see some value coming back to them. Machado explains:
We know that customers want to be interacting with businesses generally on mobile devices, that’s an overarching consumer trend. I think we need to make it easy for them to do it.
That means prefilling fields as much as possible and giving feedback as early as possible. The team is currently prototyping an application that dynamically predicts the final quote a consumer will receive as they complete each field on the form — so the consumer can watch the price of their insurance converge on a figure as they provide each new snippet of information.
We’re trying to predict as much as possible and ask the consumer to fill in as little as possible.
The trick is to get the balance right. Consumers like the convenience of not having to fill in information that the brand already knows, but sometimes it can feel a bit too creepy if the brand appears to know more than the consumer feels it should. Machado believes brands have to find out what works by testing the boundaries.
Companies have to tread the line between being too creepy on the one side and being too bland on the other side. It’s very hard to predict what consumers want and I think the only way to do it is to put real features in front of them and see how they react.
Consumers are very bad at trying to tell you in a research capacity what new feature they’re looking for, because it’s very hard for consumers to understand the possibilities. Whereas, if you demonstrate the value, put something in front of them actually, consumers can decide for sure, by either taking you up and engaging in your feature or not.
Another bane of personalization is when consumers see offers for items they’ve already bought and no longer need. To avoid this happening, brands need to find a way of making sure their information is more accurate and up-to-date, says Machado.
One of the problems I think a lot of businesses encounter is that there can be a lag between customers taking an action and companies learning about you through data. I think the trend has to be to try to reduce that lag so that you’re not trying to make out of date recommendations to people.
I think we need to get better at trying to collect that information — or making easy for customers to tell us if they want to.
My take
Having come to Moneysupermarket.com from a key role at customer science pioneer dunnhumby, Machado is one of the UK’s leading authorities on the use of data science in the consumer market.
What I find notable about his approach is the insistence on keeping the broader picture in mind. His team of data scientists and analysts work at the heart of the marketing function and collaborate closely with their colleagues to put the data to work to achieve results. That prevents people getting hung up on the technology — how the insights are found is less important than how they’re put to use.
Image credit - Feature image - screengrab from Moneysupermarket's #epicstrut TV campaign; Orlando Machado speaking from Twitter via @PsycologyAndMeDisclosure - Orlando Machado was speaking at Ignite Summit in London, organized by Nimbus Ninety, who arranged for this interview to take place. Read more on: Analytics planning and data analysisDigital and content marketingRetail e-commerce and the omni-channelUse cases 