
Rachel Zoe (r) with NetSuite’s Jim McGeever
Today’s digital tools and near-ubiquitous connectivity have opened up many new ways of growing a business. Modern entrepreneurs who pick up these opportunities are rewriting the rulebook for business success. Here are three examples that show how to harness the power of connected digital technology, break through the old constraints, and achieve what we at diginomica like to call frictionless enterprise.
Connecting with individuals at scale
Before the Internet came along, it was nigh on impossible to put an innovative business proposition in front of the market without spending large amounts on advertising and promotion. The only alternative was to build up a local following and rely on word-of-mouth to gradually reach new customers, but that often took years to achieve.
Today, social media has completely changed the equation. Fashion stylist Rachel Zoe started out using word-of-mouth and then built out her brand using a reality TV show and a daily freesheet called the Zoe Report. But the advent of social media has let her take her business to a whole new level by enabling a direct connection with her followers. She says:
I think social media has been, I would say, the most instrumental, high-impact part of my business over the last couple of years … I think that the fact that I can directly communicate with my audience is the greatest gift to anyone.
Speaking on stage with Oracle NetSuite chief Jim McGeever at the business software vendor’s SuiteWorld gathering in April, she recalls that as soon as social media became a thing, she realized she had to get involved.
With the launch of social media … It was something that I was just so excited by. I just had to jump on it, be a part of it, and figure it out as it was going on.
She and her businesses now have a total of 16 million followers across various social media accounts including almost 3 million on Instagram and 4 million on Twitter. But the flipside of being so connected is that you also have to responsive to change, she warns:
It’s scary and amazing in the same breath. You do have to be nimble … You have to be willing to change. If you don’t change with the times, you’ll never win.
Going local, everywhere
Most businesses have traditionally started out serving a local customer base. That’s all changed in today’s connected world, where a startup can instantly sell anywhere it can find customers willing to buy. But physical products still need a reliable supply chain and distribution.
This was especially important when Kara Goldin set up her business Hint to market naturally flavored, unsweetened water as a healthy alternative to sugary soda drinks. Unwilling to use artificial preservatives to prolong the product’s shelf life, she realized very early on that she would need to closely control the supply chain all the way through from production to consumption.
In a disconnected, pre-digital world, that would have severely limited Hint’s expansion. But by using a cloud-based business system she was able to put in digitally connected processes that ensure Hint always stays on top of its local production and distribution throughout the US, and can continue to do so even as it expands internationally. Speaking on stage at SuiteWorld, she explains:
Not just from a production standpoint, but just from a distribution standpoint, our desire was really to ship as locally as possible. We don’t want to have trucks going across the country, shipping water in trucks. We actually do everything here in the US as well, so we’re not shipping water overseas or shipping bottles overseas. As we go into other countries, we also wanted to be able to have partners that allow us to do that production locally in all of these countries as well.
Engaging with a community
The final element is the ability to deliver digitally connected products allow you to stay engaged with customers while they’re making use of them. This represents a fundamental break with the past that we call the XaaS Effect:
Before we all became connected by modern digital technology, time and distance separated businesses from their customers, creating an invisible wall between the two …
Creating a digital connection between a business and its customers transforms this relationship, breaking down that invisible wall and replacing it with a continuous channel of interaction.
Fitness equipment maker Peloton Interactive demonstrates how this ability to remain engaged with customers can make it possible to build a community around their use of your products. Best known for its spinning bikes, the company not only sells the equipment but also a subscription to an application which allows riders to join virtual group exercise classes, track performance, or get coaching. As director of enterprise technology Dave Brown explains, this creates a distinctive experience for riders:
Part of this special sauce is something we call a live leaderboard. It’s a social enabler and creates a little bit of a competition. You can ride with the ‘peloton’ — the lead riders that are taking the same class as you are.
Sensors on the bike measure metrics such as the speed and tension of the flywheel. These are fed back into the application to calculate statistics such as calorie burn as well as placement on the leaderboard. There are also integrations with heart rate monitors and similar fitness devices.
We can put all that data together and provide a full picture of the workout for the member. They have some historical representation of their performance … so there’s an opportunity for someone to continually improve their performance — and their health for that matter.
The content is part of the subscription. So you buy the bike, and you buy the subscription for $39 a month, which in essence activates the bike.
We certainly enjoy a very engaged membership. There are folks that are really into spin.
My take
Connect with your customers, connect your operations and your products, nurture an engaged customer community — three action points for every business that wants to take advantage of modern connected digital technology. All of this underlines the importance of harnessing technology to do things differently, instead of simply automating entrenched ways of operating.
It’s notable that all these conversations took place at a technology vendor event, but are focused on the business outcomes people have achieved, rather than the technology itself. Although tech was on the agenda at this year’s SuiteWorld, there was a marked and welcome shift to focus on this kind of content, which will be carried through into the Grow Wire website launched at the event. It’s a reflection that the technology itself is becoming mainstream as attention shifts towards how it can make a difference.
Image credit - Rachel Zoe (r) with NetSuite EVP Jim McGeever at SuiteWorld 2018 in  Las Vegas, photo via NetSuiteDisclosure - Oracle NetSuite is a diginomica premier partner at time of writing and funded the author's travel to attend SuiteWorld. Read more on: Cloud ERP financials and supply chainFrictionless enterpriseSocialUse cases 