
If it ain’t broke, don’t fix it.
That’s a maxim that might be front of mind for Starbuck’s senior management right now. But, rightly or wrongly, they did set out to ‘fix’ the firm’s celebrated loyalty program, the lynchpin of the firm’s digital flywheel, and the end result has been an end to the coffee giant’s 25 straight quarters of growth.
That leaves CEO Howard Schultz to admit that:
With candor and humility, we acknowledge that in certain areas, we did not execute as well as we could have in the US in Q3.
But he insists that despite the hit that the company has taken, he and his team were correct to set out to change the way the Starbucks loyalty scheme works and that there will be long term gains:
The Starbucks Rewards program has been strengthened in Q3…the improvements will fuel an even more powerful digital flywheel that will propel our business forward for years to come.
New readers start here: Starbucks Rewards was previously built around the frequency of customer visits, but is now based on giving out free drinks based on how much money customers spend over time. This, according to Starbucks, meant an end to customers splitting up orders in order to get rewards points more quickly.
Customers reacted negatively to the change, but Schultz insists that this can be addressed and the changes were not made lightly. He explains:
After months of planning, we began executing against what I am convinced will prove to be among our boldest and most strategic moves ever, the strategic shift of our tremendously successful loyalty program from a frequency-based to a spend-based model. The shift was a one-time event, a once-in-a-decade change built on carefully vetted analysis that showed that a spend-based program would best reward our most loyal customers and encourage all of our customers to visit us more often and spend more on each visit, and it would be more fair for all of our customers as well.
In addition, the shift would instantly eliminate a vexing in-store operating issue, order splitting, that was and has resulted in shorter lines, increased speed of service, and reduced line attrition. Now, given the sheer size, scale, and complexity of our Starbucks Rewards program and the mobile and digital technologies that support it, we knew there could be some hurdles to navigate at launch, particularly since the launch would coincide with the kick-off of our annual Frappuccino Happy Hour promotion, a nationwide event that typically ushers in the busiest time of year in our stores and consistently drives significant traffic and incremental revenue.
Too much at the same time
The Happy Hour factor may have been known about, but the timing was unfortunate in retrospect as “noise” about the loyalty program changes drowned out the Happy Hour vibe. Schultz admits:
What we underestimated was the interdependence of Starbucks Rewards and Happy Hour, and that two powerful initiatives competing for partner and customer mind share during a discrete period of time would disrupt what should have been strong, positive interdependence and leverage. In hindsight, what we should have done was build customer awareness anticipation for the Frappuccino Happy Hour promotion as we have done so successfully in the past and given the promotion the breathing room it needed. At the same time, the Happy Hour promotion interfered with the results we were expecting from the Starbucks Rewards program launch.
It’s a point picked up by Chief Operating Officer Kevin Johnson, who argues:
In many ways, the Rewards launch went exactly as planned, with the vast majority of our customers excited about their ability to earn more rewards and with nearly 20% year-on-year growth in membership. Customers that could potentially be disadvantaged have not materially changed their behavior, and we’re seeing increased lift in activity and early signs of success from [our] personalization efforts.
But having the Rewards changes at the same time as the firm’s biggest annual marketing promotion didn’t work, he adds:
The launch of Rewards required a significant amount of cross-company focus from our marketing teams, store execution, our digital teams, and this included specific training and marketing in our stores. We trained our store partners on Rewards programs so they could explain it, and educate customers, and help them through that transition. We used our stores to market and launch the Rewards program. In order to make room in the marketing calendar to do this training and launch it in our stores and communicate it to customers, we delayed our normal Summer 1 campaign launch by one week. So we launched it one week later than we did last year. And so this resulted in a slower launch or start to the Frappuccino Happy Hour.
Second, and related, was the implication of having two major marketing campaigns, Rewards and our Frappuccino Happy Hour, running simultaneously. Happy Hour is a significant event each May and makes that month the biggest month of the year for us in terms of total US transactions. Because of the foundational importance of the new Rewards program and the need to connect with customers, we had to have the marketing message around Rewards and communicated and unfortunately having two major marketing messages running simultaneously, we didn’t get as much traction behind Frappuccino Happy Hour. We didn’t get as much social media buzz and that translated into not as many transactions.
But Schultz isn’t in full mea culpa mode, pointing out that even after taking a hit, Starbucks can point to one of the most successful loyalty programs in the world:
By anyone else’s standards, our Rewards results have been outstanding. We entered nearly 2 million new members year-over-year, representing 18% growth, and 300,000 net new members in Q3 alone, a time of year when we often see flat to negative membership growth. And we now have 12.3 million active Reward members in the US and millions more worldwide.
We are already seeing the percentage of tender from Starbucks Rewards U.S. customers rise to 33% in Q3, up three full points from last year, continuing an established pattern in which revenue growth from Rewards customers typically outpaces revenue growth from non-Rewards customers. And we are seeing both incrementality of spend and increase in total profit per customer, both directly attributable to a customer’s having joined the Rewards program.
These powerful metrics bode extremely well for our business going forward, and having us continue to lean in and convert even more customers into the Rewards program. In the months ahead, we will be launching even more initiatives to fully leverage Rewards as incentives for customer behavior and to encourage greater ticket and attach.
That’s going to mean a big focus on personalization of the customer experience via digital engagement channels, exaplins Johnson:
We are now driving personalized offers through e-mail, which are yielding extremely encouraging results. We are building a true, real-time, personalization capability which will begin to power personalized experiences and communications within our app.
Our Summer 2 marketing campaign launched earlier this month, and we are seeing positive customer reception. We are experiencing good early results from our personalized digital marketing, with more customer-focused enhancements to our mobile app in the pipeline, and execution across our seven core strategies for growth continues with progress in each initiative linked to growth.
There’s still work to be done here, cautions Matthew Ryan, Starbucks Global Chief Strategy Officer, who says it’s early days here:
Very late in the quarter, we turned on, what we call, one-to-one marketing. It’s actually close to one-to-30, but we are getting down to the level of personalized rewards based upon what people actually will do and knowledge we have of that individual customer’s behavior. Previously, we sent e-mails to very large segments of customers. Now, we’re able to do it on a very targeted basis, and what that allows us to do is to be more efficient and more effective with our communications so that we don’t have to peanut butter a broad discount. We can go in more selectively and offer just what’s right to get the next incremental level of engagement with us.
For his part, Johnson insists that the changeover in loyalty scheme model is a bump in the road that has now passed:
We have navigated the onetime event of transitioning to the new Starbucks Rewards program and our actions going forward are clear – drive the Summer 2 marketing campaign around cold, enable the next wave of digital innovation and personalization, and continue to execute against our seven core strategies for growth.
This quarter was an anomaly, and while we are not pleased with the US comp result, we understand the drivers and have a clear action plan already in motion.
My take
We’ve been effusive in our celebration of Starbucks as a digital economy champion, so it comes as a shock to be focusing on a rare failure from the firm. Johnson’s almost certainly correct that this is a short-term issue. Initial negative reaction from customers to what’s seen as an unnecessary change won’t translate into long-term rejection of the daily grande latte. But it’s a healthy reminder to embark on such changes with forethought and caution.
Image credit - Starbucks/VectorwerksRead more on: CRM and customer experienceDigital enterprise in the real worldRetail e-commerce and the omni-channelSocialUX and application design 