
The traditional mindset that developed with the emergence of the cloud is that the disruption it can create will see the downfall of the Dinosaurs of the business world. You know Dinosaurs – the type of company that is huge, often on a global scale, and has been around for decades if not centuries. The second part of this mindset is that it will be the disruptors – the Unicorns – that will be the ones to kill off the Dinosaurs, and that the vast majority of them will disappear in pretty short order.
It is an attractive model, especially for any startup in any market sector – come up with some new ideas that meet the changing needs of the customer base and they will beat a path to your door, while the roads that led to the once dominant Dinosaur vendors crack up as nature and disuse take hold.
But is it a model that actually holds water? In practice the answer appears to be ‘not really’, as told by Matt Guest, the Head of Digital Strategy at consultant and systems integrator, Deloitte. He explained his findings in a keynote delivered to the Oracle-sponsored ‘Modern Business Experience’ event earlier this week in London.
Working with a colleague, Guest has conducted an extensive study on whether there is a measurable difference between Unicorns and Dinosaurs in terms of their rates of demise. There are, and there are some lessons to be learned in terms of Dinosaur survival strategies.
Looking at levels of productivity, the Unicorns tend to do better, but not conclusively, so there is no real impact on the Dinosaurs.
This suggests that what the Unicorns can offer, such as better productivity, operational flexibility and business agility, may not be as telling a death blow to the Dinosaurs as the folklore surrounding the cloud might suggest. Indeed, the evidence to emerge in Guest’s researches suggest that each has its own times and reasons for self-immolation – for self-immolation is normally the cause of their demise.
How to kill a Unicorn
According to Guest, the Unicorns are at highest risk from the time of their inception up to getting to be ten years old. The reasons are fairly obvious as well, for it is in this period that they are most likely to fall foul of a range of `infant’ disorders such as significant management inexperience and an urge to spend all investment funding at high speed.
If they are amongst the bleeding-edge startups working in a new technology or market area, they are also likely to commit too early to a product or technology idea, or execute the right idea badly in some way.
Get past these issues, however, and they stand a good chance to become one of the disruptors of the peaceful life of a Dinosaur or two. They also, of course, stand the chance of becoming the next round of adolescent Dinosaurs, facing then the same disruptive risks they are imposing now as Unicorns.
Dinosaurs were Unicorns once upon a time, and some Unicorns will grow into Dinosaurs.
The first set of risks, Guest suggests, occur when a business is some 10 to 15 years old. This is a high risk time because it usually equates to a business reaching a stage of maturity for the first time. Usually this will be the maturity of the product or service on which the business has built its initial success, and that very success can then prove seductive enough to fixate the business. It is successful now, therefore it will be successful always.
But most products and services will have their day, and even if they are still able to meet customer needs the chances are that other options have come along that not only meet those customer needs but also many others as well. A common situation is that the product has serviced a part of a much bigger service requirement and has needed to be engineered, with other products, into the complete service.
Then along comes a fully integrated version of the service as an entity requiring no engineering, much lower maintenance, far greater reliability, and a bunch of additional tools that give customers a far richer business management experience.
Change, or be (terminally) changed
As a whole, the underlying thrust of the Oracle event revolved around this inevitability of the need to change, how to define the change, develop and implement it and manage the whole process, this mapped closely to many of the delegates present.
Others present, especially so close to the City of London’s financial services industry, will have fitted into Guest’s next dangerous age, for Dinosaurs. In fact there are two statistical peaks to the occurrence of this, one between 80 and 90 years of being in business, and the other between 100 and 110 years.
These are high risk times for businesses, for it is a time when they can find no more growth for their business and at the same time face the possibility of being hit by an external shock or change.
This is an inevitable problem for just about all businesses and, more specifically, all markets. They either just become satiated to the point that demand fades away, or the market ceases to exist because it is superseded in the hearts and minds of customers by a better, different alternative – or indeed no alternative at all.
This process has gone on for centuries and will continue to do so, and all businesses must be not just willing to accept that change will come `sometime’, but willing and able – in terms of both skills-base and culture – to jump in a new direction sooner rather than later. The impact of digitalization is unlikely to leave any business sector without some scars on businesses that stay unwilling to consider this.
Finding ways to ride out these risks is, therefore, a core management requirement for all businesses. Guest recommended the audience to adopt a seven-stage approach to this, starting with the all-important senior management buy-in stage of commissioning any process of potential change to start.
Next comes invention, where those people with the minds to do it – and they do tend to be those that are inventive rather than those taught invention – are given the time and resources to be creative. Immediately following on from this is the innovation stage, which sets the inventions against the known and perceived needs of a marketplace – any invention has to make sense and offer a potential benefit to the customers of any business.
The commercialization stage is fairly obvious, covering issues such as, is there a market, can it be done at the right price point, what are all the costs involved. Equally self-explanatory is scalability, for an invention may be innovative and make sense for a market but if it can’t be made, or delivered, in the volumes the market might demand, then the potential damage to a brand could mean it is better left alone.
It has to be said here that for many Dinosaurs, there will be an option to short-circuit some of these processes. It is quite common for Dinosaurs to dine on appropriate Unicorns, and many do. Some choke in the process, the majority probably never get too much benefit from it, but some can find such meals extremely invigorating.
The last key stage is optimization, for this is where the growth – and much of the profits – will come as the product or service matures in its marketplace.
There is one last stage, de-commissioning, which aims to ensure that getting a product or service out of its market at the right time can be spotted and planned to cause the least grief and most future market opportunity possible.
My take
It is easy to look at this and say, “Yeah, yeah, I know that,” and then forget that these risks hang over every business and the steps need to be taken. And with digitalization, the cloud, IoT, WiFi and mobilization, machine learning and artificial intelligence all coming into play at around the same time, more businesses than ever are moving into the risk target area.
Image credit - Unicorn silhouetted against sunrise © adrenalinapura – Fotolia.comDisclosure - Oracle is a diginomica premier partner at time of writing. Read more on: Cloud ERP financials and supply chainDigital transformation - frictionless enterpriseProfessional services 