
Someone called me yesterday to offer me their telecoms and broadband service. We worked out that their proposal could save me at least £200 ($260) annually compared to what I pay my family’s current supplier. But I declined the offer.
I explained that I didn’t want to spend the time it would take to sign a new contract, get the new connection installed and work through any change to my business expense processes. Plus, since I work from home, there was the risk attached to moving to a new supplier for a business-critical service that was working very well with my current supplier.
Weighing the savings amount against the expected and potential disruption, it simply didn’t appeal. The seller gracefully accepted my decision and moved on to his next call.
Overcoming inertia
The episode illustrates just how difficult it is to overcome the inertia of incumbency when selling a new product or service. Even when you can show a clear savings or benefit, any change still has a real or perceived cost. Unless the buyer’s already unhappy with their current supplier, the seller has to come up with a compelling reason why they should make the switch.
The best my caller could come up with yesterday was the argument that I would be sharing their broadband servers with 50 other customers rather than 150 with my current supplier. It was a technical argument that didn’t translate to a quantifiable benefit I could be certain of.
If I hadn’t been happy with my existing service, it might well have been an easier sell. I’m constantly looking for ways to escape costly, inefficient service from my banking providers.
Making it easy
Having seen Travelex speak at a recent AWS event about their new Supercard foreign exchange card, I signed up a few weeks ago just before heading off on vacation.
Every aspect of this decision was the polar opposite of the proposed broadband deal. I was already sold on finding a new provider. I had an alternative I could use if it didn’t work out. And getting started was a breeze — Travelex really have made the process as easy as pie. You simply download the app, input your details, and when the card arrives in the mail a few days later, just link it to an existing account. With an ironic frisson, I did that last step on my mobile phone while waiting in line at my bank!
In fact it was so easy that I just went ahead and used Supercard for all my foreign cash withdrawals during my vacation, without bothering to check whether it actually was saving me money. It turns out it wasn’t. The Travelex markup is higher than what I would have paid for withdrawing that cash directly using my bank’s debit card. But you know what? The app made it such a pleasure to use that I’m not really bothered.
My take
The moral of the story is that, as in so many decisions, feelings matter a lot more than reason. If you’re trying to win a sale against the inertia of incumbency, remember these five key points:

It’s much easier if the customer’s already dissatisfied with their current supplier
Make signing up for your new solution as easy and delightful as possible.
Don’t assume that simply showing you’re better value or technically superior will clinch the deal.
The buyer needs to have a compelling reason to make the switch.
It’s hard to sell rip-and-replace — find a low-risk way to build a relationship first.

Image credit - Sales meeting silhouette men handshake industry background © kentoh - Fotolia.comRead more on: CRM and customer experienceFinancial services and fintech 