
Google AMP’d pages
The recent announcement that Google is finally doing something about web performance on mobile devices is a relief. AMP — short for Accelerated Mobile Pages — cannot have come too soon following Apple’s AdBlocker moves aka Apple News and Facebook’s quiet addition of another ‘builder’s lift‘ to its walled garden via Facebook Instant Articles.
For those not following along and more concerned about ad budget performance reviews, there’s an undeclared war going on out there in Internet land. At stake are the destination of ad dollars on the one hand and an open web on the other hand.
If none of that matters to you and all you care about are ad dollar bang for the buck then of course you’ll place your bets where you think they’ll do the most good. But as we’ve discovered, the rise of Ad Blockers only highlights a much more gnarly problem. Contrary to pretty much everything the advertisers choose to believe, people don’t like ads. Shifting the center of power from Google, which defined the ad networks, to Facebook or Apple doesn’t solve the problem. Here’s an early example.
Yesterday, Twitter released Moments, a compendium of curated news it thinks we’d like to have, inside its mobile applications. But guess what? I hit the Moments icon and boom! The first thing I saw is an advert that covers two thirds of the screen. Forget the fact its curated news has no relevance to me whatsoever. But an advert as the FIRST thing I’m presented? Talk about instant #fail.
Side note: I see that when I hit Moments today, the first piece I see is a Fox News article. Hmm. Just as bad IMO.
Therein lies the risk that both Facebook and Apple are taking. On the one hand they argue that having a performant application is better than browsing on the web. That’s a good argument and one that wholly makes sense for sites that are weighed down by ad related objects. On the other hand, being force fed ads via a captive application isn’t going to fly over the long term. Neither does it encourage the essential deep linking that helps spread knowledge.
The fact some people think that Facebook is indistinguishable from the Internet or more specifically the web, isn’t going to be enough to drive users away if, as seems inevitable, Facebook and Apple shovel ads in our faces. Even so, by somewhat hastily opening the AMP kimono, Google demonstrated it is taking the threat seriously.
If you believe in an open web as the best way to allow the spread of ideas, improve knowledge distribution and generally help us all lead better lives then Google’s play is an essential part of that evolution. Put another way, an array of well known vendors are joining the party:
This is the start of an exciting collaboration with publishers and technology companies, who have all come together to make the mobile web work better for everyone. Twitter, Pinterest, WordPress.com, Chartbeat, Parse.ly, Adobe Analytics and LinkedIn are among the first group of technology partners planning to integrate AMP HTML pages.
Where I think this gets truly interesting is in the world of business to business rather than consumer facing situations. In a tangentially related story, Kurt Marko demonstrated how the combination of social, mobile and cloud technologies helped him in an otherwise difficult situation:
The nexus of social, mobile and cloud technologies, what some term SoMoClo, also allowed me to handle many other work and personal issues: getting projects and meetings rescheduled, respond to inquiries or questions, ordering necessary supplies for home delivery via Amazon, get doctor contacts and follow up visits entered in my phonebook and calendar, coordinating transportation in real time with my friend via messaging, etc.  Indeed, the technology allowed me to both stay connected and perform any kind of knowledge work without missing a beat, even as my body was broken and physical mobility was badly crippled.
Curiously, in that same article, he displayed a graphic that talks about how poorly mobile business apps have performed. Here it is:

So on the one hand we have Facebook doing well by its own account in the mobile space and poised to throw more ads at us while in the corporate world, apps are not doing so well? Why the disconnect?
I reckon it’s quite simple. Early attempts to build mobile apps have been little short of underwhelming as companies forklift web apps to mobile. There are some exceptions like Slack, which by all accounts has done well, along with elements of the Salesforce and Workday portfolios. But in reality, most business people still work on the equivalent of a desktop machine. A recent straw poll among diginomica folk confirmed that. Equally important, a mobile app is as much a one shot wonder as an old school accounting app. The integrations that ought to exist between many apps are simply not there.
Now — do we want our web pages to be lightning fast? Hell yes! Along with others, we (by which I mean me and a part time engineer) spend a disproportionate amount of time tuning and tweaking to ensure we deliver the best experience possible. If we can get the bonus of fast loading mobile pages then I’m absolutely behind AMP. And so should you.
But — isn’t there always a but? Facebook Lead Ads could represent a much bigger threat to Google. They’ve cracked some integration nuts back to services like Salesforce, Marketo, Eloqua and Sailthru. Let’s see how that plays out.
In the meantime, check out AMP by running this search on your mobile device. Try ‘guardian’ or ‘night’ to get some examples.
Disclosure: Workday, Salesforce, Marketo, Oracle (which owns Eloqua), Sailthru and Salesforce are premier partners at time of writing
Read more on: MobileSocial 