
Like many large, global organizations, the technology services arm of computer giant HP feels the need to transform its operations to become more responsive to customer needs. Its chosen platform for doing so is the cloud — more specifically, the Salesforce1 cloud platform, which delivers both Salesforce’s own CRM tools as well as professional services automation from FinancialForce.com.
HP is one of both vendors’ larger customers. The technology services organization (which will remain part of HP Enterprise when the company splits later this year) provides every kind of IT service, from planning and delivering datacenter migrations to implementing and supporting enterprise applications. A few random statistics help convey the scale of its operations: 140 countries, around 40,000 interactions with customers every day, and (among others) a SAP user population of 1.7 million spread across 54 countries.
Today’s customer expectations are placing new demands on the service organization, says Adam Jones, support process architecture manager:
We’re seeing our customers wanting to be more proactively, pre-emptively notified of what’s going on. They want to be socially connected to resolve issues and indeed to solicit feedback on best approaches and also want us to understand their social profile and align our engagement with their needs.
At the same time, all divisions of the company are being encouraged to put the customer at the center of everything they do. For the services organization, this means not only achieving the elusive ‘360 degree view’ of the customer by marrying sales and services data, but also adding an understanding of the customer’s wants and needs so that service can be truly personalized.
Opportunity to standardize
That’s the theory, anyhow. Translating that into practice means leaving behind a legacy environment that had grown up through a mixture of merger and acquisition activity and local or regional purchasing decisions, says Jones.
If you go from global to region to country to districts, everyone does it their own way. People go off and customize and it’s very hard to control that.
The opportunity to standardize makes it possible to remove many inefficiencies that have built up over the years. As part of the change management process, it’s important to explain the benefits of the new processes, says Jones.
We’ve got to stop the shadow IT work because there’s big investment here.
Adam Jones, HP Enterprise
The roll-out of FinancialForce PSA supercedes a collection of around 15 different tools that were used for service planning and delivery, including Sharepoint and Excel. Using a single cloud platform to bring together this functionality avoids customization and integration headaches, as Jones explains:
The workflow transformation is really about driving customer experience, and ensuring we learn from our previous legacy environments — so limit customization, and leverage the power of the SaaS vendor to provide leading practice capabilities to transform our business operations and delivery models. We really don’t want to get into a ‘Frankencloud‘ situation.
One of the most significant outcomes, Jones believes, will be driven by improved collaboration and communication between sales and delivery teams. This will help ensure that sales people are selling what the organization is able to deliver, and that what is delivered matches the customer’s expectation.
If you can get it right, then you have the opportunity to differentiate, which will delight your customers.
SaaS agility
Using SaaS is an important part of enabling a more agile approach. Salesforce was implemented for sales in 2011 and the current roll-out of FinancialForce PSA has already been delivered to almost 4,000 users, and will reach 5,500 once it is complete. Jones says that SaaS vendors have a community-based approach to development that helps them evolve their software to match customer needs.
With client server [vendors] it’s very difficult to influence what’s going on. With SaaS vendors they like to learn from what customers are doing.
Not all of the organization’s IT resources are going to the cloud. The call center, field teams and project management are all SaaS, while billing and other backend systems run on SAP. Document management and sharing remains on-premise too, says Jones.
We can’t keep everything in the cloud because of IP and indeed the cost.
HP had help from an SI to get the project started but the intention was always to become self-sufficient. The SaaS approach of managing processes by configuration rather than customization helps reduce the IT overhead, says Jones.
The IT role should become more focused on integrations. Business should be taking on their own configuration.
As well as being adopted in-house, HP is increasingly doing SaaS proofs of concept with clients, he added. Being able to focus on process transformation rather than the underlying technology is good for business.
Disclosure: FinancialForce.com, Salesforce and SAP are diginomica premier partners.
Image credits: Man on ladder planning network design in cloud © Tom Wang – Fotolia.com; headshot by FinancialForce.com.
Read more on: Professional servicesThe new professional and IT as a serviceUse cases 