
Euan Semple
While Facebook, Twitter and other social media have become everyday tools to run our social lives, the corporate world still lags behind. Euan Semple, author, speaker and social media strategist, states :
Most organizations are still at the very, very early stages. Most people are exploring the potential of it – they are still, in some ways, doing it at the margins. There are actually very few organizations which have actually fully embedded it and made it part of how they work.
Instead, the reaction in some companies is still one of suspicion. Semple recounts a recent example where a company discovered that 200 or so employees had created a closed group on Facebook, which they used as a forum to discuss how to improve work.
Instead of being delighted at their commitment to making the workplace better, the organization shut it down, as it was against company policy to use Facebook at work. As Semple notes:
That’s the world most of us are operating in.
But even when companies do decide to implement some kind of internal social media initiative, there is no guarantee that the build-it-and-they-will-come approach will work, acknowledges Semple:
I think there’s the risk of building a big, expensive, shiny corporate thing, and then wondering why no one is using it.
This can happen if staff feeling that this is something being imposed on them from above, which then sets off “organizational antibodies” among workers. Semple notes:
It’s almost like the more high profile, the more you spend on your initiative to bring about change, the less likely it is to happen. Real change I think happens incrementally with small steps.
Semple uses the phrase Trojan mice to describe this incremental change, adding:
I really do thing this happens one person at a time. You can’t mandate that everyone in the organization is going to blog or tweet or whatever.
They also need help to see how a particular social media tool is relevant to them:
I think people need help contextualizing this. So again you don’t just put in Twitter or Slack or whatever else without giving people a reason to use it.
He believes that we are only at the start of a very long period of change, which started with the internet and continues with social media. People need to adapt the way they work to be more open and to share with co-workers more, but it’s not always easy for people to adapt:
It’s all too easy to enthuse from the stage about the potential for all this, but I know that too many people still fear being the dad dancing at the disco – that feeling of being out of your comfort zone and doing things that feel very counterintuitive.
Opening up
This idea of openness and transparency is also a theme highlighted by David Shing, digital prophet at AOL:
The thing that’s become apparent about digital is that everything is now open. I can find out everything about everyone now because everything is transparent. For good or bad, it is what it is.
Social is an interesting place. Social used to be about you and I sitting down and having a conversation. Social is now about open conversations everywhere.
David Shing
The challenge is whether you’re sending the right information or the right people at the right time. Unfortunately, people get that wrong, believes Shing, because they take one piece of information and they simply “amplify it” everywhere.
He jokingly refers to this more open and collaborative way of working as heralding the end of the “CYA” (Cover Your Arse) email era. When someone asks a co-worker a question via email, it can set off a chain reaction as and more and more people are cced, but no one really takes any accountability or actually does anything.
With social tools such as Slack for project management, everything is more transparent and there’s less opportunity for buck passing. The result, says Shing, is that:
We’re in a world where ‘cover your arse’ is getting harder to do.
Shing sees this as a huge opportunity for those in HR to really understand what this world of transparent interaction is really like.
While HR was previously just the place you called if there was a problem, it now has the opportunity to be at the forefront of this open revolution. But that will only happen if HR gets involved in introducing the type of social media which furthers this open interaction.
Semple agrees that HR has a huge opportunity to push social media in the organization:
HR [professionals] are potentially in an incredibly exciting and powerful situation to see the patterns, to tell the stories and to help people to make sense of this and not just to be transactional and deal with the miscreants or policies – systems are already working hard to automate that.
Semple believes that automation will increasingly change many white-collar jobs:
So many of the jobs one would aspire to – the middle ranking bureaucratic jobs in an organization – are likely to be automated in the next 10, 15, 20 years.
Semple and Shing were talking at the HR Tech World Congress.
Read more on: HCM and the digital future of workSocial 