

Tullow Oil
We had 20 different systems or applications in the business all using people information, none of them connected to the HR database and none of them using HR information to feed their systems directly. So the chances of us and the business saying the same things were absolutely zero.
That was the situation three years ago at multinational oil and gas exploration organization Tullow Oil, explained HR services manager, Neal Barnes at the CIPD analytics conference earlier this month.
Tullow’s HR team recognized that something had to be done. It wanted to be able to use analytics to provide useful business insight, but to do that it also needed to change HR processes and upgrade technology.
The key driver was to improve alignment between HR and finance, so that everyone was using the same data to tell the same story, particularly about headcount.
At that time, in 2013, headcount reports from HR and finance both did not match.
Not surprisingly, the rest of the business couldn’t understand how two departments could come up with different figures for something as fundamental as headcount.
But headcount was not easy to measure and it was approached differently by HR and finance. For example, Tullow had rotational roles – four weeks on, four weeks off. It was one job role, but carried out by two people. For HR this meant that the headcount was two people, but for finance, which measured those people in terms of cost to a project, they counted as 1.8 people.
It was essential for the two groups needed to align their headcount figures for the rest of the business. Says Barnes:
The reality is if you can’t get alignment with the people who produce headcount information, why should the business trust your information? Why should they take your data as being credible? If they don’t think the data is credible, they are not going to look at the reporting.
Work to do
In terms of technology, at that time the company had an HR database and an electronic appraisal system, but nothing was connected. It was a starting point, but there was a lot of work to do, particularly when it came to people data and processes. Barnes points out:
We were the gatekeepers of people data, but the reality was that wasn’t where we were at the time.
Different departments were inputting people data into multiple systems. Tullow needed that information to be put into the system once, by the right person – and in time that should be the employee or their manager through self-service.
Other changes in technology were needed. Currently, the company has Cascade as its main HR system but will migrate to SuccessFactors by Q2 this year. It has also invested in HR shared services last year to support the business and take charge of ensuring the integrity of the data.
It invested in OrgVue for resource planning, reporting and creating organization charts, so for the first time it can produce global organizational charts from one set of data.
Putting in these basic foundations were essential, believes Barnes:
Everything we’ve been doing over past two or three years is getting the basics right, getting to a point where the business trusts our information, getting to the point where they are asking for more information and more data, getting it aligned with other systems and finance, so that the numbers are saying the same story.
Questions
For Tullow, it wasn’t a question about looking about predictive analytics, but finding who their people were and what they cost – having a greater insight into the here and now.
Tullow’s answer to making the data match was for HR to take control of the master data, which was then passed to finance. The finance department was not allowed to edit the headcount information. Barnes admits that this “carried a lot of pain and was a massive challenge”, because HR was basically asking finance to relinquish control. It also meant training HR staff to take over that control and to become data masters.
That took a change of mind set. In 2014, SAP was implemented for finance and the supply chain and it felt like a rugby scrum as there was a massive pull for data. SAP required master data and HR just wasn’t ready yet.
It felt, remembers Barnes, like HR was the rugby ball being kicked from every direction, but the lightbulb moment was when he realised that HR was really like the ref and that “without good quality data the game doesn’t happen”.
A year on and Barnes is confident that they are on the right track. People trust the data and look at it on daily basis. Says Barnes:
Making our information transparent has forced us to get better and the business now trusts the data.
One of the key things that helped build confidence and expertise was adding a data scientist to the HR team, according to Barnes:
Last year we brought in a data scientist and that was probably one of the best things we did. For the first time we could challenge what finance did with their figures, which we wouldn’t have had the confidence to do before.
We still came up with different numbers, but the data scientist was able to say why and we could say it was their figures that were wrong, not ours. We all have the same data set, so if the numbers are saying something different at least we know the data is right.
Results
Barnes is fully aware that they are on a journey of improvement that will never end, but is proud of the achievements made so far:
We can generate accurate reports, show better alignment with finance, we can do standard organizational charts and we put HR shared services in place that is hitting its SLAs. We needed to globalize and standardise HR processes. We hardwired some HR processes to change behaviour.
But it hasn’t always been easy, acknowledges Barnes:
Be careful what you wish for. We said we wanted to be owners of master data. We had to hold financial structures and cost centres within HR systems and we had to get HR people comfortable to analyse data on cost basis not just an organizational basis for HR, because that’s what finance needed. That’s been one of the biggest challenges for us.
We ended up stopping producing reports by organizational structure and in the beginning running it in line with finance because we needed to get the business confident that our HR and finance reporting was giving them the same information.
And it continues to be a challenge. Barnes says he spends half his time talking to managers and understanding what they need and half talking to finance to influence what that department does. He says:
We’ve spent two years getting to point where we have headcount definition that suits finance and HR.
As for the future, the aim is to keep concentrating the KPIs of the business, according to Barnes:
For us, it’s about really understanding what the business wants to achieve with KPIs, This isn’t about HR reporting for the sake of HR but reporting that matches business need.
My take
The experience of Tullow Oil illustrates the link between analytics and data. Having one single version of data (and one group in charge of that data) was essential to make any analytics HR did stack up.
It also shows the importance of building trust between HR and the rest of the business – getting the basics right, so that the business will begin to gain more confidence in HR’s reporting.
Disclosure: at time of writing, SAP is a premier partner of diginomica. 

 
Read more on: Analytics planning and data analysisHCM and the digital future of work 