
Author’s Note:  I requested a briefing from ServiceNow, a provider of IT Service Management and other solutions, to see if they use their own software solutions. Specifically, I wanted to see if they used their new-ish HR service management solution internally. A surprising number of vendors don’t ‘eat their own dog food,’ and I feel it’s important to see who does and how. I learned more than expected and that has implications for fast and slow growing firms everywhere.
When modest growth becomes an avalanche
Some companies experience extraordinary growth that can assume ‘hockey stick’ proportions. Revenues, employee counts, new geographic markets are simply exploding. For HR and other internal functions, this growth creates challenges such as:

Major pressure to identify new, great talent
Successful on-boarding of these new personnel
Acquiring timely performance feedback of the workforce and the correct administration of raises and promotions
Developing a leadership pipeline with mega-growth in mind
Identifying and closing skill/training gaps in a timely fashion
Resolving key HR issues for affected staff
Acquiring and acclimating new HR team members in-sync with the growth

The list doesn’t end here as growth makes it ever harder for an HR group just to stay current let alone develop better, future capabilities. HR in a high growth firm can seem like it is always behind. HR’s technologies are probably dated or already out-of-date. Service requests are taking ever longer to fulfill. Small issues are becoming ever-larger problems with each consuming ever-larger amounts of time to research and close. This is time that isn’t getting more abundant with growth. HR is getting squeezed and the company and its workers are getting short shrift.
In high growth firms, small, low-frequency issues rarely stay that way. For example, I learned that ServiceNow has gone through several growth phases in its short time already. It once was a bootstrapped startup that quickly became a $100 million revenue firm. Recently, it crossed the billion dollar revenue mark and now has its eyes on the $4 billion revenue space. To accomplish this, the company has had to acquire employees, lots of them, and more and more employees have been coming from locations far and away from its origin office. Half of the company’s employees now work remotely.
In a few short years, ServiceNow has grown from a few employees to a few hundred employees and now has over 3000 employee equivalents. It utilizes a number of 1099 contractors as well. Growth within the HR department has not matched the growth in headcount overall as the firm has utilized some of its own tools to manage this. But, I’m getting ahead of myself.
When a few small requests become an avalanche
Readers should think of growth like the water filling up behind a dam or dike. As the water level exceeds a critical depth, it puts all kind of pressure on the structure. Where an unimportant, small crack or fissure once existed in the levee, a larger and more deadly crack will form under new or continued pressure. Unless something is done to alleviate the pressure, a breach with potentially ruinous consequences will occur.
Small, but fast growing, firms often start with starter enterprise software systems. They use low-end, under-powered software and supplement these with spreadsheets and patched-together processes/procedures to overcome the technology shortcomings. What often occurs are back office groups going from one fire-fight to the next. These hard-working folks find ways to patch things along and keep the lights on – a task that gets ever more difficult as the firm keeps growing. Unfortunately, this growth often comes at the cost of the back office worker, the company’s brand, employee engagement rankings, etc.
The problems only worsen in a high-growth firm as there never is the time to fix the underlying root cause: poor technology integration; a lack of self-service applications; and/or, underpowered or irrelevant processes and technologies.  And, in a high-growth firm, the problems seem to grow exponentially in number and variety. This creates the avalanche.
One of the avalanche issues that ServiceNow executives brought up involved on-boarding. As time wore on and the company grew, the percentage of new hires that were correctly kitted out on their first day of work was declining. When new hires were unable to complete simple day one functions because they never got the laptop they were supposed to get, then worker productivity, engagement and satisfaction all took a hit.
In Q1 2014, ServiceNow started using its HR case management and process workflow toolset to get a handle on its own on-boarding challenges. ServiceNow extended its tools to make the on-boarding functionality more relevant to ServiceNow and to other firms.
What did ServiceNow focus on? Repetitive requests
It’s like déjà vu all over again (with thanks to Yogi Berra)
ServiceNow correctly understood that the big and growing work drivers for its HR team were repetitive work requests. A request that used to occur once every month, when the company only had 100 employees was now occurring daily. Worse, the volumes would only increase dramatically if the issues weren’t permanently and quickly addressed.
ServiceNow started by identifying the different issues, requests, error corrections, etc. that HR was tackling. Each of these requests was reflected in a service ticket. Once documented, the company could see which issues were occurring and how often they were doing arising. Prioritization was an outgrowth of the data. Surveys of HR customers (i.e. the workforce) can also pinpoint hot-button problem areas.
The company began tackling the worst and most frequent issues first. The focus was on designing and automating better processes that solved the worker’s need once, quickly and permanently. New workflows were created to ensure processes were completed and approvals were occurring in a timely fashion. In the on-boarding area alone, there has been a 53% improvement in day one experiences. Additionally, the on-boarding process is now accomplished regardless of where a worker is based. The people providing the equipment, training, paperwork, approvals, etc. for the new hires don’t have to be in the same work location as the new hire. The workflow makes geography irrelevant.
But can processes/workflows change as fast as the company?
I’m a long-time process designer and business process re-engineering quant. The larger a company gets, the more likely an old, out-of-date, inflexible, unexplainable and/or frustrating process will remain. I’ve seen the most illogical processes and workflows remain and I’ve encountered the people who will zealously defend the continued existence of this absurd drain on people’s productivity and morale. Worse, I’ve experienced countless examples of customer unfriendly processes and workflows from firms who are supposed to be serving their customers not vice versa.  At times, it feels as if there’s nothing we as consumers can do to get these firms to improve these processes.
Big companies often have ossified processes and methods – but – they don’t have to.  Growing firms, especially high growth firms, cannot afford to have rigid temples to an unchanging future. Dynamic business environments are now the norm. Static worlds are the luxury of a bygone era.
For larger firms to remain vibrant and relevant, they must be able to change processes, workflows and technologies at the speed of business. This means that new application software must come with a process/workflow/exception handling layer within it. Alternatively, if a company is not changing its core software, then it must overlay a process/workflow/exception handling toolset over these apps. Users (not IT) need to define the way processes should work, what controls are needed, how key delays or exceptions will be routed for a more timely decision or action.
ServiceNow fits in the latter camp. They already have Workday HR software, training software and other HR solutions in use. To improve their HR processes, they didn’t change application software. Instead, they deployed their own HR service management technology. It tracked service requests/problems, ranked issues and provided the capability to automate processes or repair broken or manual processes. Approval queues were materially shortened, manual processes were automated, new integrations were created and overall process completion timeframes were substantially shortened.
Other benefits also emerged. The ServiceNow HR organization:

Spends less time researching problems.
Spends more time solving the most difficult or rare problems – not run of the mill issues.
Does not need to grow its headcount at the same pace as the firm’s because it can do more with less.
Can make most process/workflow/exception handling changes internally inside a day. They don’t need IT to complete these changes.

One of the comments a ServiceNow executive shared with me is that their “focus is on doing work – not jamming data into systems”. That’s a telling point as so many back office solutions are clearly oriented around cramming ever more and larger transactions into a system. Process value occurs when systems complete transactions quickly and with a minimum of user interaction. If your idea of value creation is speeds and feeds, it’s probably time to adjust that.  It should be on improving worker productivity and elimination of latency, exception handling, problem researching, etc. In short, value should be about a combination of productivity that arises naturally combined with effective outcomes.
Lessons for all firms
It’s probably time to revisit some core concepts re: work and systems. It’s time to place increased transparency and visibility into how work is completed. Your firm’s competitive viability may well depend on it.
Small or large, businesses have to grow or become irrelevant. The question that management teams and functional leads should focus on is how to grow the firm without needlessly adding more headcount, frustration and bureaucracy. Or, stated more positively: How can we grow the company more profitably while also improving the customer, recruit, employee and supplier experience? Fixing repetitive, broken or time-consuming processes may be something to examine in more areas than just HR. It can be done in Finance, Sales and other areas, too. IT isn’t the only function that can utilize a service management discipline.
Disclosure: Workday is a premier partner at time of writing
Image credit: story image: via Automation Engineers, featured image via Fotolia ©, Change ahead sign with clouds in sky
Read more on: Best of archivesCustomer service managementFuture of workHR admin and payrollIT service management 