
HR Tech Conference Las Vegas is just around the corner but in the world of HR, nothing is standing still.
Here’s a selection of notes from meetings I’ve had with vendors over the last month and, will no doubt, be running into again at the upcoming show.
I close out with some words around why HR technology is more relevant today than at possibly any time in the past. Hint: it’s about talent.
FinancialForce
I ran into FinancialForce at the recent Salesforce.com Dreamforce event. FinancialForce acquired a Human Resources software firm a little over a year ago. Like the other FinancialForce applications, this product was built on the Salesforce platform. Since the acquisition, the product has been expanded and now includes benefits, talent management, recruiting, time and attendance and core HRM.
This product line will be marketed to the same target market as the financials and professional services automation solutions that FinancialForce sells. Generally, that target customer is a high growth, high tech and/or people-driven firm.
FinancialForce has been busy integrating this product with its PSA (Professional Services Automation) solution. This should make activities like time reporting, expense processing and revenue management easier for services-oriented organizations.
I’ll get a more complete update at the HR Tech show later this month.
Lumesse – Talent Objects
I also ran into the folks from Lumesse at Dreamforce. A little over a year ago, they began the journey to create a modern HCM solution built on the Salesforce platform. The product line is called Talent Objects.
The product suite will include recruiting, performance, compensation, succession and learning functionality. Several of these appear to be ready although the learning and performance management modules may still need some development. Some of the Salesforce technologies were used in creating some of the workforce engagement solutions. These tools help with creating communities, collaboration, etc.
The product line has already undergone changes to its user interface (a la Salesforce.com’s Lightning look and feel).
I might see more of them at the HR Tech show, too.
Workday
Workday announced its much anticipated Learning module last week at Workday Rising. The product helps fill out their HR suite. The application will not be available until 2H2016 and will provide the “science” behind very personalized training/coursework suggestions. The software will use machine learning to review a person’s role, prior experiences/training, etc. to create a personalized training program. This review would occur many times over a person’s career so that adjustments can be made to reflect changing job responsibilities, new assignments, etc.
Workday will not be creating the training content. It will leave that to users, third parties and employers.
For a pretty good review of the Learning module, see this piece by Joelle Smith.
ADP
ADP, a perennial HR powerhouse, had an analyst event a few days back. To give you an idea of their scale, one of their product lines, the small business oriented ADP Run, has over 440,000 clients.

ADP offers payroll services in 104 countries and supports 30+ languages. The company spends approximately $767 million on R&D – a figure that’s up 11.8% YOY – and a material amount of spend for this software sector. Their R&D spend dwarfs the total revenue number of many of their competitors.
Analysts also heard a lot about the company’s concerted focus on customer experience/satisfaction. The company reported revenue retention of 91.4%. I gave ADP CEO Carlos Rodriguez the name of one customer that needed attention. I’m pleased to report that ADP has marshalled several people on this customer and is already working on their issues.

The company is focusing on several innovation areas currently. Application Programming Interfaces (APIs) were one of these as the firm has built an applications ecosystem with approximately 60 applications and about 350 partners. From what I learned, ADP has a single API environment where a partner can build one API and their product will connect to all four of ADP’s major product lines. This environment, for now, is an API-oriented world. A platform ecosystem (a la Salesforce’s) is on the drawing board but not available as yet. APIs are still good given the phenomenal number of third party products that are often integrated with payroll/HCM solutions. A typical large firm may have dozens or hundreds of solutions to integrate including those to benefits administrators, learning/training solutions, salary benchmarks, time & attendance systems, video interviewing software, etc.
HR Technology Conference & Expo
This annual celebration of all things HR takes place in a few days in Las Vegas. While the show always has some great annual events like the Awesome New Technologies presentation, it won’t, alas, have me presenting this year. I’ll be walking the expo hall learning about all-new vendors and pointing out relevant vendors to a client. One such all-new HR vendor, Simppler, won’t be exhibiting this year but I will produce a pre-show write-up on them shortly.
Why is this show important? A recent research study by Thomsons Online Benefits shows a number of HR organizations will be looking at new HR software.
Nevertheless, there’s also hope in the research that some organizations are waking up to the value of technology and the role it can play in improving employee engagement. More than a quarter (29%) of companies globally will spend more on benefits technology in 2015 than they did last year, with 55% saying that employee-facing benefits portals are top of their lists for benefits technology investment.
Benefits, often a significant portion of an employee’s total compensation, are often designed to improve employee retention and engagement. Bad HR technology is frustrating to job seekers, current employees and alumni. Older HR technology was not designed for a more mobile workforce, millennials, etc. Like ERP and financial software, HR technology has to be relevant if it is to be effective.
It’s time to find some more relevant HR software. What will users see at HR Tech?
Disclosure: Workday and FinancialForce are premier partners at time of writing.
Image credits: infographics via ADP, HR Tech logo via conference site.
Read more on: HCM and the digital future of work 