
Mike DiClaudio
The goal for HR is to move from being the transaction-focused “steward and operator” of the business to the “strategist and catalyst”.
Cloud computing is instrumental in helping HR make that transformational shift, but it requires far more than a simple change of technology, according to KPMG’s 2016 HR Transformation Survey.
According to Michael DiClaudio, advisory principal in KPMG’s people and change practice, it’s important to focus on strategy and change management in transforming HR. He says:

Everyone can say they have a strategy, what we’re looking for are the boundaries of what you will and will not do as a function.
And then take it a level down and say: ‘I’m going to go from these types of actions and these types of responsibilities to these sets of actions’. So being able to articulate strategy in terms of stops and starts is very important.

This strategy for HR transformation needs to take a holistic view of the changes. The triumvirate of people, process and technology must be kept in check; there is no leader, all must work as one. DiClaudio points out:

We’ve had this cart-horse-chicken-egg dilemma around people process and technology for as long as there’s been people, process and technology. If you wait long enough, someone’s going to say one has to lead and the other has to follow. And I think our perspective is that these are all spokes coming out of the same wheel. It’s not about first second and third order of priorities; it’s about first, first and first order of priority.

If companies talk about implementing technology independent in any way of people and process, then the chances of them failing “skyrocket”, says DiClaudio. 
Crucially, there needs to be incredibly close cooperation between these three groups. You need three people using flipcharts or computers sitting in a room together ensuring that every technology or process decision is immediately acknowledged and reflected in the other groups. Otherwise, he warns:

If you have three individuals capturing those things at the exact same time your chances of being successful skyrocket. It’s not enough doing it all the same time but in three different groups who all report to the same person.

The third determining factor to success or failure, as ever, is change management. DiClaudio observes: 

It’s a misconception with these transformations that you leave work on a Friday and return a Monday and everything’s totally different just because there’s a ‘goal line’. With technology that is a somewhat a binary event, human change is non-binary and it has to happen slowly over time.

While this could be said about any project for the last 15 years or so, the difference with a cloud HR system is that the implementation time is so much more rapid.  Where it could take three or four years to implement a monolithic ERP beast, a cloud implementation will be up and running in 12 to 18 months. And that, says DiClaudio, means there’s no time for slacking:

It requires you to be incredibly sharp because you’re not going to get three or four years to faff about, so it puts a heck of a lot more emphasis on getting that right.

That also means tackling the people element head on, helping employees to feel comfortable rather than threatened by the changes. Cloud-based HR enables HR people and others to be able to quickly access information in ways they couldn’t before. But ‘automating’ the effort required to gather information for reports, for example, means that the skills and capabilities of those workers changes. As DiClaudio explains, using his car metaphor again:

I might buy a car that can drive 180mph, but I’m not equipped to drive a car 180mph. If I try to drive that fast, it will end in tears. So I almost believe that there’s a certain amount of capability gap that needs to be closed as well.

Where before the key skill was to “muscle it out” with the technology  to find the information that could maybe then be worked on, the job now is less about digging out the information and more about taking actions based on that information. As DiClaudio notes: 

That’s just not a skillset people have had many years to cultivate.

So HR is changing, but then so are finance and marketing. The FP& A [financial planning and analysis] function is changing the way in which financial data is being recorded and reported, so that their job is less about muscling out financial data and more about projections and touching upon business strategy. Which means that there’s “organizations empathy for what’s going on in HR”.  That’s is just as well because HR needs the help of other people in the business to make this work.
Even those pioneering first-wave adopters that were hell-bent on strategic transformation are finding that they aren’t squeezing as many benefits as they should. This is because they haven’t changed their mind-set from break-fix to continuous improvement, believes DiClaudio:

We’re seeing a lot of organizations that were in that first wave come all the way back around and say ‘right, the platforms themselves have changed’. Oracle and Workday’s platforms change twice a year with new functionality, new user experience and in some cases fundamentally new capabilities, such as recruiting or learning management or advanced compensation. 
That forces organizations to come back and think of this as an optimization project versus a break-fix. For many years organizations were stuck in a break-fix mode: ‘the outsourcing arrangement was broken I had to fix it, the ERP was broken now I have to fix it’. Well, this is not broken, it’s just underutilized. Either you implemented it in a slightly underutilised way or the way you implemented has not kept pace with the technology advances and now you have an opportunity to continually optimize. 
On the commercial side that’s a large portion of the conversations we have with clients right now. The clients are saying ‘I think this can go much faster than I can drive it, I need to learn to drive faster’.

The headline for the KPMG report is Cloud HR: the future belongs to the bold, because this HR transformation is not for the faint-hearted looking for a quick technology-enabled fix. Says DiClaudio:

The objective of isn’t about making HR better for HR and I think if I had to dictate our mantra in one phrase: it’s no more HR for HR. Just like there will be no more finance for finance or IT for IT, this is all about servicing the greater needs of the business.

An HR Transformation To-Do List

Start with a solid vision: The HR transformation journey needs to begin with a very clear vision of your desired destination. Never build out from the current state, or you will never achieve a significantly different level of value-add to the business from HR.
Remember success is not automatic: Don’t expect the HCM technology, no matter how new or leading-edge, to automatically deliver the transformational benefits you are pursuing. Realizing those benefits requires precise planning, resources, energy and time.
Change management is crucial: The need for strategic change management is more critical with cloud HCM solutions than with traditional ERP programs because changes via cloud can be surprisingly fast and far-reaching.
Data insights demand expertise: Even with embedded workforce analytics available at the touch of a button, delivering analytical insights that businesses can act upon requires new processes, roles and skills. This is particularly true in relation to the role of the HR business partner.
Don’t ignore HR skills: Rethinking the operating model of HR often requires new skills and roles. The learning and development agenda for the HR function is too often overlooked. Again, the role and skills of HR business partners should also be a key focus here.
Collaboration is key: Don’t expect line managers to immediately adopt an enhanced role in relation to people management using the HCM solution. It requires strategic change management if they are to become advocates for a new way of working.
Challenge the status quo: Alignment to a standardized, simplified and global HR process model requires challenging the status quo. Except in cases involving regulatory, business revenue, profit or legislative considerations, differences to a standard process model must be vigorously challenged.
Be bold: Businesses typically want change to happen quickly, but effective transformation takes time and puts a strain on the HR function along the way. Stay the course and deliver tangible improvements that will keep the change process moving toward success. Effective transformation is not a sprint; it’s a marathon.

Source: Cloud HR: The future belongs to the bold
My Take
The business expectations of what HR should do are changing and are matched by HR’s desire to be more strategic. The report expresses this idea well when it talks of HR moving from being a “steward and operator” to a “strategist and catalyst”.
Cloud computing and the Software-as-a-Service model provide the tools to make this shift. Where companies are falling short, as ever, is not with the technology itself, but with the strategic and change management issues surrounding it. The technology may be transforming, but the processes and particularly the people can be hard to change.
 
Image credit - KPMG/Freeimages.comRead more on: Cloud platforms - infrastructure and architectureDigital enterprise in the real worldHCM and the digital future of work 