
At last year’s HR Tech 2014, I was beginning to suspect that the Nevada Legislature had passed a law requiring every HR vendor had to have an engagement solution or story. Engagement was the operative word in 2014 just like cloud was in 2007.
What was particularly off-putting last year was how many vendors seemed to think that engagement was an employee created problem that businesses need to solve. There were lots of studies trotted out that showed the business impact of having less than fully engaged employees. But the studies only showed the after-effect of disengaged employees. They didn’t look at what caused the engagement problem.
The 2014 crop of engagement solutions were trying to ‘solve’ the symptoms of a problem without a clue as to its root causes. They were putting bandages on stab wounds while being disinterested in the malcontent that was inflicting the injuries.
Vendors sell software to managers and executives. It is easy to sell a solution about engagement to a manager when you tell them that the employees are the ones with the engagement problem. It’s a lot harder to sell to that manager or software buyer when you must tell them that they may be the cause of the disengagement.
Unfortunately, many employee engagement root causes are, in my opinion, created by ineffective, inattentive or pathologically crippling managers/executives. Don’t believe me? Look at how many studies illustrate that approximately 60-75% of voluntary turnover is due to issues an employee has with their supervisor. When people and their supervisor do not mesh, the employee will cease to be engaged.
In that sense the old saw: ‘Hired in by a great company, left because a lousy manager’ holds as true to day as it ever has.
What is capturing the disengaged employee’s attention are the task and opportunities associated with a potential new job not the current one.
At this year’s HR Tech, I ran into some HR firms that got this. In meetings with both Halogen and The Marcus Buckingham Company, I saw companies that used more of a team matching/building technology to identify mechanisms for creating great working relationships. Their technologies, to differing degrees, help supervisors change the nature and frequency of conversations between workers and their supervisors by adding important context and insight to the process.
These tools can help good bosses create a better work relationship and more valuable performance reviews. But, no tool will improve engagement when a boss is pathologically cruel or is a narcissist, imperious, micromanaging, abusive, etc. sort. Those folk need to start with The No Asshole Rule.
And, that leaves the long-standing dilemma in engagement and leadership development/performance management solutions still in place.
We still don’t have vendors creating solutions that identify those managers and executives with value-destroying pathologies. Vendors won’t create them out of fear that few executives would want their secret shortcomings coming to light. Employers won’t buy them as the results could decimate their executive ranks. What HR executive is going to tell a peer that that their bullying management style is why they must leave the firm?
HR vendors find it easier to implement gimmicky solutions like electronic atta-boys, social media badges for workers who need praise every hour and a reward store where employees can cash in points for doing their job or being ‘engaged’.  Those may be easy to implement but engagement fixes are rarely so easy to accomplish or so simply defined.
I can’t wait to see how engagement evolves for HR Tech 2016.
Featured image via @gapingvoid
Read more on: Future of workHR admin and payroll 