
Nick Holley
These tried-and-trusted maxims are all very well in theory, but who actually makes them happen? The HR director may set the strategy, but the person on the ground who sees it through, is the HR business partner. 
These HR business partners comprise one of the legs of David Ulrich’s widely adopted ‘three-legged model’ of HR, alongside HR shared services and centers of excellence.  This 20-year old model is still highly relevant today, as HR strives ever harder to embed itself in the business rather than be a support adjunct.
Yet, Professor Nick Holley, co-director of the Centre for HR Excellence at the UK’s Henley Business School, sounds a note of caution:

What we’ve been finding in our research is not a criticism of the model itself, but in most organizations it hasn’t achieved everything it set out to achieve….the thing that really defines the success or not of this concept is the HR business partner.

The problem with the HR business partner role is that is incredibly complex – more organizational development in nature than HR.  But in addition to the complexity of dealing with organizational development and value creation, notes Holley, these individuals also need to understand and deal with the complexity of HR:

The HR business partner role takes all of this in and prioritizes it and makes sense of it, spotting patterns in it and then identifying how HR can actually fix all the problems.

So this HR business partner role is pivotal in driving through technological and cultural change, but it is also often a potential point of weakness, warns Holley: 

What organizations have done is they’ve just rebadged their HR manager or their HR generalists in this new structure and called them HR business partner, without understanding that intellectually this is fundamentally a different level that you are asking these people to operate at.

HR business partners can be the weakest link because individuals with the requisite mix of skills are in short supply and because companies haven’t matched up people with the right skills to the right business unit. 
Everyone in an organization has the intelligence and experience to work at a particular level. Problems occur when there’s a mismatch between abilities and the job requirements.
Seven split
Organizational psychologist Elliott Jaques split management into seven levels. Each level is defined by the amount of ambiguity and complexity of the task, the geographical scope and the time frame for decision making.  The most basic level 1 job would be a factory line worker, while a level 7 job is reserved for presidents and other role where the level of ambiguity is enormous.  Holley says:

HR business partners probably operate somewhere around a level 3. Trouble is we’ve recruited people into HR to do a level 1 or 2 job.

When someone is asked to work at a level that is beyond their capabilities, they dumb down the job to cope, notes Holley:

They simplify the job to fit what they can do, which makes HR look naïve and lacking credibility because they can’t actually operate at the level of the leadership team.

Equally, there will also be problems is you put someone in a job where they aren’t pushed enough.  They’ll deliberately create crises to alleviate the boredom of the job.
So HR has to think about making the right match between individual HR business partners and the most important parts of their business.
But it’s unrealistic to expect to fit every HR business partner role to be high-level strategic thinkers.  Companies tend to lock down the good ones with golden handshakes, so experienced people are few and far between. 
Holly suggests instead a more pragmatic approach. Companies should rank their HR business partners and the level they think they operate at, and then similarly rank the areas of the business they operate in. High level thinkers should be deployed to the most critical areas.
It sounds obvious, but Holley maintains it’s a process that many companies overlook. People become assigned to roles for many reasons other than their capabilities.
Whatever level the business partners are working at, it’s key that they gain experience of working in the business:

I’m very proud to be an HR professional. But it’s not about HR, it’s about the business.

That’s why, although Holley runs the HR business partner program at Henley, he believes the word partner in the job title sends out the wrong message. HR should not be a partner, but a part of the business, he believes:

The danger is the idea of partnership is, people think: ‘I’ll partner with clients and if it all goes wrong, it’s not my fault; I can step away from it’.

My take
It’s amazing how enduring David Ulrich’s model for HR has been, considering the changes in technology and the workplace in general over the last two decades.
HR business partners have become a regular part of the HR landscape and their role is only increasing in importance as the pace and complexity of business  increases.
Disclosure - Nick Holley was speaking at the HR Tech conference in London. Read more on: HCM and the digital future of work 