
From the air, Shanghai looks like a game of dominoes on a vast scale: a fast-expanding metropolis with new block after new block housing 25 million people – all lined up in rows alongside new motorways, new maglev lines, and new parks and gardens.
But the booming, gated communities of the new middle class reveal that the war for talent is intense in Shanghai, despite the carefree attitude of the thousands of electric-scooter riders who cruise the streets without crash helmets, weaving in and out of pedestrians.
This is a city full of energy and confidence, but always tightly controlled.
And that war for talent is being intensified by artificial intelligence, according to Huawei, whose Huawei Connect conference takes place in Shanghai this week. At a ‘Day Zero’ roundtable – the main event kicks off on Wednesday – Huawei and a panel of partners revealed just how AI is reshaping the enterprise and the way that businesses look for talent. Even as Shanghai is being reshaped by civil re-engineering and colossal state investment. One trend is the mirror of the other.
Wang Qian is co-founder and head of commercial strategy at Maimai – aka China’s LinkedIn. She claimed that even fresh AI graduates with zero experience can expect to earn RNB 12,000 a month ($1,734) – nearly five times the average salary in China. With five years’ experience, that may double to RNB 25,000, and with 10 years, double again to RNB 50,000. But top AI professionals could be earning RNB 1-2 million a year, she said, adding:
Today when we talk about talent, we need to talk about AI.
In the information age now past, enterprises needed engineers, she said, but today they need data scientists to support the shift to AI, industrial robotics, the Internet of Things (IoT), and cloud services. Currently in China, there is a huge gap in the market for this talent, she added. Maimai alone has provided 90,000 AI professionals to 1,000 companies, but as many as five million positions may be vacant across the country, the panel suggested.
With the war for talent intensifying, it would be easy to assume that the more highly qualified a candidate is academically, the better the chance they have of being snapped up by one of China’s technology behemoths. But that isn’t the case, at least according to one.
Dr Hao Lv  is Chief Innovation Officer of YITU. Despite not being as well known as companies like Baidu and Alibaba, YITU claims to make the best facial recognition system in the world – a claim supported by two years of NIST test results in the US.
Despite Dr Lv’s own PhD, YITU’s policy is to employ fresh graduates, who make up 90 percent of the company’s intake of AI experts. The reason is that PhDs typically “fail interviews miserably”, he said, with their academic focus meaning they often miss basic problems in data.
At YITU, graduates undergo a two-month AI bootcamp. If they fail that, they don’t get to do AI with the company, he said.
AI itself is tough, he added: “a different beast” – one with a long tail, its learning curve, plus heavy data and enormous system complexity. With AI, errors propagate and are hard to decouple from the system. You can’t avoid or hide them; you simply have to measure them.
To succeed in this world, talented people need to be more specialised than ever before: in data labelling, machine learning, parallel computing, data analysis, big data, algorithms, and product engineering.
YITU may become better known in time, he suggested: a cloud API is launching in December.
Build the intelligent enterprise
Next up on the panel was data science and predictive analytics consultant Ronald Van Loon, now also director at Adversitement.
Loon quoted a Gartner prediction that, by 2020, companies will manage 85% of their interactions without talking to a human being. In this environment, there are five keys to successful AI talent management, he said:

Vision, including a corporate moral compass.
Agile, multi-disciplinary customer-journey focused teams.
Data accessibility – the best, most transparent, best-governed data sets.
A data-driven culture.
Technology, with an end-to-end platform to collect data from every source.

These five things are essential if you want to build an intelligent enterprise, he said.
So what about Huawei itself? Huang Weiwei is a senior management consultant at the company, which is undergoing an internal digital transformation as comprehensive as that of any of its clients.
In that transformation, Weiwei said that Huawei isn’t just looking to attract people who have already been successful in AI, but also those who may be talented but worked on too small a platform in their previous role.
Seeking skilled, talented people rather than a CV full of conspicuous success is critical, he said, as 20 percent of real talent will create more than 80% of business value moving forward.
Huawei’s HR management strategy has always looked to grow human capital more than financial capital – via a diamond or “olive” shaped management structure, rather than the pyramid of old. In such an organisation, the core strength lies in the middle, not at the top.
Allied to this is a strategy to increase Huawei’s R&D budget to $15–$20 billion, of which 20-30% will be spent on basic research. Weiwei said:
If you have a niche you can use it for life. In the AI era, we need high-end talent. Those who can make breakthroughs will be well sought after. The key is the ability to learn. The greatest concern in China is education. Will education keep up with the needs of AI?
Either way, Huawei’s mission, said Weiwei, is to “bring digital to every person home and organisation for a fully connected world” – a “noble” vision that gives employees meaning, he explained, which is more important than the pursuit of financial gain.
This pursuit of matters of heart and head, rather than mere success, is what sets human beings apart from machines, suggested Maimai’s Wang Qian.
My take
Huawei’s and China’s orderly march towards the future is impressive to behold.
In a sense, a stroll through Shanghai at night emphasised the point. En masse, the city’s citizens walk the Bund after dark – the old city waterfront – and look at the skyscrapers of the new financial district of Pudong over the water, lit up by millions of LEDs, lasers, and spotlights.
It’s extraordinarily impressive, as one of the world’s great cities takes shape. But at exactly 10pm a clock chimes and the lights go out. The public show is over, and the real life of the city quietly reasserts itself.
Behind this city, this company, and this country’s rise to become the world’s number two economy is real grit, purpose, and control. The investment and the ‘show’ may be impressive, but what happens when other cities are sleeping is what sets China apart.

Image credit - TwitterRead more on: Future of workIoT robotics and AIMachine intelligence and AITalent management 