
 
It looks as if this week’s Huawei Cloud Congress in Shanghai will focus much of its attention on the the company’s move into the full service, enterprise end user solutions building role for delivering cloud services, and is now keen to stand up and be counted amongst that community of service providers.
This follows on from the announcement a couple of months ago of Business-Driven ICT Infrastructures (BDII), which it described as ‘facilitating in-depth integration of ICT infrastructure development and software applications’.
At the time, Huawei seemed keen to ‘Huawei-ise’ that old Intel slogan, with the phrase Huawei Inside, while diginomica suggested most users are not going to care too much whether it is Huawei `inside’ or not:
 It is what capabilities it provides them as end users, what services it allows them to exploit with ease and confidence that is now important. That means Huawei having the ability to work with partners that contribute parts of a much bigger, richer resource than the company can ever hope to provide on its own. This is something the company understands; it just seems unable or unwilling to say that this is what it is now ‘selling’.
Well, the signs now suggest the company will use its annual Cloud Congress event to ‘man-up’ and say it. Company sources have suggested there will be plenty of partners – both old and new – being talked about in this context.
This would move the company much more towards being seen as a player in the consultant/integrator/service aggregator and even services orchestrator marketplace
at a time when the groundswell behind the realisation that the technology is secondary to user business objectives is gathering pace.
The move is unlikely to be helped by continued references to the company and the allegations of involvement in cyberspying, particularly in the USA. As recently as last June the ex-US Secretary of State, Condolezza Rice, used a technology conference in Miami to raise again the suspicion that the company was a potential Trojan Horse for state cyber-spying by the Chinese. But as the US Government is equally tarnished by the same brush against China and others, it is perhaps time that such sly digs are now set aside.
It would be convenient, of course, if the technology conference had been organised by a direct competitor of Huawei. In practice, however, the speech could even be seen as something of an `own-goal’ by Rice as the organiser, Nutanix, is the type of company that would make a good complement and partner for the Chinese ICT vendor.
It will be interesting to see if the company’s two other main areas of interest, devices such as smartphones, and wearable technologies, have anything new to offer. Both have only just launched new products, with a new smartphone and a new smart watch coming form each. So further new developments may be unlikely, though it is possible there could be more moves to build greater collaboration between them and the broader enterprise need for cloud-based ‘packaged’ solutions.
Read more on: Cloud platforms - infrastructure and architectureInfrastructure 