
Chinese hardware and services giant Huawei ignored the turmoil on the tech stock markets this week by making a raft of new announcements at its Huawei Connect 2018 conference in Shanghai.
First up was the ‘debut’ of the Atlas intelligent computing platform, powered by Huawei’s new Ascend AI chips, which were launched yesterday at the event. In fact, Atlas is an evolution of the Atlas intelligent cloud hardware platform, released in 2017.
Either way, it integrates a broad range of Huawei’s hardware offerings, including modules, cards, boards, edge stations, and appliances, to build an “all-scenario AI infrastructure covering the end, edge, and cloud” – the oft-repeated theme of this year’s conference.
As such, it’s becoming clear that Huawei is recognising the importance of brand, packaging, and presentation in this increasingly competitive space.
Meanwhile, under the theme of ‘Power of the Platform’, Huawei’s Enterprise Business Group shared its vision of how its new digital platform strategy will enable governments and enterprises to accelerate their digital transformation projects.
This is despite deputy chair Eric Xu saying earlier this week that he dislikes the word ‘transformation’, because it implies a rejection of the old and a replacement with the new. Instead, Huawei sees itself as making constant progress towards achievable goals.
For example, its newly branded ‘AI + Digital Platform’ approach is being deployed in a new partnership with Tianjin’s high-tech Binhai New Area to create a smart city programme based on the technology.
Tianjin, near Beijing, was in the news earlier this year when it was announced that the city/new business zone is putting together a $16 billion local AI investment strategy – one that is 12 times larger than the UK’s entire new Sector Deal for AI.
Yan Lida, President of Huawei’s Enterprise Business Group, said:
Digital transformation is a complex process which requires a systematic approach and convergence of various technologies to integrate the physical and digital worlds. Huawei is committed to enabling our customers’ platform-based businesses with an ICT platform that allows partners to integrate industry-specific applications. In this way, Huawei’s platform serves as the ‘fertile soil’, enabling the growth of the industry ecosystem, and promoting digital transformation of various industries with our ecosystem partners.
Throughout this huge event, which has taken up three floors of Shanghai’s International Convention centre, Huawei has stressed the importance of partnership and sector expertise, with presentations from companies as diverse as Bosch (which has forged a close IoT relationship in China with Huawei, using the latter’s cloud) and Audi (which has been using prototypes of Huawei’s new AI-enabled mobile data centre [MDC] in its driverless car programme).
Bosch Software Innovations’ CEO, Dr Stefan Ferber, said he expects the Chinese IoT platform sector to grow by close to 70% over the coming years.
Meanwhile, China’s automotive market is now the largest in the world. One leading – unnamed – Chinese carmaker has chosen to deploy Bosch’s IoT Suite on the Huawei Cloud for updating its vehicles’ firmware over the air (FOTA). The system is expected to be rolled out to millions of connected cars in China in the coming years.
However, China is also rolling out up to 200 new regulations and laws concerning driverless cars, according to Dr Ferber, at a time when the US is sweeping aside federal regulation of the sector, in favour of the industry policing itself.
But back to Huawei’s new AI platform and strategy. The ‘AI + Digital Platform’ moniker is itself part of a broader branding approach that stresses Huawei’s new end-to-end, AI-enabled focus.
For example, the Enterprise Business Group also introduced its ‘Digital Platform + X + Ecosystem’ approach. With the Digital Platform as the foundation, new capabilities (‘X’), such as AI, IoT, big data, security, video, and more, can be combined with industry-specific applications.
Lu Qi, President of Marketing at Huawei’s Enterprise Business Group, explained the thinking:
Leveraging our capabilities in self-developed chips, mathematical algorithms, and architecture design, we develop full-stack solutions, including devices, the IaaS and PaaS layers, and the SaaS layer together with our ecosystem partners. Horizontal solutions offer cross-industry standardisation, and our Digital Platform can be used in a wide range of scenarios, as it supports both private and public cloud.
Additionally, Huawei is building an open, win-win ecosystem, in which our products and solutions can interoperate with those from other providers, offering customers the freedom to use the best solutions for their unique requirements. The Digital Platform allows partners to quickly develop upper-layer applications, and customers to digitally transform in an agile and efficient manner by focusing on creating business value, rather than on integrating the underlying technologies. Using this approach, Huawei aims to become a long-term strategic partner for our customers.
There’s that word ‘partnership’ again – which Huawei appears particularly keen to apply to its European clients and customers. With a trade war raging between the US and China, threatening to engulf all Chinese exports to America, an image of moderation and close cooperation plays well in these tense and polarised times.
The Digital Platform’s capabilities include:

Multi-cloud: Huawei claims that its FusionStorage 8.0 is currently the industry’s “only solution that can deliver a 300 microsecond I/O response, a fully-distributed architecture with no gateways, and active-active reliability”. More, the company claims that its private cloud offers “the most cloud services on the IaaS layer in the industry”.
Network: Huawei’s CloudFabric can support minute-level uplink and downlink of 10k containers.
Devices: Huawei offers the industry’s “first intelligent acceleration module”, the Atlas200, that can perform real-time analysis of high-definition video and advanced smart, small cells.

And, of course, Huawei announced its full-stack AI portfolio on day one of the conference, allowing industry-specific AI applications to be integrated into the Digital Platform to “better support customers’ digital transformation journeys” – even if Huawei itself doesn’t share that goal.
And the rest…
Also at the Connect 2018 event this week, Huawei released a three-year global industry cooperation plan, and committed to invest more in industry application innovation and multilateral cooperation.
Huawei also released the Huawei Cloud EI Intelligent Twins solution for cities. An evolution of the digital twin concept – in which real-world assets are modelled in data – EI Intelligent Twins for cities deploys AI to “achieve synergies between clouds, big data, the IoT, edge computing, and other technologies and to build a complete system from data generation and analysis to closed-loop management,” said the company.
Huawei also announced an update for its Intent-Driven Network (IDN) offering, which is designed to help industry customers construct “user experience-centric intelligent networks” for different business uses.
Finally, T-Systems and Huawei have jointly announced the launch of the Private Link Access Service (PLAS) for enterprises on the Open Telekom Cloud (OTC). PLAS will enable users of the OTC to have a dedicated, non-shared connection from their on-premise-networks to Virtual Private Clouds (VPCs) on the public cloud platform.
Huawei contributes hardware and software, with T-Systems providing the network and a German data centre.
My take
With Huawei estimating the global AI market to be worth $380 billion by 2025 – with 90 percent of that located in the enterprise – it is keen to push a message of business value and inclusivity, rather than mere technical achievement.
That said, much of the focus at this year’s event has been on technical excellence, rather than on what the customer chooses to do with the technology. That’s something I will explore in a separate report on smart cities, where Huawei seems to be helping a number of countries focus on urban security.
Huawei said that it invested $12 billion last year on product R&D. But is it focusing enough on what some of its clients do with the technology?.
Image credit - HuaweiRead more on: Internet of ThingsIoT robotics and AIMachine intelligence and AI 