
John Morrison
The task of trying to break into the mature European marketplace for enterprise compute resource provision could be proving to have side benefits for Chinese ICT vendor, Huawei, as the company’s recently appointed Vice President for UK Enterprise, John Morrison, obliquely acknowledges.
Huawei has unsurprisingly done well in its homeland of China, as well as in the continent of Africa. But both of these have little in the way of legacy infrastructure, either in telecoms or enterprise data center resources, except in localized areas.
Europe is a different kettle of fish however, explains Morrison:
Yes, there is a huge legacy marketplace in Western Europe. It is a very different market from China and Africa, both of which are largely greenfield markets. There are no green fields in Europe, and that is the message both for us and for the marketplace – we recognise that we have to be the best in class to get any traction.
Part of the plan to gain traction, he suggested, is a very strong focus on the Solutions-as-a-Service (SOLaaS) marketplace. But not only that, the key factors in achieving such a goal are having a position as a supplier of OpenStack infrastructure, and the inherent decoupling of that basic infrastructure platform from the operating environment.
This does mean that potential customers do get a range of options when looking to engage in the process of migrating to the cloud. Some will be starting from scratch, where opting for the provision of a complete solution may be a sensible option.
For others, however, working with a different compute resource provider may be the preferred option. Here, running the Huawei FusionSphere operating environment and the ecosystem of partners that go with it, becomes a possibility on that infrastructure. Morrison says:
It does depend on what customers want and need whether they use Huawei systems or not. In the carrier world we are used to working with customers that don’t want to know who the hardware supplier is.
Channel focus
This is particularly relevant to the channel community. It means the company is happy to let third parties put its FusionSphere software and tools onto other hardware that they might want to specify for whatever reason, such as having existing contractual arrangements with other resource providers.
The channel is a marketplace where the flexibility of decoupling should bring benefits, particularly as the company is keen to build out its two-tier channel to market. This consists of selling direct, both to end user enterprises and to Systems Integrators, distributors and a select few large Value Added Resellers (VARs).
But Huawei is also keen to build out into the SMB sector through the distributors building their own channels of VARs, carrier resellers and other outlets as they develop.
It also holds out the prospect of having an impact on the coming hyperconverged marketplace. Huawei already has a server offering here, FusionCube, for which FusionSphere is the obvious primary operating system.
But within an OpenStack environment, it is possible that servers from other vendors will be manageable, giving Huawei and its channel partners the chance to offer one environment managing that other type of non-green field – both hyper-converged and traditional data center operations – as a single entity.
Morrison indicates that the company is keen to get over the fact that it and are partners are ready to work with customers looking for cloud migration now. That does mean working to migrate legacy applications, and the company has said it is well aware that this is likely to be a significant hurdle for many businesses to jump. The provider  has, however, already developed a range of migration tools and is continuing to develop more of them.
My take
This decoupling of its core software – after all the key component of delivering any cloud service – from the company’s own hardware is an important step. This is particularly the case now that FusionSphere is ready to run together with FusionCube, the company’s own hyper-converged server offering. As this is now one of the hot areas of data center development and growth – with several players already – having one operating environment that can run both hyper-converged and more traditional services on any OpenStack environment could be a good lever to waggle.
Read more on: Analytics planning and data analysisCloud platforms - infrastructure and architectureInfrastructureInternet of Things 