
A short while ago the large, and increasingly pervasive, Chinese ICT company Huawei participated in a number of exhibitions and conferences, including several of its own, where it made a number of strategic, technological and new product announcements.
Individually, it would not be that difficult to suggest these were a bit less than earth-shattering.
Collectively, however, they point at a trend that all the major technology and systems vendors now have to adopt if they are to succeed, and which end users actually need to prepare themselves to get heavily involved with.
This trend is for the major vendors to become major consultancies in their own right. Instead of Huawei seeing itself as competing with the likes of IBM or HP, its rivals are now the likes of Accenture.
And this is in a marketplace where that hoary old word ‘co-opetition’ takes on a new complexion, for it will be a world where the likes of Huawei and Accenture might be partners in some projects rather than competitors.
What is more, the real difference now is that the projects and ventures on which they consult will be so complex that the customers will really be the ones in the driving seat. This means that customer CIOs and Line of Business managers will need to add new skills to their repertoires – the ability to lead on the development of large, complex projects.
This may well mark a significant change for many businesses, where the norm has been to call in the consultants and, even if only to a small extent, then stand aside as the suits move in with their clipboards and iPads.
Huawei did, it has to be said, get close to making this move the key announcement of its spring splurge, but seemed to duck the real story in the end. At its own Network Conference in May, it introduced what it called a `guiding principle’ for working with the enterprise market – the objective of building Business-Driven ICT Infrastructures (BDII), which it described as ‘facilitating in-depth integration of ICT infrastructure development and software applications’.
That does rather make it sound like just another layer of management superstructure aimed at the likes of the CIO and those in charge of telecommunications networks just that little bit easier. So far, so not very amazing, therefore. It even adopts the now time-honoured, Intel-esque model of `Huawei Inside’ as a possible motif for its objectives.
This does rather demonstrate that, like many of the technology-based major enterprises these days, it is currently missing the point of what it is trying to sell – at least at the glib marketing-phrase level. Not many people are going to care too much whether it is Huawei `inside’ or not; it is what capabilities it provides them as end users, what services it allows them to exploit with ease and confidence that is now important.
Partnering
That means Huawei having the ability to work with partners that contribute parts of a much bigger, richer resource than the company can ever hope to provide on its own. This is something the company understands; it just seems unable or unwilling to say that this is what it is now ‘selling’.
In its announcements on BDII, the firm states that that `closer collaboration between Huawei and its partners and better coordinated innovation is required’. With this in mind it is pushing out in the world of forming ever more partnerships and industrial alliances which it hopes will create new channels through which customer businesses can find the appropriate way of transforming their businesses to meet the demands of faster-changing markets.
It is inevitable that some of those channels will see Huawei being just a bit-part player, with one of its partners in the driving seat as far as the customers are concerned, rather than Huawei being the `brand name’ around which everything hinges. That, as with every other established big name vendor moving out into the future, could be a primary problem for Huawei.
The company may in practice provide the majority of the technology involved, but the customer will still want Arnold Scroggins and Sons as primary contractor, for whatever reason.
For the CIOs, IT managements and Line of Business Managers at the customer end they should now expect to play a much more active, controlling role as an equal member of this troika – the primary contractor (for the sake of argument, Huawei), the appropriate partner(s), and the customer. They will be, more than ever, driving the consultancy process as they will have the clear idea of what they want to achieve rather than simply going with what the technology vendors say is possible.
The size and scope of the projects Huawei is now targeting are substantial. For example, it recently signed a Memorandum of Understanding with the City of Groningen to explore them the implementation of the company’s Smart City concepts, following in the footsteps of Amsterdam,. The Hague and Tilburg.
It has also partnered with Volkswagen on the development and demonstration of new apps that safely allow drivers to use GPS systems, play music, send and receive messages and make phones calls while driving. These apps support the open standard, MirrorLink, which is designed to maximise interoperability between smartphones and vehicle-mounted systems.
This obviously has wider implications as the combination of Uber-style order management and fulfilment, plus Google-style driverless vehicles, comes more to the fore. As a major vehicle manufacturer, it will also be of primary interest to Volkswagen.
My take
Huawei shows every sign of being one of the large vendors that understands the new relationship between themselves, their partners and their customers. It would have been good, however, to also see them setting out that new sales pitch explicitly.
Read more on: InfrastructureOutsourcingThe new professional and IT as a service 