
Shanghai Clouds
Huawei has duly confirmed at its annual Cloud Congress in Shanghai that it is heading out into the world of solutions-oriented cloud services provision, working with a large and growing set of partners, and has plans that – to those of us used to the over-hyped claims of most businesses in IT – are really quite modest. The upside of that, however, is that they are probably more achievable than most business claims.
In broad terms, what Huawei is pitching at is the growing need amongst business users for Solutions as a Service (SOLaaS). It is targeting a select band of market sectors, with finance, Government and energy provision amongst the obvious initial targets, as well as a selection of smaller opportunities such as the education market.
It acknowledges that it is, for now, a small player in the burgeoning cloud services sector, and with a goal of a $10bn run rate by the end of four years, it will still not be amongst the front runners.
But by targeting defined market sectors, and partnering with businesses that not only contribute to the provision of a comprehensive infrastructure but also add more targeted applications functionality, it offers enterprise businesses the opportunity to off-load much of the migration-to-the-cloud problem to a partnership of service suppliers that are leading specialists in their area of business, such as Microsoft and SAP.
Time will obviously tell, but that could give all the partners the chance to generate a better margin on contracts because they will be based on the value of services provided.
This does have a frisson of being on dangerous ground, of course. Journalists and analysts tend to hate the word ‘solutions’ because every business claims to provide them, though quite often can’t, once the journalists start probing a bit. But, on the other side of that coin, when it comes to the cloud and the way disparate but complementary companies can be pulled together to create targeted services based on their applications, that solutions word can start to mean something – providing whatever it is that the customer requires that adds value to their business.
Advantages
According to Eric Xu, Deputy Chairman and rotating CEO of Huawei, the company’s advantage here is that it has no legacy in IT, so it is starting from a clean sheet.
“In 2014 I talked about our position in IT and that we wanted to become an ICT player, which meant becoming an IT player in the first place. But we knew that we could not be a company that could do everything in ICT, so we focused on three areas, servers, storage and datacentre connectivity:
In 2014 we focused on products, but we have realised that this is not enough. An infrastructure system is essential, but it also requires partner companies working together to allow them to move to the cloud.
It can also be argued that the company realised its then core market, the network business, was starting to run out of steam and strong growth there was slipping away. In practice it seems like it was showing the first signs of suffering the effects of the Steel Industry Curve. In this case, new network hardware was offering much greater performance and capacity but with no great hike in unit prices, which can stall growth.
The company also developed three main platform components, the OpenStack-focused FusionSphere operating system, FusionInsight data analytics, and the FusionCube hyperconverged compute systems and these are now the core components of its infrastructure offering.
It has launched Enterprise Cloud Services in the Chinese market and the first announcements of contract wins in Europe are expected before the end of the year, though there is little rush towards the idea of becoming an instant global provider.
It is initially working with Telcos such as China Telecom, looking to build out in competition to the big CSPs. It is also working with and Deutsch Telecom for the European Telecom and enterprise market, and is looking for software development support. Xu says:
The company aims to build a community of 10,000 Huawei certified professionals as well as building up seven open Labs around the world, looking to build an open strategy for innovations.
According to Lida Yan, President of the Huawei’s Enterprise Business Group, the internet has fundamentally reshaped the global economy and changed global industries:
The next 10 years will see the next revolution. The USA, Germany and China have released industrial strategies, and the core concept is the same for each. ICT will be driving the changes that are coming. And data will be the most important asset for business. Cloud computing, big data and IoT are the core parts of this. So Enterprise will be IT based, with IT a core part of production and business processes.
He sees this being the start of the sharing economy, especially when it comes to shared resources such as IaaS and SaaS. He even sees companies with spare IT capacity starting to rent it out to others.
He sees a growth in industry-specific cloud environments. While there will be no difference in industry cloud architecture, they will need to be optimised differently, a task tailor-made for FusionCube. He also sees industry-specific PaaS and application-specific PaaS growing:
And the sharing economy will extend to the old concept of data siloes. These siloes will be connected together, even across multiple companies such as business partners, driving synergy and benefit across the cloud.
Underneath this there must be a platform that is agile and adaptable. It will need to offer Industry best practices, and that will be a part played by partners. The integration capabilities have to be seamless so that the platform and service can offer real time on-demand service capabilities.
Partners
Huawei will be working with partners to build communities for different industries and market sectors as the focus point for ICT infrastructure. It will stay out of applications, though it wants to provide total solutions.
The trick here, therefore, is being about to define enough of the infrastructure needed to allow others to rapidly build out what the industry, sector or specific business requires, with the minimum of effort and re-engineering, while keeping the infrastructure as standard as possible. Sharing depends on the right level of standardisation, especially at the infrastructure level.
All this means that the company can stand on the same starting line as other companies now. He indicated that, as well as the four main target markets, the company will also be targeting smaller sectors such as Education.
Speaking at a post-keynote press conference, he indulged in what was, for a senior ICT vendor executive, either a refreshing level of honesty and corporate modesty or a splendid piece of reverse-psychology double-bluff.
While he sees Huawei having and holding the lead in cloud vision, he is only predicting a revenue target of $10bn by 2019. This, he acknowledged, will still mean it is a small player in the SOLaaS marketplace. He acknowledged that it was unlikely Huawei would be Number 1 in the market by that time, or even close, though he would not be drawn on where in the rankings this might leave the company.
There is, of course, an unspoken side to this, in that moving into the world of solutions development, implementation and provisioning, the margins may well be a good bit higher than with the provision of a simple IaaS environment.
My take
This puts Huawei in a strong position to compete against both the big-name IT vendors and the the major consultancy/systems integrators businesses in the SOLaaS market as it starts to open up. And by focusing on the needs of specific target markets, rather than aiming to offer a general `catch-all’ platform that is often little more than IaaS+, it stands a good chance of providing customer enterprises with much more of what they need, as a service, rather that engineering it specifically (and no doubt expensively).
Read more on: Cloud platforms - infrastructure and architectureCRM and customer experienceDevOps NoSQL and the open source stackDigital and content marketingInfrastructureThe new professional and IT as a service 