
IBM may have been a late entrant to the public cloud market with its 2013 acquisition of SoftLayer, but there’s still all to play for, according to Robert LeBlanc, the 35-year IBM veteran who leads the vendor’s cloud division.
We’re still in the very early innings of the match. Clients are all committed to going to the cloud but they’re at a very early stage.
IBM sees cloud as a core generator of new revenue growth to offset its declining sales of conventional systems, software and services — in 2015, the computing giant reported total cloud revenue of $10.2 billion, up 46% on the year prior.
As such, cloud is one of the few areas, alongside cognitive computing and security, in which IBM is still aggressively hiring. Since taking the helm 18 months ago, LeBlanc has been headhunting external talent that shares his vision of the cloud — while moving others aside. Addressing a meeting with industry analysts in London last week, he emphasized how much fresh blood there is on IBM’s cloud team.
You’ve probably seen this in your own IT organizations. One third of your developers get it, they’ve already got projects under way. One third get it intellectually. One third will not make it. You keep them on the more traditional systems or you move them out.
On my team, one third of the developers and one third of the executive team are new to IBM in the past 18 months.
This is all in preparation for a long game. LeBlanc argues that it’s far too early to call a winner just yet, despite Amazon’s current dominance of the market for public cloud infrastructure. He rejects the notion that victory will go to the cloud provider that reaches the largest scale, predicting instead that what matters will be breadth of offering.
I don’t think the cloud is a race to size. I think it’s a race to value.
Cloud investments
For IBM, that value comes from offering services layered on top of the infrastructure as well as broader choice within the infrastructure. Data and analytics, linking into Watson’s cognitive computing services, is particularly important. One of the most important assets from IBM’s acquisition of The Weather Company last year was its advanced IoT capabilities, says LeBlanc, with capacity to acquire 20 billion data points a day.
Video is another growth opportunity, set to become 85% of web traffic by 2019, according to Braxton Jarratt, general manager of the new IBM Cloud Video division. He joined IBM as CEO of Clearleap, acquired in December, and the video division was formed after January’s $130 million purchase of video streaming service Ustream.
There are also investments going into blockchain, health and mobile, where IBM’s partnership with Apple has already created significant deal flow. Another important piece is the Bluemix brand, which provides the devops environment for innovation on the platform. That’s the sweetspot for cloud in the IBM universe, says LeBlanc.
The cloud is not a destination. I think you have to look at it as a platform for innovation …
I say to clients, build everything new on the cloud. If you’re building brand new, go straight to the public cloud. You’ve got to think public cloud and then work out what’s practical to get there.
Middleware and hybrid cloud
The corollary is that there’s much that won’t be moving to the cloud anytime soon. Therefore an equally important part of the IBM offering is the integration story that supports hybrid environments, connecting public cloud innovation back to on-premise core systems, or enabling workloads to move back and forth from on-premise to cloud and vice-versa. In this way, customers can have their innovation in the cloud and still get the benefit of their bread-and-butter on-premise investments.
To accommodate this, IBM has been migrating its middleware to the cloud too, as Marie Wieck, general manager of cloud integration explains.
We’ve provided managed enablement of our middleware on cloud, on SoftLayer. But that doesn’t fundamentally address the cloud-native aspect of it. Really taking our core technology, and the standards and compliance that we have, and releasing our own microservices, refactoring it as capabilities that are API-callable in the cloud, is what we’ve been spending the better part of the last 18 months on.
Wieck highlights this month’s release of version 9 of Websphere and MQ as cloud-ready, with support for deployment as a hypervisor machine image, to Docker containers, and for package distribution, with dynamic upgrading.
The API model is a linchpin of the IBM approach to cloud integration, she explains, and to this end the API Connect platform has been embedded across a swathe of IBM’s on-premise portfolio.
How do you automatically take the investments that you’ve already made and put an API front-end on the front of your data lake, put it on the front of your CICS capabilities, put it on the front of those trillion MQ messages we handle a day, so you can now do packet inspection and do creative new ideas?
In most cases, customers can choose whether to host the middleware either as a cloud service or as hosted SaaS. The importance of having a cloud option was called out in a case study presented by Lee Harris, programme director at 140-year-old catalog retailer N Brown Group, which operates the JD Williams, Simply Be and Jacamo brands. The company is in the second year of a two-year project to move customer-facing systems to the cloud on Softlayer, but it had to make a late decision to put its middleware on the cloud platform, having found it didn’t work to keep it on-premise.
To get the performance and latency we need, we’re now having to move the middleware onto the Softlayer platform. That was a learning — and difficult to do in the middle of the program.
My take
IBM is building out a powerful set of capabilities in the cloud and means to be a significant player. That journey is not yet complete — it was evident from what was said last week that there are several more pieces waiting in the wings to be slotted into place.
But while IBM has got the message about all the core ingredients that are essential for a true cloud model — devops, microservices architectures, APIs and continuous delivery — it has to accommodate the demands of a customer base that still operates most of its IT assets on-premise. So its message, like its architecture, has to accommodate a hybrid, bimodal reality.
This creates some cognitive dissonance to a seasoned cloud observer like myself. Can it really be the best course of action to cloud-enable Websphere rather than replace it with something better attuned to the cloud environment? This kind of stubbornness leads to episodes like the N Brown story, where the company started out with its middleware on-premise but realized rather late in the day that latency demanded it run those interfaces in the cloud.
I have a feeling IBM will continue to be tempted to encourage its customers to preserve more of their on-premise legacy than is good for them in a cloud environment. But in fairness to IBM, let’s be clear that it’s the customers who are demanding these options. Cloud-native businesses are better placed and more amenable to run everything in the cloud. Interestingly, IBM’s Bluemix brand and its Watson cognitive offerings are appealing to these kinds of companies too. That suggests that IBM’s cloud transformation is at least on the right tracks. It has clearly established itself as a cloud player of some considerable substance and is determined to play a strong game.
Image credit - Steps into blue sky with clouds, sun © kraft2727 - Fotolia.comRead more on: Cloud platforms - infrastructure and architecture 