
I have always been hopeless at gambling, so I wouldn’t put too much faith in what follows, but following the news that Salesforce is believed to be currently ‘in play’ as an acquisition target, and the subsequent pieces written by Dennis Howlett and Stuart Lauchlan suggesting that Oracle has to be the favourite acquiring contender, I feel the urge to throw in a different suggestion.
My 50 cent bet is going to go on IBM as strong alternative potential buyer.
Why? Well, it’s the recent announcement of Heroku Elements by Salesforce that got me thinking as to why this could/should be the case.
Elements is a new tool to componentise applications sub-systems and routines that are commonly used by applications developers working with Salesforce’s Heroku division’s development environment.
Basically, it is intended to provide a drag’n’drop app development environment that should both speed up the development process, and improve applications quality by increased re-use of components of proven quality and reliability.
It is precisely this type of capability that made me think of why Salesforce would make a good addition to IBM, if the company is to get snapped up.
IBM changing
IBM itself has undergone a major shift its reasons for existing. It has now divested itself of just about every bit of hardware manufacturing – as IBM-branded boxes – except the mainframe business. There is still a software applications and tools business, but that is now largely targeted at those areas of business services that are not widely covered by other software vendors – such as the iSeries and mainframe systems.
The company is now a serious contender in the provision of hosted services of all types, from its long-standing Managed Service Provider business, which is largely partner-based, through its cloud platform services. These are geared around some significant investment in the acquisition and on-going development of SoftLayer, which has been an important addition to its own Smart Cloud services in both brute resources and cloud service provision skills.
But that is only part of it; the alter ego is the Bluemix platform, which combines such elements as the Cloud Foundry applications development environment, container apps delivery services based on Docker, and an OpenStack services management environment.
Add into this a large,growing and globally diverse partner programme, including those long-established MSPs as they move into cloud services. There is a huge range of service specialisms available amongst the community, from the common and widely used – where each country or region will have at least one partner providing it – through to the niche and highly specialised where they could be the sole global provider.
Either way, IBM is keen to help support a develop collaboration between said partners, for they each can provide their contemporaries with either a new market opportunity or an application-specific tool that then does not need to be developed.
One last point. In the end IBM has a very long track record in building big soup-to -nuts business solutions for big enterprises, and while the actual tools of delivery are now radically different, the under-pinnings of knowledge, experience, skills and brand image remain the same.
Why IBM?
Salesforce itself has worked hard at developing a similar profile out there in the wide world, and while its applications development side, Force, has done well here for both the company and its partner community, It has arguably not really got beyond being a CRM tech company with some added bits. And in the end, while CRM is a very big part of any successful business, it is not the bit. There is no the bit in a business solution.
IBM’s next CEO?
By combining Salesforce with IBM two things could happen. One is that the former could get a significant, instant increase of its global reach and influence as a provider of those business solutions it obviously wants to be seen as and branded for.
The other is that IBM gets the big gorilla cloud services brand name through which to move beyond its own branding hang-up, that of being the `purveyor of old-style, gargantuan solutions for the landed gentry of the global enterprise world’.
What is more Marc Benioff would certainly become the leader of one of the biggest, most comprehensive soup-to-nuts business solutions provision, delivery and management organisations ever created. What sales person would not want to be in the position to say: “Go on, try me. You name it, we can build it, deliver in any more forms than you can think of and have it ready to roll before you’ve put the phone down.”
IBM would get its next CEO, the CEO that is in charge of the business that decides whether a solution should be based on Oracle, or Microsoft, or SAP, or indeed IBM. That is a much bigger, richer toy box to be playing with than simply ending up in charge of Oracle as it goes through a major change of life.
So they both can claim to win in one of those `whole is bigger than sum of parts’ scenarios.
And that is why the arrival of Heroku Elements started me thinking that IBM would make the perfect acquisition bed-fellow. The key under-current of cloud services and delivery is the extraction of technology from the equation as front-line issue.
So any applications development tool that moves along the drag’n’drop model of service building has to be a good contribution. Indeed, I would venture to suggest Elements should promote itself as being able to drag’n’drop functional tasks and business processes rather than technology components.
This has to be the direction to go, for it maps onto what I believe business users want in the end. That is the provision of ever-more comprehensive `business GPS’ systems to get them through to greater value, more quickly. They don’t want yet another way of teaching themselves cartography skills.
My take

I’m betting on IBM.
I’m a lousy gambler.
You have been warned.


Read more on: Cloud platforms - infrastructure and architectureCRM and customer experienceDigital and content marketing 