
ibm
A 13.5% year-on-year profit decline on top of a 4.6% fall in first quarter revenues – IBM may not be bleeding red ink, but there’s a seeping wound that isn’t healing as quickly as hoped.
First quarter revenue fell to $18.68 billion and net income was $2.01 billion, down from $2.33 billion a year earlier.
Revenue in cognitive solutions, which includes the Watson data analytics units, declined 1.7% to $3.98 billion during the quarter, while Global Business Services delivered $4.1 billion of revenue, down 2%. Cloud computing did better, with revenues up 34% year-on-year.
Chief Financial Officer Martin Schroeter says the firm will continue to invest in acquisitions like those to bolster IBM’s capabilities:
We completed the acquisition of The Weather Company’s digital assets. This is not only a source of valuable weather data but a high-volume, cloud-based, insight-driven platform. We’re bringing this together with our organic Watson capabilities to form the basis of our Watson IoT platform.
We acquired Ustream and will bring it together with software and our object storage capabilities to extend our leadership in cloud video services. At the end of the quarter, we announced the acquisition of Bluewolf, a top Salesforce partner and leader in cloud consulting and implementation services.
Expanding the Watson ecosystem remains a strategic priority, he adds:
Over the last 12 months, the number of developers using Watson APIs is up over 300% and the number of enterprises we’ve engaged with has doubled. Watson solutions are being built, used, and deployed in more than 45 countries and across 20 different industries.
New opportunities
It’s a new $2 trillion market opportunity beyond the $1.2 trillion traditional IT market, says Schroeter. The first industry-focused application is Watson Healthcare:
This is an industry with billions of dollars of new revenue opportunity for IBM. We started to move into the cognitive healthcare space just about a year ago and have invested $4 billion through four acquisitions.
We’re scaling rapidly, moving from effectively no employees to more than 6,000 in a year. Most came to us through the acquisitions, but we’ve also hired nearly 700 employees who are highly skilled healthcare professionals who will now make a difference in millions of lives. We believe success will be based on building platforms, and we’re focused on leveraging partnerships and ecosystems.
We’re now working with clients such as the American Cancer Society, the American Heart Association, and Under Armour, in addition to initial partners of Medtronic, Johnson & Johnson, CVS, and many more.
Watson’s reach is continually growing, he adds:
When we first introduced Watson, it could reach a population of 400 million English-speaking people. As Watson has been taught more languages, it can now speak with another billion people in their native language. We are working on our Watson oncology solution with a number of hospitals that have a combined reach of more than three million patients.
The new strategic imperatives require a shift in the skills balance within IBM, notes Schroeter:
As we build new businesses in areas like Watson Health and Watson Internet of Things, this requires different skills and to be in different places. I mentioned earlier that over the last year we’ve added over 6,000 resources in Watson Health and added over 1,000 security experts. These are specialized skills in highly competitive areas. So this is not about reducing our capacity; this is about transforming our workforce.
We started the year with just under 380,000 people. We have people leaving the business, but we’re also adding large numbers of resources. We currently have tens of thousands of open positions, and we’re hiring aggressively.
He adds:
In many sectors, we will hire [skilled people] as quickly as the world can create them. We hired 1,000 security experts last year and quite frankly, if world created 2,000 of the caliber and the kind of talent we needed, we would’ve hired 2,000. But the world creates these skills at a certain rate and we’ll hire them as aggressively as we can. We have some limits in terms of how do we put them to work and where’s the demand and does that all match up, but we’ll hire people as aggressively as we can as we build these businesses out. We are relying on some pretty unique talents in some these businesses.
If the world created 5,000 cognitive experts, we would hire 5,000 cognitive experts. We already have the largest private math department in the world, and so we are absorbing the skills that we need for our business in order to drive these.
It is an ongoing global search for talent, concludes Schroeter:
People come to IBM and we got about 1.2 million applicants. They come here in order to work with the leaders in their fields. What we find is that skills have gravity and highly-skilled people want to work with others in their fields who are also highly skilled. So they come here to work with our unique data sets, with our unique technologies, with our unique industry expertise, in order to change the way the world works in order to change the way industries operate, in order to change professions. We’ll do that as fast as we can…we hired 70,000 people last year out of the 1.2 million applicants. It takes a while to find the right people, so we’ll invest as fast as the world creates the skills we need.
Read more on: Cloud platforms - infrastructure and architectureDigital transformation - frictionless enterpriseHealthcare transformationIoT robotics and AI 