
There’s much excitement in the UK this week about a major turn of events that has divided the nation. No, not Brexit – we’re all heartily sick and tired of that, whichever side you voted for. No, this is far more important to the national psyche – the John Lewis TV commercial for Christmas!
For those non-UK readers, John Lewis is one of the UK’s most famous department store chains. In common with every major retailer in the UK, it spends vast amounts of money in the run-up to Christmas each year on TV advertising with the plushest of production values. And each year there’s a national debate around which of those retailers has produced the best advert, a competition that ignores the fact that we’re all heartily sick of the sight of any of them by the time it gets anywhere near 25 December!
This year John Lewis is running the sentimental tale of a young boy whose parents buy him a piano from the aforementioned store. It starts in the present day where none other than Elton John is sat at his piano and rolls back through time, gaining more hair with each shift, until we get to Elton as a little boy unwrapping a piano on Christmas Day, presumably purchased by his mother from John Lewis. You can check it out below.



It will have cost John Lewis a lot of money of course. The firm went so far as getting ITV, the main UK commercial television channel, to replace the theme tunes of some of its flagship shows to piano renditions of the usual music to tease the launch of the ad, something which, according to the tabloid press, left viewers baffled.
But job done. Even as the UK government tore itself apart over Brexit on Thursday, the ad was trending on twitter, the story of the ad featured on every newspaper’s website and ad agency experts were falling all over themselves to pass judgement – almost universally favorable – on the finished product.
Monkey business
That said, it’s another commercial that’s stolen all the thunder this year – and it hasn’t even been aired on TV. It’s also a brilliant example of digital and social media marketing that hasn’t been bettered this year and that’s the Iceland advert that got itself banned, deliberately so if you believe the cynics out there.
Again for non-UK readers, Iceland is a low-cost retailer which deals in frozen food and ready meals. Usually its Christmas fare has consisted of past-their-prime pop stars and sub-Kardashian reality ‘stars’, normally hosting a festive party where they’re all dressed in some of the vilest Christmas knitwear known to humanity and slavering at the bit to chow down on some frozen prawns or a defrosted turkey vol-au-vent, inevitably accompanied by some contrived Christmas soundtrack to which they must mime when not wrapped around a mince pie or three.
This year it’s different – and it’s worked brilliantly. This year’s Iceland ad tells the story of Ran Tan, a cartoon orangutan who has to flee her home due to the destruction of the rainforest to produce palm oil. Cheery stuff, huh? Not a frozen quiche or a pig-in-a-blanket in sight, let alone a flicker of tinsel or fairy-lights. In fact, it’s got zero Christmas elements in it all.



There’s a reason for that – the film, narrated by Emma Thompson, was originally made for Greenpeace and rebadged by Iceland, which is where the ‘problems’ begin. UK advertising watchdog Clearcast would not clear the Iceland campaign as it deems Greenpeace to a be political organization and as such, it is not permitted to advertise under the terms of the Communications Act of 2003.
Ah, but the Communications Act only covers TV and radio, not online platforms. So when Iceland Managing Director Richard Walker announced how sad he was that his ad couldn’t be shown, he was at least able to urge everyone to “take to social media to view the film”.
Now, it’s questionable how far a social reach Mr Walker might have, but that doesn’t matter when James Corden – 10 million Twitter followers and counting – tells his followers that “everyone should see it” and links to the ad online.

And then it took off. As of Thursday, the film has been viewed nearly 4.5 million times on YouTube, nearly 15 million times on Iceland’s Facebook page and been re-tweeted nearly 100,000 times on Twitter. Meanwhile a petition on change.org demanding a TV airing is heading towards 700,000 signatures.
The chances of a ‘normal’ Iceland ad making such ripples are remote. Some commentators have complained that the firm surely knew that the Greenpeace connection would cause trouble and that this public outrage about a ban has been cynically created. Iceland’s Walker insists not so, telling BBC’s Radio1:
When we first found out it was going to be banned ten days ago, we were absolutely gutted. We thought we wouldn’t have a Christmas campaign.
But even if Walker and his Iceland team didn’t realise the problems they’d run into, surely the ad agency must have? That’s where some people are complaining about being manipulated. I can see the argument, but equally I think that the agency behind this, Amplify, has more than earned its keep on this one. The BBC quotes Head of Planning Krupali Cescau as admitting that the banning has helped:
If it had just gone straight on air it would have been great in terms of starting a conversation. Actually, the fact that it’s been released like this, as a banned advert, is riding the sentiment that is out there at the moment.
And the controversy keeps delivering the goods. For its part, Clearcast, understandably fed-up with being the bad guy here, has now insisted that it didn’t ban the ad for the simple reason that it doesn’t actually have the power to ban it. Only the Advertising Standards Authority can do that. What Clearcast says it did was advise that the commercial would likely breach broadcasting laws because it was made by Greenpeace.
Meanwhile Iceland kept the story going by sending an animatronic orangutan out onto the streets of London, publicising this latest twist via social media as said robo-primate clambered up a Christmas tree.



And it’s still only the middle of November….
My take
A superb example of social marketing in action, exploiting online channels and still becoming a story, and thus promoting the campaign, on TV and radio as well as in print. It’s a campaign that taps into the ‘compassionate capitalism’ vein running through business today, one that clearly resonates with the public AKA the consumers.
It’s a good extension of corporate policy – Iceland had previously pledged to ban palm oil from its own brand products by the end of this year, although this sterling effort is a tad undermined by the fact that the chain does still sell 200 products that do contain the ingredient. But at least the firm is cutting back and raising the wider issue of deforestation and all its negative impacts.
What intrigues me now is where this goes from here. The orangutan on the streets will be visting local stores around the UK, so there’s clearly an ongoing plan in play. But neighborhood sightings of the ape aren’t going to be enough to sustain the online virality of the campaign. Whatever does come next, this has been a template exemplar for digital marketing and brand awareness in a social media age – and a lot cheaper than Elton at his piano!
Image credit - Iceland Foods/John Lewis Read more on: Digital and content marketingDigital enterprise in the real worldSocial 