
Morgan Freeman raps on Super Bowl ad
As a Brit, the prospect of sitting through about six hours of televised American football in the shape of the Super Bowl holds about as much allure as watching paint dry.
But then it’s taken me years to understand what aficionados of the game can point to; the metaphorical battle strategies that are central to game outcomes. For those people, the Super Bowl is a joy. For others, it’s all about the Super Bowl adverts.
My Sunday Twitter feed was awash with commentary about the ads; which were deemed best, which were meh, which made people giggle and which fell flat. That seems so uniquely American but again, my understanding is that American Football or rather the Super Bowl, is built around the concept of advertising as an integral part of the experience.
Check this from Variety:
From Cardi B and Tiffany Haddish to Keanu Reeves and Morgan Freeman, Hollywood was represented in full force in this year’s Super Bowl commercials.
Our highlights include Freeman’s lip sync rap battle with “Game of Thrones” star Peter Dinklage, David Harbour in a giant clam shell, Reeves howling with wolves, David Schwimmer feeding Skittles to a talking sandwich, and Eli Manning and O’Dell Beckham Jr. “Dirty Dancing.”
…which then goes on to list the best Super Bowl adverts, including a detailed commentary on each.
And yet and on a daily basis, my Twitter feed regularly pops up rants about the generally crappy quality or misleading nature of advertising. What’s going on? I think Hugh MacLeod said it best some years ago when he posited:

Therein lies the paradox I see in U.S. advertising that is leading a procession of pundits to predict that advertising volumes, and attendant revenues, are set to decline.
On the one hand, huge numbers of people watch the Super Bowl. While I don’t have 2018 figures, the TV viewership growth since 1990 is impressive, allowing the organizers to charge $5 million per 30-second slot. (See chart below.)
 

Find more statistics at Statista
But what makes Super Bowl adverts stand out and why they’re so keenly watched has as much to do with why they are so popular and why they are so keenly anticipated.
According to Prosper Insights and Analytics, 17.7% of adults say that advertisements are the most important part of the event.
If it ‘only’ costs $5 million (plus production costs) to reach 100 million plus people on first showing and many others from re-runs, then the potential ROI is attractive from a brand perspective.
From this perch, the ads make the overall show. It’s all about the production qualities that includes attracting well-known stars.
Now compare that to what pundits are saying about advertising in general. In Publicis’ Tobaccowala: Advertising Will Decline 30% In Next 5 Years, we hear that Madison Avenue maven Rishad Tobaccowala believes :

“We are so disrespecting people’s time that they are spending more and more time in advertising-free environments,” he asserted, citing the rapid adoption of ad-free content platforms such as Netflix as proof.
“We don’t value their time,” Tobaccowala said, estimating that the value the ad industry places on consumer time is “less than minimum wage.”
As a result, he said the decline in consumer exposure to advertising could decline “30% or more” in the next five years.

In  Tackling the Internet’s Central Villain: The Advertising Business, the NYT’s Farhad Manjoo says:

But the online ad machine is also a vast, opaque and dizzyingly complex contraption with underappreciated capacity for misuse — one that collects and constantly profiles data about our behavior, creates incentives to monetize our most private desires and frequently unleashes loopholes that the shadiest of people are only too happy to exploit.
And for all its power, the digital ad business has long been under-regulated and under-policed, both by the companies that run it and by the world’s governments. In the United States, the industry has been almost untouched by oversight, even though it forms the primary revenue stream of two of the planet’s most valuable companies, Google and Facebook.

In Digital Deceit, researchers suggest that policy and regulation are needed because:

The central problem of disinformation corrupting American political culture is not Russian spies or a particular social media platform. The central problem is that the entire industry is built to leverage sophisticated technology to aggregate user attention and sell advertising. There is an alignment of interests between advertisers and the platforms. And disinformation operators are typically indistinguishable from any other advertiser.

In one of his all too frequent polemics, Umair Haque also believes that the advertising industry is its own worst enemy, failing to move with the times and opting for easy fixes to a model that has outgrown itself. The result?

So, at last, ads turned into phantom psychos piranhas that follow you around the web, just because you once made the mistake of once randomly clicking on a pair of sunglasses. The ad industry’s brilliant solution to the problem of making stuff no one wanted was: “hound the bastards until they throw their hands up and give in!!” What does that tell us? The idea was to do anything to get you to click — anything except make ads useful, valuable, or beneficial.
But that was exactly the problem. In the digital world, nobody has to look at ads. When revenues are measured by clicks, not readers or viewers, then, ads must meet a higher burden — they must genuinely offer people a reason tocare. But the ad industry never quite figured this out. It only got more and more desperate — and tried to get people to click through tricks, annoyances, passive-aggressive tactics bordering on outright hostility, and fudging the numbers.
That’s exactly why, today, digital ads are worthless.

I would add, entertaining, which is where the Super Bowl ads excel.
But if all these folk are right then why did Facebook just record increased revenue from near flatlining viewer growth? Haque has your answer.

…the only organizations that could profit off ads that no one wanted in the first place were those that could either manipulate people into clicking, or those that served them at such mass scale that it didn’t matter.

In short, advertising survives because of the stranglehold Facebook and Google exert over the online world despite the fact TV advertising is holding up. So what next?
My take
Like many of my colleagues, friends, and family, adverts are an interruption that I find increasingly annoying. I like the idea of ads as ‘useful’ but no-one who is opining about it seems to have much more than a vague idea what the sustainable ‘fix’ will look like. It must be an open question as to whether the advertising industry is capable of that level of creativity. Oh yeah – I don’t see AI coming to the rescue any time soon.
Image credit - From a Super Bowl YouTube advertRead more on: Analytics planning and data analysisCRM and customer experience 