

Microsoft CEO Satya Nadella at Imagine Cup 2016
At the Microsoft Imagine Cup finals in Seattle last week, Steve Guggenheimer, Microsoft’s Chief Evangelist, tipped a nod to the way young developers are approaching problem solving in the 21st century:
Young developers have big ideas, big aspiration and big dreams. They use technologies to transform their dreams into apps, games and products we’ve never seen before.
Over its 14 years Microsoft’s global student developer competition has reflected the changing priorities of the company and its struggles to adapt to a changing marketplace. In many ways the Imagine Cup tells us more about Microsoft’s dreams than those of the students.
In 2003, the first year of the competition, the winners were an online point of sale application and a photo sharing app. Interestingly the points based judging system had a thirty percent weighting for .Net content. This year’s winner, ENTy from Romania, is a posture and balance monitoring device that follows the competition’s recent trend of focusing on medical applications.
While the overt requirement for Microsoft products was dropped after the first year the results tell us much about the company’s ambitions and how the market has evolved around them. Ironically as CEO Satya Nadella was announcing the finalists last Thursday, the company announced it was eliminating a further 2,850 jobs from its failed phone hardware experiment.
Android and iOS smartphones were a key part of most of the Imagine Cup entrants while it was notable thing how few Microsoft products were being used by the students. When Diginomica asked Microsoft’s Guggenheimer if that concerned him, he didn’t show it.
We’re always happy if they do but the goal isn’t to promote Microsoft’s products, we can potentially learn to make better products based upon what people are using.
We learn a ton of things. First off, we learn what’s interesting to the students – what’s their imagination? Second, we sort of learn about what works and what doesn’t. What are young coders using today, what errors do they run into, what can we do help and what can we do better as a company. But most of all it’s about how we use tech and where is the world going.
Looking at the winners over the 14 years of the competition it’s hard to see how much Microsoft has learned from the competitors. While the entrant’s technologies have reflected the technology trends of the time, with the cloud and smartphones being the current iterations. It’s not quite clear how the company has followed through on either the technology or in engaging competitors after the contest.
To its credit, the Imagine Cup is a vibrant, high energy event that generates some goodwill towards Microsoft among young developers who don’t perceive the company as being the first choice for a career. Next year we can expect to see a greater emphasis on VR and machine learning which, on current trends, will almost certainly be largely focused on medical applications.
My take
The Imagine Cup is a worthy initiative and its good to harness the energy, talent and perspectives of today’s college students. However it is notable how little traction Microsoft has got from the program, either from a brand or market intelligence angle.
More concerning to this writer was Microsoft’s reluctance to show off new technologies like HoloLens and events like the internal ‘science fair’ – the reaction from security when I tried to walk in the wrong door indicated they’d been firmly instructed to keep media in controlled areas. To me, this shows a worrying lack of confidence of their competitive strengths.
The competitive strength Microsoft does have though is its large commercial and enterprise footprints with Azure and its associated services being the best prospects for the company. Azure’s strengths were shown in it being the most commonly used Microsoft service by the Imagine Cup entrants.
For the Imagine Cup entrants, it seems a pity Microsoft doesn’t follow up more aggressively with the more promising projects. Some early stage investment or some strategically located incubators could pay large dividends for the company and do more than anything to make the software giant more relevant to the current generation of entrepreneurial students.
Editor’s note: We have seen this kind of thing before. Based upon our observations among many enterprise vendors who claim comprehensive developer support, Salesforce, with its much publicized Dreamforce hackathons, is the only company that has come close to understanding the value of competitions of this kind, and the need to actively nurture developer organizations. This might come as a surprise given that Microsoft’s storied history was rooted in the need to build large and vibrant developer ecosystems.
Image credit - via the authorDisclosure - Microsoft covered some of the author's travel and expense costs. Salesforce is a premier partner at time of writing. Read more on: DevOps NoSQL and the open source stack 