
The post-GDPR world is chaotic. 25th May came and went, giving some of us a much-needed opportunity to clean out all those services we’d not touched in years but which suddenly sprang to life in the wake of compliance.
The extent to which some firms are skating the rules is extraordinary but none more so than Fin which has managed to throw so many red flags it’s not even funny.
Fin first approached me via email last November with a digital assistant service. I ran through a series of questions covering work and life, it then calculated how much time it can save me. The idea was novel and interesting, telling me that I could save many hours across multiple categories. While I liked the idea, Fin appeared to be targeting the Silicon Valley bros. I promptly forgot about it.
Out of the blue, and on May 31st, I got another invite from Fin – as outlined in the image top left. That’s odd but hey, let’s check it out by clicking the first link. Which took me to this page.
I get why that message is phrased the way it is but a bit of forethought might have meant they didn’t send me the email in the first place. My IP address hasn’t changed, nor has my geolocation, data that any decent mailing list provider already holds and which Fin must use to make their software throw the above message.
In addition, I fail to see how I can send emails with ‘wants’ when I can’t get to the system anyway.
At this point, I looked through to the bottom of the email and saw this:

Hang on – Fin already knows I’m not in the U.S. and is not rolled out to the UK so…let’s unsubscribe and this is what I then saw:

If I’ve understood this correctly, the error message is not about geolocation but language definition. I’ve gone back to the email today. It executed correctly and I’ve now been successfully unsubscribed. I guess they cleaned it up.
All the ways
Fin got this wrong from the get-go post-GDPR.
They were OK to cold email me with an invitation to check something out pre-GDPR. But given they don’t know IF I am in the EU, they should have ascertained that and flagged it to the email record.
They failed to seek consent. This has proven a difficult one for business to figure out so I’m not surprised they got it wrong. Since I was on their mailing list, had some interaction with them through the online questionnaire but not bought any service, they should have actively sought consent. This is especially the case where there is doubt about my location, That should have been done before sending me a fresh invitation.
Since Fin can’t service me anyway, they should have identified me as in that group and emailed to say that is the case and then provided me with the choice of remaining on their database for email marketing purposes. The ‘if I’m a U.S. citizen traveling’ thing could then be addressed – if possible. But then I have no way of knowing which email address to use since no reply address or clue was given.
It doesn’t look like Fin has established a privacy policy, neither are there links to any terms of use. If both are in existence then they should be at the front of the website and easy to locate. But if you go to Fin.com you should at the very least be able to able to find those statements.
Once I’d unsubscribed, I was taken to a confirmation page that doesn’t include any menu items for these important pieces of information. Again, odd.
My take
If a consumer-grade app doesn’t work, doesn’t meet your needs or is flaky then it isn’t the end of the world. If the service is messy or at the ‘minimum viable product’ stage that doesn’t matter either.
But it does matter that services make an effort to clean up their privacy and terms issues as a matter of general principle. I’m not convinced Fin has thought about this at a time when ‘privacy by design’ is top of mind.
It also matters that developers give great thought to the user experience. This one slipped past the coding QA team as well although I can see they are going for a minimal screen design with Google as the style setter.
My curiosity is not at a high enough level that I feel moved to defeat the geolocation software used by Fin via a VPN. Others might want to pick this one up.
This small and relatively insignificant case goes to illustrate what happens when things are not thought through. Assuming Fin is successful with EU ambitions – and I hope they are since the service has a value – then they will have to re-engineer for GDPR. I’ve watched as too many vendors have treated GDPR as a bolt-on rather than an architectural design issue. Those decisions will turn out to be expensive compared to the rethinking it through development model. That’s just as true in the B2B world as it is elsewhere.
Just for giggles
Such has been the whacky world of GDPR that there is a continuing stream of fun stuff turning up. Check this, courtesy of Frank Scavo:

#GDPR compliance. Cc @dahowlett @jonerp pic.twitter.com/eORYTMQ1sj
— Frank Scavo (@fscavo) June 2, 2018
I hope the remainder of your weekend is error and GDPR free.
Image credit - © ilkercelik - Fotolia.comRead more on: Data privacyFrictionless enterpriseIdentityRegulationUse cases 