
My colleague Dennis Howlett took Tesla CEO Elon Musk to task earlier in his piece On due diligence – lessons from Tesla and Palantir. But his analysis was far too logical for my liking. That’s his background as a sometime accountant showing through. The fact is, when you’re dealing with something as speculative as whether Elon Musk’s business empire will soar or crash, you can only go with your gut. There’s no logic that will help you decide.
His arguments put me in mind of the UK’s Brexit decision, by popular vote, to leave the European Union. Throughout this campaign, large numbers of undecided or uncertain voters were clamoring for the facts so they could make a confident decision. But there have been no incontrovertible facts available, only assertions and predictions. It is not a question on which it’s possible to make an evidence-based decision.
And so it was, from very early on in the referendum campaign — people made up their minds based on their gut feel. I found myself astonished at the positions taken by some, which seemed at odds with what I thought I knew of them. People who I had felt certain would be ardent leavers turned out to be waverers, while others who I thought were shoo-ins for remain had decided in favor of leave. There was no logic that I could discern. People were making their minds up, and only then calling on logic to retrospectively justify their decision.
Defying conventional logic
So it is too with business adventurers like Elon Musk, who this week has launched an acquisition bid by carmaker Tesla, of which he is CEO, to buy solar energy company SolarCity, of which he is chairman. By some measures, the two companies appear to have a combined cash burn rate of around $3 billion a year and the project to combine them looks to all intents and purposes like a solar-powered, slow-motion car crash in the making. It defies all conventional logic, as Dennis maps out in his post.
Yet the point about business leaders like Elon Musk is that people back them precisely because of their prowess in defying conventional logic. If the merger goes through, it will not be the first time that Musk has driven Tesla to the brink of bankruptcy. But his ability to come through the other side is one that investors are willing to bet on. And the rewards for success, in part because it appears so vanishingly elusive, are huge, even astronomical (if you’ll forgive the SpaceX allusion). As I’ve written before, Musk’s plan is to disrupt not only the automotive industry but also the energy market:
If large numbers of homes and businesses start using small arrays of solar panels and static batteries to economically generate and store their own electricity — even selling it back to the grid at a profit — then the entire power network will move away from its existing model of distributing power out from large generating plants.
There’s no proven roadmap for success in these ventures — that’s why they represent an opportunity, just as much as they carry huge risk. Success requires a certain type of driven personality who’s prepared to stretch the envelope as far as it will go to reach the destination, someone who against seemingly impossible odds can discern a path to the glimmer of light on the distant horizon.
As I wrote recently in the context of setbacks at Silicon Valley-based Zenefits and London-based Powa Technologies, this is the bargain investors make with the CEOs of high-growth ventures:
Most startups are a gamble — an entrepreneur making a bet that they will find success with some new idea or business strategy. Most CEOs are risk-takers. When the stakes reach unicorn proportions, the CEO has to front huge risks in order to deliver the expected returns.
Your gut is all you have
The problem with such bargains based on gut feel is that sentiment can turn in an instant. It only takes a few people getting cold feet, a slight diminution in risk appetite, to suddenly leave the gambler exposed and isolated. Unless they can come up with some new source of chips to continue playing their hand, it all comes crashing down around them, as we saw in the case of Powa Technologies, which went from a $3 billion valuation one year to bankruptcy the next.
But when confronted with the unknowable, your gut is all you have. Just over half the British population has voted Brexit because they felt in their gut they wanted a different settlement for their country. Conventional logic says that’s a risky choice with unknowable consequences. But the opposite decision was not without its own risks. There was no way to objectively weigh up the alternatives. It was one of those cases where you had to trust your gut and live with the consequences. Now Britan has to map a new path in an uncertain world and will face many more cboices where the decision will again come down to gut feel.
For the record, I was firmly on the side of remaining in the EU, but as I said to my son this morning, Britain is still anchored just off the coast of France. There will be short-term pain, but I have never seen Brexit as a disastrous choice, merely a different path from one I would have chosen. It gives the country a chance to play a new role in a changing world and I hope it embraces that opportunity with passion and optimism.
Image credit - compass blue sky cloud © WavebreakMediaMicro - Fotolia.comRead more on: Digital transformation - frictionless enterprise 