
Roz Brewer, COO, Starbucks
It’s not often that Starbucks senior management has to start off a public pitch with the CEO having a mea culpa moment. But that’s what faced CEO Kevin Johnson last week when he met with analysts and opened with:
All companies make mistakes; great companies learn from them and improve – and that is exactly what we intend to do.
As most people can hardly have failed to notice, it’s been a bad few weeks for Starbucks since the racial controversy over the actions of store members in a branch in Philadelphia. That’s made the firm a use case in crisis management as well as equality issues.
So when Johnson got the chance to fall back on the safer topic of digital transformation, it must have come as something of a relief. As on previous occasions, there was much progress to flag up.
We are widening the aperture of our digital flywheel through a range of customer interaction touch points, including opening up Mobile Order and Pay to all customers, leveraging Wi-Fi sign-up in our stores, and reinventing Happy Hour through the use of single-use digital coupon, all of which are yielding results.
Together these initiatives and related efforts will generate a few million additional registered customers by year-end, and we are already running ahead of our expectations. We are now leveraging the Digital Flywheel to prove out that we can deepen engagement and incrementality with newly registered customers, the same way we have for active Rewards customers.
That last point was previously flagged up as a priority for Chief Operating Officer Rosalind Brewer, now six months into her tenure. The issue/opportunity for Starbucks is that while it has digital relationships with 15 million of its customers, there are a further 60 million with which it does not.
These ‘occasional customers come into the store between one to five times a month and not enough is known about them, says Brewer:
We know that many of these customers, largely those whom we don’t have a digital relationship, do not visit as frequently and have a low awareness of either new product introductions or many of our great core offerings. In fact, over this past year, only one in four of these non-Starbucks Rewards occasional customers were aware of our new offerings and key promotions as compared to nearly double that of our frequent Starbucks Rewards customers.
And these customers make up nearly 50% of the volume sold in the afternoon, which is greater than their share of other day-parts. Said more simply, these customers are a material part of our current afternoon challenges. These differences are driving a shift in our marketing initiatives, particularly in the afternoon to drive more relevant product promotions and focus on these customers.
She adds:
When we think about the afternoon, we are actually going after a customer base that we really haven’t touched. So it feels almost like a new customer that we’re introducing to the brand. We have the opportunity to talk to them about the product offering and then introduce them to the experience in the stores, which has improved if they were a lapsed customer. So there’s things that are changing that we hope will attract them to the store and then get them to eventually engage as a Starbucks Rewards member and begin to react and respond to us like our Starbucks Rewards members.
Outside-in
To that end, she says:
We are highly focused on driving more digital relationships outside of Starbucks Rewards to help develop relevant marketing and offers for more occasional customers. And while the specific focus is on serving customers through our amazing partners, we do so by leveraging the same key priorities that were outlined more than a year ago. These priorities include digital relevance and the expansion of our digital relationship; innovation in both our products and our marketing activities; and an unwavering focus on the customer experience in our stores.
The first of these priorities goes hand-in-hand with growing levels of personalized marketing, moving away from a never-ending series of horizontal promotional offers, says Brewer:
Our new approach to marketing will be centered on meaningfully strengthening customer relationships by increasingly targeting our offers to each customer. While we still have unique products such as Crystal Ball Frappuccino, our focus will shift to leveraging platforms with broader appeal.
For example, for customers who prefer a lighter, sweeter espresso experience, Blonde Espresso offers a second espresso roast, which can be applied to an entire platform of existing beverages. Initially, Blonde was only slated to have approximately six weeks of marketing support, but given our new focus and the early success of the product, we now plan to continue to market the platform throughout the balance of this year.
MIrroring Johnson’s opening remarks about learning from mistakes, Brewer points to the firm’s Happy Hour promotion as a case in point:
Previously we offered a special only on Frappuccino over a short time period to anyone and everyone, even customers who might have come in anyway. This worked for a few years as the lift we saw in the period following Happy Hour covered the cost of the discounts. But the past two years has not worked from a profitability standpoint. So we re-imagined Happy Hour. The new program will be used to sign customers up for direct digital relationships and to promote the great variety of beverages that we offer all year long. This one-to-one offer will leverage our personalization capabilities and drive significant incrementality.
Chief Strategy Officer Matthew Ryan expands on the thinking here:
Last year, Happy Hour was a ten-day, one-and-done stunt. What ended up happening is you gave the discount away to everybody. People came in, and whether or not they intended to come in, they got the discount if they’re ordering a Frappuccino, available on one product.
What we are now doing is inviting people to sign up for Starbucks. Rather than it be a one-time-a-year promotion, this is an ongoing digital relationship that we will reprise over and over again, across the year and the years. What that means is that we won’t just be doing Frappuccino for ten days in May. We will be able to use this very well-known device we have called Happy Hour to promote a variety of afternoon products across the year, using it not just in May, but across the year to bring customers back into our stores on an ongoing basis.
Over time, we get to know customers, what they respond to, repeat, and we’re able to personalize, and do things that we could do with the Starbucks Rewards customer right now, with a much broader segment of customers. The long-term strategy is something that is going to build over time, and its part of an ongoing shift in our marketing, from a short term one and done focus to a sustained platform ongoing relationship focus with our customers.
He adds that early indicators are positive that this is the right direction of travel:
After just a couple of Happy Hours, we know we’re on the right track here. We also know that it’s very easy to sign customers up because people want to have a relationship with a brand that they are very involved with. So what we have going for us that most companies don’t have going for us is that people want a direct digital relationship, and we’re now giving them reasons outside of Starbucks Rewards to do that.
My take
All impressive-sounding stuff and based on Starbucks digital track record, there’s a fair chance that the company will report more progress across the rest of the year. For now though the shadow of the unpleasantness in Philadelphia dominates the headlines – and rightly so.
The firm has announced all U.S. stores will close on 29 May for training and education of staffers. That’s a move that has won some plaudits, although clearly the proof of the pudding is in the eating. That said, Johnson is pledging transparency of approach here:
We’re embarking on not only a day of discovery, but work that we’re going to do to ensure that all aspects of our review are captured in the actions that we’re taking.
And he reiterates his earlier point about learning from mistakes:
I believe we are focused on the long term and doing the right things, and we will be a better company because of this.
Let’s hope so – and then we can get back to focusing on the digital success story rather than the damage limitation work.
Image credit - StarbucksRead more on: CRM and customer experienceDigital and content marketingDigital enterprise in the real worldDiversitySocial 