
Social media is one of those channels of communication that is completely necessary, given that a lot of conversations about brands are shifting to online, but is also increasingly hard to measure. Given the differences between the social channels themselves and the hard-to-define engagement metrics, it can be a big challenge for companies, even for the ones wanting to throw money at the situation.
From personal experience, I know that there are a number of factors to consider when adopting a social media strategy. For example, the real-time nature of conversations (you’ve got to be willing to respond as people are engaging with you, otherwise impact is lost), the need to be open about your faults (ignoring negativity on social channels is pointless) and the importance of timing/tone (depending on your markets, your audience, timing and tone can make a huge difference).
Which is why when some benchmarking research on the food and drinks industry got sent to me, I thought it would be interesting to take a look at who is winning out and what channels are working for what brands. The research looks at the past six months of activity and was conducted by eDigitalResearch.
The main thing that I picked up from the findings, which I thought was quite interesting, is that food and drink brands with as few as three outlets are managing to appear in the top twenty Instagram league tables, competing with the likes of McDonald’s and Subway.
However, when it comes to Twitter and Facebook, it seems that the more convenient and the more widespread your physical footprint, the more success you’ll have.
It’s obviously hard to identify exactly what the ingredients for success are, given that strategies will vary greatly between brands, but it’s worth taking a look at the macro trends.
Facebook
If we take a look at Facebook to begin with, it’s incredible to see that some of the top brands (McDonald’s, KFC) have tends of millions of followers and are still managing to gain millions of followers in a six month period.

And whilst some smaller brands are managing to appear in the growth tables, for example Turtle Bay with over 32,000 new followers in the past six months, they are still failing to crack the top twenty.
Some other key points worth noting are that less than half of the food and beverage brands within the league table have reached one million followers, but the top four brands are growing so quickly that they have all gained over 1 million followers in the past six months.
It’s also worth noting that some of the most successful brands on social are also posting the least, but still getting the high levels of engagement (see graphs below). Whether that means that it’s better not to flood consumers with post, or whether it just means that people are loyal to the same brands offline as they are online, it’s hard to know.


Twitter
Again, Twitter shows that it’s largely top brands that dominate with large numbers of Twitter followers. Equally, it’s worth noting that the top ten largely have stayed the same over the past six months.
The number of followers on Twitter are also significantly less than those seen on Facebook, which likely reflects the difference in popularity between the two networks.

Interestingly, brands on Twitter are only, on average, engaging with their audiences just once a day. They are also posting less on the weekend (which would be a popular time for people to go out and have food and drink). My guess is that this is because the companies themselves are probably working to strict processes, when social media teams should be given some freedom to engage as and when is necessary.
For example, as highlighted by the research, the top brand on Twitter, Nando’s, whilst doing well to use humour to frequently engage with its audience also takes time to listen to complaining customers and encourages them to speak to people on site when things go wrong. For example:

@AdamPhilpott1 Can you give the restaurant a call when you have time and speak to the Manager?
— Nando’s (@NandosUK) December 18, 2015


@NandosUK it finally came after 45 mins !
— sophie (@xsophiebrown_) December 18, 2015


Instagram
Finally, Instagram paints somewhat of a different picture to the other social networks. For example, although the likes of McDonald’s, Subway and Nandos are still dominating the top of the table, there are also a number of independents or smaller brands that feature in the top 20.

For example, the likes of Burger and Lobster has near 13,000 followers, which is only 6,000 less than Pret a Manger, or 18,000 less than Domino’s Pizza. When you consider that Burger and Lobster has a handful of locations in the UK and a handful scattered abroad, it’s competitiveness on Instagram is quite impressive.
This is also true for the likes of Honest Burger and Pizza Pilgrims, which have a small physical footprint, but are managing to compete with the big players in the Instagram league table.
This is likely to be for a number of reasons. Firstly, McDonald’s is the only food and drink brand on Instagram with over 1 million followers, with it’s next closest competitor being Subway with 112,000 followers. So the numbers we are dealing with are significantly smaller, which gives smaller brands a chance to compete.
Also, if we think about the nature of Instagram posts, people are posting photos that are meant to be aesthetically pleasing to their followers. I’d argue that I’d be far more likely to be drawn to a photo of a meal at Burger and Lobster, than compared to say one at Subway. But maybe that’s just me…
My take
This research shows the diverse nature of social media networks. What works for some brands on one channel, may not work for the same brands on another channel…
The only advice I can give is that trial and error is the name of the game. And that companies should cater their posts to the nature of the specific channels. Also, it’s important to listen to what customers are saying on these channels, as opposed to just blasting them ti content.
It’s a full time job, but if properly done, can be hugely beneficial to your brand.
Read more on: Social 