
Vishal Sikka speaking at Confluence 2015
In what will be his first Confluence following a full year as CEO, Vishal Sikka has much to celebrate and reflect upon. In talking with the company and some of its line of business heads, I think what we will see is an expansion of GAIT. What do I mean: Giving, Automation, Intelligence and Transformation. Yes, I know it sounds a tad corny but when I put this to Sikka he came back with:
Walking the talk!!
That will be most easily seen from the customers who are brought on stage. This is always a treat at any customer event but I sense we will see greater customer emphasis this year. For example, when I asked Sanjay Purohit, Executive Vice President and Global Head of Infosys Consulting what we might expect to hear from him he answered:
You won’t see too much of me on the stage but you will hear how our clients are making progress and how they are finding answers to problems by reframing some of their questions.
But what about my made up acronym?
Earlier in the year I met Vandana Sikka, who heads the Infosys Foundation USA. This is the all important ‘Giving’ part of the equation. I’ve been told the Foundation will showcase some of the outcomes from its work with children who live in under served communities. My past experience of these showcases has always been encouraging for the future of technology and I don’t expect this to be any less appealing.
Moving on to Automation. At the last earnings call, Sikka made the point that Infosys has freed up internal resource as part of the drive to reduce the dependency upon manual labor. The company also talked about the well worn practice of eating its own dog food as a way of demonstrating its commitment to improvement:

In Q4, we released 1,710 full time employees equivalent worth of work across service lines using our automation platform, which brings us to 3,900 FTEs released over the course of FY16 due to automation. These numbers are still small in fiscal ‘16 but will continue to rise as the deployment of items and the tools themselves evolve to handle more complex activities that are today performed manually.
In addition, we did our first major project to bring the power of automation and information platform capabilities internally to review our own financial processes under Ranga’s leadership. We identified and then massively automated the things that cause latency in our system due to bad processes and we have created a better user experience across our systems.

Alongside, Abdul Razack tells me his platform play is finding more opportunities in the client base so again, we can expect to hear how customers are benefitting from this part of Infosys portfolio of offerings.
Next we come to Intelligence and here I recently learned that Infosys is a contributor to Open AI, an initiative closely associated with Elon Musk, CEO Tesla but which has a concentration of research around machine learning. This is a topic close to Sikka’s heart as his PhD was focused upon artificial intelligence, although he is careful to emphasize that an unfettered reliance upon machines is not the way to go. Instead, these newer technologies should be seen as a way of augmenting human decision making.
It is early days for this kind of project and Infosys has much work to do to convince clients that is has moved beyond providing time and materials and has a solid capability of bringing business acumen to the table along with its technology smarts. Let’s see what happens when customers speak to this topic.
Finally we come to Transformation. This is often about what Infosys has called ‘renewal’ of systems that of itself allows for greater efficiency and a releasing of resource while at the same time opening the door to doing entirely new things or operating in previously impossible ways.
Last year, we heard from Boeing and GE who both talked enthusiastically about how engagements with Infosys had allowed them to both modernize and bring systems and people into the 21st century. This year, I’m expecting to hear from the banking part of the business and from Number26, a new type of banking operation that sounds a lot like the thing that was described to me late last year.
I’m looking forward to Confluence because for the first time, we will have opportunities to assess the progress Infosys has made across the practical dimensions that Sikka set out as his go forward strategy that are well beyond the headlines we see in the financial media.
Image credit - Via authorDisclosure - Infosys is a premier partner at time of writing and a personal consulting client of the authorRead more on: Analytics planning and data analysisFintechFrictionless enterpriseInfrastructureOpen source 