
Vishal Sikka, CEO Infosys
A good fourth quarter for Infosys, with a 16.2% uptick in profits, but with some foreshadowing of slower times ahead with downward pressure on pricing. 
Net profit for the three months to 31 March was Rs 3,597 crore ($533 million), compared to Rs 3,097 crore in January-March of 2014-15. Revenues grew 23.4% year-on-year to Rs 16,550 crore in the March quarter compared with Rs 13,411 crore in the same quarter last year.
Some stats of note:


The number of $50 million plus clients grew to 52.
The number of $10 million plus clients grew to 177.
The firm added 47 net new clients during the quarter.

The firm expects revenue to grow between 11.5% and 13.5% in constant currency terms in the coming year, a faster growth rate than the outsourcing industry average predicted by Nasscom of 10%-12%, but also potentially lower than the 13.3% reported for the full year just closed. 
So, good numbers, but CEO Vishal Sikka was quick to argue: 

Despite these heartening results, they’re still based on metrics of the past in many ways, of the way the industry has been. The world of our future looks entirely different. It is a world that is being fundamentally reshaped by digital technologies and it is our endeavor to create great value for every business through solutions built on our AI technology and open cloud platforms to have Infoscions amplified by intelligent technology, to bring purposeful innovation to life to drive collaboration and an entrepreneurial spirit from within to transform our relationship with clients. And in that sense, we are still very much at the beginning of this journey.

Sikka previously set a goal to raise the company’s revenue to $20 billion by 2020, a target that remains in place, although he only expects to see $10.7 billion in fiscal 2017: 

If we execute on that set of opportunities we would have not only achieved our 2020 goals we would have ended up creating a completely new kind of IT services company. ”Steve Jobs always said you always connect the dots looking back … every day that goes by I feel very comfortable that we will get there.

Financial services is proving a ripe growth area. Sikka said this requires a different mindset: 

Many of the large banks in certain geographies are under such pressure from a regulatory perspective [that] from an economic perspective, simply doing the same thing that they have been doing cheaper is no longer enough. A vendor in order to succeed in this climate has to bring capabilities and technologies and innovation that not only others are not able to, but the banks themselves are not able to. So, you have to be able to do things in new ways that were not there before. 
In order for a vendor to be successful in this climate with the bank, we have to have innovation in the story. We have to have a deep understanding of what is going on in the clients and that is what it takes. It turns out that if you have those, then the fact that the banks are under tremendous pressure doesn’t matter. In fact that is a good thing and it allows us to win more business.

As for the wider turnaround plan for Infosys, Sikka said that two years at the helm has shot by:

When I think of two years, does it really mean that long? It feels like yesterday. 
Conversions have improved dramatically, the relationships have become much more elevated and more importantly the nature of the work that we do has had become more elevated. There are kind of strategic projects that we’re starting to do now with clients – it’s just extraordinary. We work on their digital future and we work on bringing AI to their most complex problems. 

This change is becoming recognised by the client base, he added: 

We recently had a huge company from Europe that was going through a very structural change, and they actually did their entire rebranding exercise in our office in Palo Alto. The entire leadership team of this huge company was locked in our office and working on deep extensive questions about their future and their identity and it was just an unbelievable experience.
The nature of the relationship, the nature of engagement, we’re designing actually a workspace if you can believe; we’re designing an entire building of our one of the large companies in the United States because they saw our space. They were very impressed by our ability to build green and highly open collaborative workspaces and so forth. 
So, there has been an absolutely marked changed in the nature of the relationships with the clients, certainly not with all of them but evidently an increasing number of these. 

My take
The turnaround remains on track, despite hints at underlying growth slowdown. 
Disclosure - At time of writing, Infosys is a premier partner of diginomica. Read more on: Outsourcing 