
Salil Parekh – CEO Infosys
Last week, Infosys posted what, for many, was an OK Q3 FY 2018 result, although some were less than happy.
Other than a settlement on U.S. tax rate topics, which gave the quarter a boost, there were no major issues in what was a ‘business as usual’ quarter. However, in the detailed analyst call, we heard insights into how Infosys is thinking about its own transformation.
Freshly minted CEO Salil Parekh may only be days into the job but that didn’t prevent analysts from asking the odd pesky question. First among those was one designed to elucidate Parekh’s view on opportunities and challenges. His response:

So the areas of data and analytics, IoT and industrial Internet, the whole area of cloud from SaaS to hybrid cloud management to the migrations, digital customer experience, security, AI, machine learning. So these are massive areas of opportunities for growth in the sector.
In terms of areas where there’s challenges, I think, the overall sector is shifting to a much more business-driven tech agenda to the business. The buyer is – not just the CIO, but there’s also the business user. And so many of the ways and means of interacting with clients used to evolve if you look at that. So that’s my perspective on the sector. It’s an exciting sector, but there’s a transformation in the sector, and the players in the sector need to have agility to be playing in the new areas.

Nothing especially surprising there but it opens up the question – which was not asked – as to how Infosys will become the trusted business partner to which it aspires. Some believe that Parekh’s CV, most recently as deputy CEO and member of the group management board at Capgemini, will be enough to bring over key colleagues from Capgemini.
A more interesting question came from Ravi Menon of Elara Securities who asked whether Parekh considers Indian heritage firms to be slow in adopting technology change and whether changes in service requirements require a change in the organizational model. Parekh’s reply:

I think, it’s difficult to characterize all companies whether they’re from India from other geographies in a particular grouping with where they stand on the transformation journey. There are different nuances of different companies. And generally in the market, I think, there’s a lot of work that’s going on in different components of the digital spectrum.
As you know well, there’s a whole component around the marketing and interactive side. There’s a component around the industrial Internet, and there’s a component around cloud and its different iterations. And different companies across the sector, not just from India or others, have the strength that has developed in specific areas. That’s the way, at least, I’ve seen how the industries evolve. So I don’t have a view of one grouping being in a position, which benefits or does not benefit.
I think, the pyramid model applies to almost every business I’ve seen within the IT sector, whether it’s from India or from anywhere. In general, I think, it’s skill sets that are needed in some of the newer areas require that there needs to be some level of re-skilling or indeed to recruiting from college that type of skilling that needs to come in.
So those implications, I think, are independent of where the company is from. It depends on the portfolio that the company has in terms of its current service offer.

I found this segment fascinating because it suggests the market can expect little change in how Infosys has traditionally operated. That may be presumptuous because Parekh has yet to conduct a review he will bring to market in April. That review will be based on what he calls the ‘four pillars’ of market opportunities, client relationship, people, and rejuvenation of the service portfolio.
Nothing in there about software which, if confirmed represents a turnabout from the view of Vishal Sikka, the previous CEO, who was convinced that Infosys needs a strong software offering as an integral part of the overall offering.
But equally important, Parekh gave no hint as to how he sees Infosys moving into growth mode, something that has eluded the company over the last year or so.
My take
‘Business as usual’ is not a bad thing for Infosys at this time. Concentrating on keeping existing clients happy while also looking for opportunistic cross and upsales makes sense.
However, it seems to me that Parekh will be faced with issues the past management was not able to overcome and which have left the Indian heritage businesses lagging behind the likes of Accenture.
For example, we don’t know whether Parekh’s presence will be enough to attract the very best consultants from Capgemini or other firms. These will be needed in order for Parekh to make the ‘business’ sale a reality. If those hires are possible, will Parekh run into the same compensation fights his predecessor faced?
What will Infosys do about product development? The interim management swept that one under the table but, having lost most of the Palo Alto located ‘big brains,’ where does the new talent pool come from?
Equally, the analyst call suggested that the room for tweaking the cost model is now limited. Utilization will likely improve as automation expands inside the services business, but costs are rising and there is no sign those costs can be compensated by impoved rates. What to do?
More to the point, how does Infosys eat the kind of dog food that Phil Fersht is recommending around RPA? His concluding remarks in this story are apropos:
The challenge presented by digital and automation technologies can only be met successfully with a commitment to transformational change; incremental, tactical approaches will only yield limited results and risk failure.  As never before, senior executives in every industry face existential decisions about the future of their enterprises, and will need to “make themselves uncomfortable,” as one participant put it – to re-imagine their businesses based on the centrality of data and digital relationships (see Technology above).  They will need to shed the constraints of the “as is” and articulate the journey to the “to be.”  Success will be measured not on beating last quarter’s results but on the ability to see and grasp the scale of change required and create a viable and compelling digital vision for what one participant called the “journey to improvement.”
We shall see.
Image credit - via InfosysRead more on: Digital transformation - frictionless enterpriseIT service managementMachine intelligence and AIOutsourcingProfessional servicesRobotics 