
Vishal Sikka – CEO Infosys
Infosys closed out Q3 FY2016 (statement – PDF) with a surprisingly good outcome given that this is considered a seasonally poor quarter.
Stuart Lachlan has provided the ‘quick hit’ on the results. In this analysis, we look at what Infosys is claiming as the drivers for current and future growth.
Results were slightly distorted by a one off $23 million contract termination payment to Infosys in Q2. When taken out of the equation revenue growth translates into 2.1% quarter over quarter revenue increase. Surprisingly, the flooding in Chennai was reported to have had little direct impact on results.
Despite the better than expected results and guiding better than anticipated full year growth to a range of 12.8% to 13.2%, Infosys remains quietly cautious about the outlook going forward.
Asked on a video recorded call to explain how the company is achieving better than expected results, Vishal Sikka CEO said that he attributes this to ‘creative confidence’ that comes from the positive mood among employees. Evidence for that comes in the attrition rate which continues to fall and stood at 13.4% for the quarter, a level that has not been seen for 15 quarters. Sikka added that:
It is still too early for the initiatives to kick in, it is largely as a result of the increased confidence, we have equipped our teams with much better tools, with much better capabilities, if you look at our deal rates, our win rates have increased dramatically.
Pointing to the challenges, he added that while spinning up an innovation center is relatively easy:
Getting our delivery organization to think of themselves as innovators is not easy and I think that is something our teams have managed to do which is quite amazing.
Increases in US H1 visa cost has exercised the minds of the Indian outsourcers. As one of the largest users of the H1 visa system, Infosys is potentially exposed to a significant cost. During the later analyst call, the company said:
Based on our current estimate [the impact is] about 30 basis points to 35 basis points for the next year. That’s our current estimate. However, this is based on the current information that we have on the visa changes.
The actual impact may change since the company said there are some gray areas where it is unclear the precise impact.
During the same analyst call, Infosys talked about progress made in automation and the engineering resources savings that are arising:

So the largest contributor to that 1100 people that I mentioned saving was in infrastructure and we have been pumping a lot of effort into bringing automation into all aspects of infrastructure management, but also working closely with our partners especially Amazon and Microsoft, but also others like EMC and others and helping to bring this Cloud Migration and some of the next generation elastic infrastructure offerings.

Infosys is balancing reductions in infrastructure headcount requirements with investments in next generation technology  businesses.

And also on the innovation side we have been doing a ton of work with start-up companies, we have invested in Vertex Ventures which is an exclusively next generation infrastructure focused venture funds as well as we just did an investment and CloudEndure in the disaster recovery area and infrastructure services a key requirement for many of our clients. So I believe that our infrastructure offering has never been stronger and we are quite bullish on that.

Beyond this insight, Infosys didn’t provide specifics on the extent to which its initiatives are bearing fruit. We will have to wait for the company to outline its 2017 plans.
My take
As I have said before, leadership matters and clearly Sikka’s infectious enthusiasm for education and automation are serving the company’s growth and profit objectives very well. Downward pressure on the delivered cost of commodity outsourcing is a reality the company faces but so far, the impact seems to have been negligible as Infosys continues to emphasize quality and fixed price engagements.
The next test comes in April when the company announces the full year outcome alongside its plans for FY2017.
In an email received prior to the call, Sikka told me that he has ambitious plans to establish an apprenticeship style scheme. Quite what shape that will take remains to be seen but it serves to demonstrate the long term investment Infosys is prepared to make in its people. That in turn is a reflection of the company’s long range aspirational objective of becoming a $20 billion business by 2020. That objective may be one heck of a stretch but who said that ambition was a bad thing?
The one blot on the picture came coincidentally via reports that Michael Reh, who headed up Finacle, Infosys banking business, is moving on. I reached out to Reh who confirmed the decision, but says he is staying on to assist in the leadership transition. I’ve known Reh a number of years. He is one of the smartest people I know and his loss is not insignificant.
Disclosure: Infosys is a premier partner at time of writing and a personal client of the author. 
Read more on: The new professional and IT as a service 