
Infosys Confluence 2016 is providing insights into how the Indian services business is changing. First off, let’s start with Vishal Sikka, CEO’s keynote.
As I predicted, he devoted the keynote to GAIT albeit phrased the way he wants to articulate the topics, and wrapped up in the company’s Zero Distance message. From the company’s blurbs:
It has three tenets, to close the gap or Zero the Distance between us and code, clients, and the end-user. We must progressively reduce the gap to client expectations and needs till we are truly at Zero Distance to the client.
There are many moving parts inside what at first seems a simple message but according to Sikka, the idea has taken hold well inside the company but not where you’d expect to see it. He said:
When we looked to see how we are doing we were surprised to find that the offshore people were more engaged with the idea than the on site people.
I was more interested in looking out for some of Sikka’s more controversial words. So for example, in talking about the impact of bots, a current topic du jour, he said:
There is a deeply held misbelief that a chat bot will replace a good app. That’s nonsense.
When I posted this on Facebook, the peanut gallery had some fun with this. Adam Thier for instance made the point that:
But it can replace a whole swath of bad ones
While there was some agreement around that, Bob Warfield said:
Contrary to popular belief, language isn’t always as high a bandwidth as we’d like and computers are far from understanding language well enough to replace any good app.
<Sigh> Geeks will be geeks but it was all in good fun. From my Tweetstream – on the topic of institutional stagnation and what companies need to address:

Stagnation: “expensive consultants tell us it’s always the middle management problem.” @vsikka#InfosysConfluence
— Dennis Howlett (@dahowlett) April 28, 2016

On artificial intelligence, Sikka’s PhD topic:

“AI is just a bunch of techniques” @vsikka #InfosysConfluence
— Dennis Howlett (@dahowlett) April 28, 2016


and…

“AI will improve us” @vsikka #InfosysConfluence
— Dennis Howlett (@dahowlett) April 28, 2016

What he was trying to convey is that AI has been with us a very long time so intrinsically, it is nothing new. But rather than listening to the doom mongers, Sikka is firmly of the belief that when deployed appropriately and in the right context, AI and its attendant sibling machine learning, will provide significant opportunities “to do more with less for more” and be more creative. This is important because there are some who seem to take an almost religious view that AI should be everywhere, cutting out human interaction and decision making wherever possible. That is patently absurd. 
Sikka saved the best for last. In talking about my favorite buzzphrase du jour (not), digital transformation:

“The transformation from atoms to bits is the real digital story. It’s often too complicated for the financial analyst types.” <– @vsikka
— Dennis Howlett (@dahowlett) April 28, 2016


Again, this is one of those important myth slayers that goes well beyond what is often associated with digital transformation and suggests a much longer timeline for both implementation and the realization of value and benefit. That dovetails well with the conversation I had with Accenture’s Narry Singh although on tis outing, Sikka chose not to dive too deeply into the topic from that angle. Instead, he used the underpinning themes of his keynote to announce Infosys Mana.
Infosys Mana
Infosys Mana
When we first saw the slide deck on this topic, I was confused. I was convinced this was a variation on Panaya, the toolset Infosys acquired in 2015 that allows for fast track remediation of SAP and Oracle landscapes in upgrade scenarios. That is not the case. From the blurbs:
Mana, with the Infosys Aikido service offerings, dramatically lowers the cost of maintenance for both physical and digital assets; captures the knowledge and know-how of people, and fragmented and complex systems; simplifies the continuous renovation of core business processes; and enables businesses to bring new and delightful user experiences leveraging state of the art technology.
What does this mean in the real world?
Infosys is currently working with five clients on Mana projects and expects to have a controlled ‘release’ with a total of 25 clients. In one example, Infosys claims that the company can predict the likelihood of asset failure in plant maintenance scenarios. We already know of similar capabilities in TCS ignio, but Infosys says this is a well differentiated offering that goes well beyond the simple surfacing of potential fault data.
Jeffrey G. Augustin, Vice President and CIO, Johnson Controls came on stage to discuss this, saying that his company and Infosys are working on a project designed to improve automation in the company’s physical and digital landscapes. It is clearly early days but the promise and potential is significant. More significant, Sikka pointed out that most of the work that has gone into developing Mana came from people within Infosys that have many years experience managing systems. In short, while there is plenty of ‘sexy’ AI and machine learning attached to Mana, its basics are rooted in deep subject matter expertise that Infosys has developed over 35 years.
My take
While the keynote ran hideously over time Sikka offered plenty of technical meat to keep the audience satisfied. When you wrap all the Infosys specific jargon together (Mana, Zero Distance, AiKido), you end up with an evolving story of transformation that is happening inside the company and which is manifested by the emergence of entirely new service offerings. But…I am concerned that the way Infosys markets doesn’t do it as much credit as it deserves.
Sikka knows there is no point in talking about technology unless there is a business value proposition attached to it. That, after all, is the whole point of Zero Distance. But the company has yet to find a slick way of articulating that set of messages such that you just ‘get it’ in the presentations. Hence mine (and others’) initial confusion about Mana.
That’s a wholly solvable problem but one that will hinder Infosys as it seeks to get from underneath  the ‘outsourcing body shop’ image it shares with other India based technology companies.
Bonus points – Johnson Controls on stage at Confluence recorded live:

Image credit - via the authorDisclosure - Infosys is a premier partner at time of writing and a personal consulting client of the authorRead more on: Analytics planning and data analysisDigital transformation - frictionless enterpriseInfrastructure 