
Like the other major on-premise enterprise application players, Infor is currently progressing down a multi-year journey towards becoming a ‘cloud’ company. Although there are similarities between SAP, Oracle and Infor’s approach in getting customers to adopt cloud, there are also distinct differences.
Infor, for example, has arguably had the benefit of being a privately owned company, which has potentially given it more freedom and time to be strategic with its cloud investments. Unlike the others, Infor has spent years investing and refactoring key applications for the cloud, as opposed to acquiring a cloud customer base.
It also has the benefit of not scaring investors about the fact that it is potentially cannibalising a very profitable maintenance core, in an attempt to shift to the cloud. This is why we see the likes of Sage making bold claims about forever protecting and investing in on-premise, as opposed to it going full steam ahead for the cloud. It needs to keep investors happy.
However, Infor has spent five years investing billions of dollars in reengineering and redesigning strategic applications into CloudSuites that are hosted on AWS. The results? On the face of it, pretty good. Infor now claims that it has over 50 applications in the cloud today and that over 50% of new bookings are for cloud.
Not only this, but it is signing net new customers with the likes of Whole Foods and Travis Perkins, the latter which is said to be an eight figure deal and one that Infor claims is the ‘biggest ERP cloud deal ever’.
We got the chance to sit down with Infor’s Global Head of Cloud, Lisa Pope, at the company’s annual user event in New York City last week, where she explained in a bit more detail about how the vendor is ridding the shackles of its on-premise image. She said:
We still have an incredibly large maintenance base, like any large ERP. That’s the base that we are working with to move to the cloud.
But our entire salesforce now carries a quota for cloud. That’s a big change. They don’t just have an on premise quota, they also have a SaaS quota.
We are cloud first. When I first got here we were cloud first from a sales perspective, but the rest of the company hadn’t caught on. But now, a few years on, our company is getting cloud first. We will lead with cloud, because we feel the industry is going that way and we think customers will get more value out of it. Cannibalise is an interesting word, but we want a percentage of our base to shift to cloud every year.
The good news for our customers is that we don’t have to choice to put R&D dollar into our cloud product or into our on premise product. Every dollar that we put into a product gets to run on both. So, we are not having to choose. Whereas, our competitors have different product lines for on premise and cloud, so the existing customer base gets very nervous that all new dollars are going into the sexy new cloud thing and nothing to their product. We don’t have that issue.
Executive cloud council
Pope explained that whilst Infor is focusing on maintenance conversion to the cloud, this isn’t the company’s primary focus. It is also interested in net new wins to drive growth, from large global companies. Two things that have helped to secure these deals – as those done with Travis Perkins – have been Infor’s executive cloud council and its rethinking around its services business.
Firstly, when Infor began migrating customers to cloud, it picked 12 global companies that were committed to shifting off their on-premise systems and formed a council that allows for constant feedback, so that they can guide Infor for the benefit of all customers. Pope said:
We just met again here in New York.They are one of our best feedback mechanisms, because they are all running very different products. Those customers are really diverse industries, diverse products, so they basically give us feedback into the product and also overall the experience.
And one of the key messages that was delivered back to Infor, was that it needed to simplify its services and support. Pope said:
We felt when we went to them during the implementation we were still acting as a support organisation, a cloud team and a services team, instead of really one organisation. So we made a decision and in that reorganisation Charles [Phillips, CEO] made that call a few months ago – where we have now created Infor Services.
We have combined all of our cloud operations, all of our global support, and our entire consulting organisation into one team. Because we want a service DNA. We don’t want someone to say ‘I’m a consultant’, or ‘I’m a support person’, or ‘I’m a cloud person’. No, when you are a cloud customer, we are running their business, it’s one person that can do anything and everything. Our goal is to cross train and get those organisations aligned better.
Working with customers
Pope wasn’t able to tell me how many customers that Infor now had live on its core CloudSuites, despite Infor making bold claims about its growth in cloud bookings in recent quarters. However, Pope did add that Infor has a longer lead time to going live with its customers, as they are often complex, company-wide back-end implementations. She said:
Unlike a Salesforce.com, which is selling simpler software – I mean, you can deploy a Salesforce system and get it up and running typically in a couple of months. Many of our customers are deploying mission critical apps in the cloud. It’s a full ERP. It’s not just one department, or one functionality.
They are larger projects and more complicated from that perspective. We have gotten many customers live. But the good news is that we are shortening the time it takes for them to get live, using our implementation accelerators, which are designed to take standard business processes in the cloud.
An advantage for us is that it’s not two different products for us. Our products run on premise and in the cloud, so there is no learning curve for them. It’s not like they say ‘oh I used to know this product, now I’ve got to learn HANA because that’s the cloud product’. It’s one product, so if they run it on premise they’re just going into the customer with a little different business case.
One sales approach that Infor takes is that for potential customers interested in its cloud business, is its value team looks at the customer and helps them establish the total cost of ownership of running their system on premise versus running their system in the cloud. Application maintenance, hardware maintenance, operating maintenance, cost of upgrades are all taken into account, and then it is compared to a SaaS model over a five year period. Pope said:
Those studies almost across the board they come in about 20% cheaper. Now, is that a reason for the company to go to the cloud? Maybe, maybe not. Even when it’s equal, many customers will still decide to go to the cloud with the same TCO, just because you’re getting a level of service, more security, more compliance, more upgrades. It’s also that peace of mind that they can take those resources and go focus on something more important.
I pushed Pope on this further to get some more information on what is driving Infor customers to consider cloud, where she said that more often than not it has very little to do with money and is typically about market pressures and the need for business agility and better customer experience. This means that Pope’s team typically deals with the business buyers, before it deals with IT. She said:
Cost is not the reason, it’s just something that they want to see. It is almost always a compelling business reason that has nothing to do with IT, I’ll be honest. If you look at Whole Foods, it’s about transforming the customer experience in the store. It’s about the digital ability that they’re going to be able to enable by having everything in the cloud. It’s much more related to the business side.
One of the things we’ve tried to work with is that we’ve tried to work with the CFO, with the President, understand the business. Then we work with IT so that the due diligence is there, so that they feel good about security and compliance. It is definitely the business that is saying that they’re not moving fast enough, or they’re working on an important product development or customer experience project and want to take all resources and focus them on that, not running ERP.
My take
Still a long way to go for Infor, but it’s latest customer deals suggest that it is getting something right. Infor was keen to highlight at the event that it is its vertical specific applications and its investment in Hook & Loop (the company’s digital agency) that were key differentiators for it winning some of its bigger cloud deals. This makes sense to me, as these are key capabilities that a lot of the other vendors are unable to go to market with.
Image credit - Businessman on cloud holding chart arrow © adam121 - Fotolia.comDisclosure - Infor, Salesforce, Oracle and SAP are diginomica premier partners at time of writingRead more on: Cloud ERP financials and supply chainCloud platforms - infrastructure and architecture 