
Regular readers will be all too familiar with the refrain that the world of professional services is changing – fast. The days of offshored labor arbitrage in multi-million dollar implementations and outsourcing deals is diminishing. Every player is looking for that next golden spot to take on the world for the coming years. Some will do it by acquisition. Others take a different path. Infosys is no exception to this trend and this year’s Infosys Confluence event which starts on Wednesday this week, provides CEO Vishal Sikka with a platform on which to stake the company’s claims. It won’t be easy but it will be fascinating.
When Sikka took over the CEO’s slot at Infosys, there were many who went ‘Duh? This guy is a software fellow, where is his services experience?’ In the eight months since, he has demonstrated a keen ability to see the problems his company faces and articulate them in a no nonsense fashion. The problems are not so dis-similar to direct Indian based competitors like HCL, Wipro, Cognizant and TCS. The days of claiming significant advantage through labor costs are over. At best they might represent 20% of cost saving and are dwindling fast.
At the 180 day mark I recorded a conversation with Sikka where the emphasis was on education and renewal. That won’t change in the keynote he delivers this week but we can expect to hear detail about what this means for customers. Sikka sees renewal as part of a ‘renew-new’ strategy where the renewal element prepares the way for customers to build the businesses that can compete in the 21st century. He will need to paint a compelling picture that allows businesses to preserve and optimize the best of what they have while making way for higher value projects.
Attendees can expect that the recently acquired Panaya, the means by which SAP and Oracle customers can reduce their break-fix work, will figure heavily. You can also expect to hear a lot about the Infosys Information Platform which takes a bundle of technology and services, many of which have their roots in open source, as a way of accelerating business decision making and business intelligence.
Beyond that, Sikka will likely get into some of the technical detail about where he believes customers should place their bets and how they should think about the future. It won’t be your typical CEO marketing exercise. That’s not SIkka’s way. But it will lay out choices that customers can make within the context of an understandable vision.
Sikka places great emphasis on the power of education to deliver on the company’s story, often referring to Infosys’ Mysore academy. Attendees can expect him to wax lyrical about the achievements the company has made in training staff. However, I want him to ratchet this up a gear or two and talk not just about the number being trained or the disciplines in which they are learning. I want to hear about how those graduates are being retained and trained in the field to deliver the quality of work that will be required in Sikka’s new world. The company has done a solid job reducing attrition rates but that has to be supplemented by an infusion of deep experience. How will Infosys achieve that?
Looking over the sessions, I am encouraged by the fact that most are customer led. This will not be your usual corporate flogathon but a cornucopia of practice based, customer focused ‘what happened, what happens next’ sessions. I like this because as we have known for years, customers buy from customers. For the first time in many years, I am going to be spoiled for choice. That’s a good thing.
Over and above, there will be plenty of questions for the executive team. Right now, Sikka is leading an internal transformation. That’s not easy in any business but when you’re hefting a business of 160,000 plus people, the levels of complexity are mind numbing.
Phil Fersht, CEO Horses for Sources has been banging the everything As-a-Service drum as it relates to the outsourcing community for a while and no doubt will want to know where Infosys is on that journey. I expect to catch up with Fersht at some stage and get his bead on the topic.
Infosys has clear execution issues, currently identified in sales but also in how the delivery organization gets on board with the ‘new.’ Automation helps but customers will want to know how thats working and what they can expect to see in savings. Hopefully we will hear about real world examples from both the main stage and in the sessions.
All in, this will be one of the more interesting conferences of the spring season. A combination of a company in transition, a visionary CEO who doesn’t pull punches, analysts with a clear agenda and customers on deck – what’s not to like? By the way – did I mention? I’m told it’s a sell out gig. That tells you something.
Disclosure: Infosys is a premier partner at time of writing and a consulting client to the author.
Read more on: The new professional and IT as a service 