
Vishal Sikka – CEO Infosys
Life at Infosys is always interesting. Q2 FY 2016 revenue and profit growth beat estimates, it maintained guidance at constant currencies but its CFO is quitting and being replaced by a long time Infosys finance head.
On to the detail (release) which I will discuss in USD rather than Indian Rupees.
Revenue at $2.392 billion was up six percent quarter over quarter, well ahead of the expected four percent growth. During a Q&A, Vishal Sikka, CEO Infosys said the company benefitted from a one time revenue item of $23 million. Even taking that into account, the beat was a good $27 million ahead of analysts’ expectations.
Net profit grew nine percent quarter over quarter to $519 million but year over year margin slid to 25.5% from 26.1%. Looking forward, Infosys is maintaining its growth guidance of 10-12 percent at constant currencies:
In the second half, we are preserving the guidance and we are endeavouring to buck that trend but it would be unfair to offer more than we are.
Commenting on the management changes he said:
I am not concerned with management changes when you look at our attrition rate that has fallen to 14.1 percent which is a tremendous achievement…I am not at all worried about the talent in our company.
Pravin Rao, COO Infosys talked about trading conditions going forward.
Pricing pressure is a reality…We had very good growth in financial services but banks continue to face cost pressures, [and we are seeing pressure] particularly in insurance. We expect retail to be volatile…a little bit soft. Telecoms continues to be a bit of a struggle.
MD Ranaganath, incoming CFO talked about how he plans to manage the forward position:
We’ve had a very broad based growth in the first half…We still have scope for operational efficiencies and improvements. There are many levers that are available to us.
My take
Another surprisingly good quarter although comparisons with free spending and high performing Accenture are bound to be made. The second half is clearly a challenge on multiple fronts but the company is carefully managing expectations based upon visibility into the pipeline.
As an aside, Sikka has mastered the numbers in a way that many did not expect. He talked freely about the number of Panaya (57) and Skava deals (53) along with talking about the number of employees trained in design thinking (55,000,) the number he hopes to see freed up with automation initiatives in infrastructure management this quarter (1,000) and other similar initiatives.
Looking forward, I will be interested to see the impact that the incoming head of HR has on the business. Infosys, in common with other services companies is in the throes of a transition that has as much to do with shifting the company culture as it does developing new revenue streams. In that sense I hope to hear about a more agile and less ossified set of HR processes.
Read more on: The new professional and IT as a service 