
Jill Miller
Innovation has muscled into the list of top business priorities, according to the bi-annual Charted Institute of Professional Development (CIPD)/Workday leaders’ survey.
While cost management retains pole position, innovation has grabbed a top five spot for the first time in the survey, which compares the views of HR and other business leaders. Some 35% of HR and 32% of other business leaders pinpoint innovation as a strategic priority.
Dr Jill Miller, research advisor at the CIPD, believes that prioritizing cost management is just the new normal, but organizations are learning to think more creatively against this penny-pinching backdrop:
We know organizations are thinking differently, both in ways of working and how they deliver things and how they manage their people – which is great news – but we haven’t actually seen in it called out as priority before.
While it was encouraging that HR and other leaders broadly agreed on their organizations’ strategic goals, there were also some areas of discord, most notably over HR analytics.
An impressive 92% of the HR respondents said they were doing some kind of HR analytics and over three-quarters of them believed that it was having an impact on their ability to contribute strategically.
Source : CIPD/Workday
While HR is clearly committed to people analytics, their efforts weren’t necessarily appreciated fully by the rest of the business.
Fewer than half (49%) of non-HR business leaders, for example, thought that HR analytics was an important tool for HR to deliver strategic value. In fact, 28% non-HR leaders said they didn’t even know what analytic capabilities their HR department possessed.
Added to that, 28% of the business leaders said their HR department didn’t share analytics findings, while just 12% of HR leaders agreed with this view.
Miller believes this disconnect reveals that although HR is working hard to provide business insights, it needs to redouble its efforts to communicate what it is doing with analytics and work at improving the visibility into HR practices:
I think if you look behind the figures, some of what we’re seeing could just be that HR is just not communicating it in the vocabulary of the business.
This poor communication could also explain why only 14% of non-HR leaders were happy with the HR analytics they received.
Source : CIPD/Workday
Another striking note of discord was present in the views on predictive HR analytics. While the report revealed a huge appetite and recognition of its power among HR professionals, non-HR leaders were not so convinced.
Just a third of non-HR execs believed predictive analytics would reap significant returns compared to a more bullish reaction from HR execs, where about half thought it would repay its investment handsomely.
One of the key barriers to the uptake of predictive analytics identified in the report was a lack of skills. Two-fifths of HR leaders and a fifth of business leaders said that although they would love to use predictive analytics, they were currently unable to complete even basic analytics.
Recognizing this shortfall, it’s no surprise that two-fifths of HR leaders said they intended to invest in HR analytics over the next 12 months. While the main reason was to be able to pull together different types and sources of data (53%), many also wanted to invest in training HR staff (28%) in analytics. Investment in new technology was also key for 37% of HR respondents.
Whether its analytics or other activities, HR needs to keep an eye on keeping those channels of communication with the rest of the business open. But this communication channel is not just one way, Miller points out, but “a two-way street” to be navigated:
It’s about how do we get that external voice back into the function and how do we tie all those insights together so that its system-wide rather than just functions; it’s a business-wide challenge not just an HR challenge.
While this dialogue is two- or indeed multi-way, it should be HR that takes the lead, driving communication across the business to create a company with one voice, rather than many parallel or discordant parts.
It’s also one of three key areas, alongside analytics and HR technology that Dr Miller believes are prime targets for HR to flex its creative and innovative muscles.
So, overall, the report card for HR is a positive one. When it comes to overall strategy, HR and other business leaders broadly agree. But there’s still plenty of room for improvement. Miller concludes:
I think the findings over all have highlighted some significant opportunities for HR and a big appetite from the rest of the business of what they’d like HR to do.
My take
It’s great to see innovation become a business and HR priority. In many ways, the fact that cost management has been the number one priority (and will probably continue to be so) for many years means that companies have had to learn to be innovative with their resources. Doing more with less is the business norm – and that takes some canny thinking.
The devil is in the detail, of course. How exactly do you encourage and promote innovation? HR needs to be involved both on a company-wide scale and being innovative internally. Analytics and digital technologies can play a major part in HR’s plans.
Analytics is clearly a big deal for HR. But it’s still early days and much of the disconnect between HR and other leaders’ views highlighted in the survey is probably simply down to its immaturity. The learning curve is a steep one and HR professionals have work to do on building trust among business stakeholders.
Disclosure – at time of writing, Workday is a premier partner of diginomica.
Read more on: Analytics planning and data analysisDigital skills and trainingFuture of workHCM and the digital future of workTalent management 