
The latest iteration of a recurrent question for CIOs is starting to rear its head -­ at some point in the development of a technology or application area, acquiescing to the practical realities of accepting at least a measure of technology lock­-in, becomes inevitable. But at what point in the development cycle does that happen, and what innovation and capabilities are lost despite the overall benefits?
This was the unspoken elephant in the room at this year’s Intel Developer Forum (IDF), held at San Francisco’s Moscone West convention centre. The company is now facing a growing range of questions about where its current markets are going and what it does next as a consequence, and CEO Brian Krzanich used the opportunity to set out a road map of some potentially significant changes in direction for the company.
Room, meet elephant
That is the nature of the `elephant’. Most CIOs, over the years, will have become used to the practical Intel lock­-in they operate under in their datacentres and, still, their hundreds or thousands of PCs used by staff.
The question of what innovations that lock­-in has stifled is moot, but the operational and business benefits those users have had as a consequence are pretty clear. This lock­-in has been a win:win.
Indeed, it can be argued that the cloud would simply not have happened ­ beyond being a military and academic curio – had it not been for Intel processor technologies lurking at the heart of every commodity server.
But now Intel is in the process of change -­ it has to be ­- and it showed at IDF. The company is definitely becoming a systems company, or perhaps more accurately a sub­systems company, making modules and other `collections of complementary functionality’ that are aimed at being the next level of abstraction up from the chips themselves. This makes a good deal of sense, particularly from the company’s point of view. Get it right and it can ride the next wave of developments such as IoT and virtual reality.
But in practice it is likely to be a somewhat difficult balancing act for the company. The outside influences on what happens next are no longer confined to a clear­cut set of competitors such as Motorola, Zilog and, of course, AMD. It now includes the risks associated with eating some of its customers’ breakfast by innovating similar products that play in the same market sectors. This, of course, can end up in the expensive, but honourable, process of `eating’ some customers entirely.
It will also stretch the company’s resources by not only investing in the design of new sub-
systems, but also manufacturing them. This is already being bandied around as a reason for Intel to seriously fear developments at ARM, especially now it has been acquired by Soft Bank. Each new chip development involves Intel investing in manufacturing, which in the semiconductor business involved brutally large amounts of money. Indeed, every so often it also involves the company in developing new manufacturing processes from the ground up so the chips can be made. Then the investment numbers can get mind-­boggling.
By being a design house that works with a range of chip manufacturing partners, ARM does not have such problems. In addition, by working with a range of third parties each of them can target specific applications and market sectors, getting ARM­-based products out into more markets than Intel could possibly hope to. For example, the Soft Bank acquisition should now give it additional resources with which to hit a wide range of new development opportunities, especially in areas where it has only dabbled so far, such as server applications.
Merging virtual and real
So Intel is now fighting back by moving its goalposts to a new playing field where the words Virtual Reality and Internet of Things are writ large on the grass. Both featured extensively in the opening keynote of CEO Krzanich.
We are inventing a world that cannot be experienced today. We call it merged reality, a place where the virtual and the real meet. We expect it to be a big driver of innovation.
And so we were into an exposition of the company’s move into Virtual Reality ­ and not just chips but complete sub­systems that package up complementary functionality. Here were all sides of that elephant for all to see. Get these developments right and the company could become the lynch pin of a market that will be huge. And it will be, for it will find applications across the board, from gaming to industrial automation and high risk manufacturing processes. Get it wrong and the company may yet find itself bypassed by different innovations on all sides.
The elephant also showed itself by the choice of VR demos in the Krzanich keynote. There were several around the consumer and gaming markets ­ what can be achieved using it to connect to a 90 inch 4K TV set, for example. But there were few signs of industrial applications, even verbally, let alone as a demo. Maybe it is just that consumer applications are the obvious low­hanging fruit at the moment.
VR is a fundamental shift in how we work, communicate and entertain etc. but it currently needs a dedicated space that is set up for the job, and is not really suitable for a lot of what people want to do.
Which is a very good reason for the company to launch Project Alloy, a wireless VR headset. This combines a headset camera integrated into the screen so that the user’s hands , or people close by, can appear in the same picture. It also provides the capability to track movements across multiple, interconnected locations, which opens up possibilities for the development of new ways in which users can interact with things in their world, be that at home or work. Making it wireless is also a major move in the right direction to free up VR innovations.
Like much of Intel’s new developments, the Alloy platform will be open source and the company is looking to partners to develop it into new market areas. This is certainly the way that the company see that elephant working in practice, with Intel giving its partners an important subsystem and associated software that acts as a fast­-start into new markets.
Another example of this introduced at IDF came from Microsoft, which is readying a significant upgrade of its Hololens holographic software to run on Windows 10. Useful for building VR environments, this will be available to all Win10 systems early next years. It was demo’d running on an Intel NUC, the company’s small format version of a classic desktop PC `pancake’, which is about the size of a paperback book.
That combination could be an attractive start point for developers looking to build both consumer and business VR applications.
In the area of visual intelligence, the same approach is being put behind the RealSense camera/video management technologies. Krzanich demo’d a new, classic semiconductor industry `shrink’ of the technology into a form factor that can be included as a plug-­in primary control system for a wide range of robots. This has been christened Euclid and comes complete with motion sensors, video sensors and compute capabilities.
The shrinking of the technology will go on as well, with Krzanich showing off a prototype of the next generation to come, which is not much thicker than a circuit board and looked about 5×1 cm in size.
Another market for the technology is in the burgeoning drones market, and the company is introducing not only new drone controller units, but also Software Development Kits (SDKs) and an application development drone for users to work with.
And then there is IoT
Future IoT applications are also high on the Intel agenda, with the star turn of the presentation being when BMW demo’d autonomous vehicles by driving one onto the stage. This is set to be another huge market, and the company is pitching at a good level of thought leadership with the formation last month of a partnership with both BMW and MobileEye, which specialises in the necessary movement analytics and management software required.
The aim here is to make as much as possible of the developments made open source so that others can work with them and develop them further. If successful, it would also advance the cause of essential standards for operating protocols, processes and data formats, which would play strongly to Intel’s cause as well. With that in mind the company is keen to stress that the key players in the partnership are itself and MobileEye, with BMW being the first user. It is aware that other manufacturers will want to do things differently to BMW but is hoping to pitch them a baseline technology that is common to all.
That will certainly be of benefit in building practical autonomous driving systems, where individual cars will, of necessity, need to work in close collaboration with all other vehicles on the road.
When it comes to industrial applications of IoT Intel seems to be majoring on a partnership with GE Digital, with the announcement of new SDK tools to help developers work with GE’s Predix cloud­based Industrial Internet management and implementation suite, and exploit it running on Intel­based systems.
As this is still a relatively new marketplace with significant scope for new ideas and developments the launch of SDK tools is potentially an important first step. It also highlights that this is now the area where the skills of the developer community are really needed, rather than spending their time coding minor modifications to well established business systems. Vendors of such systems should by now be providing business managers with suitable tools for such tasks now.
Wearable devices are also set to be an important element of IoT systems, even if they have had a shakey start as a marketplace. Krzanich demonstrated a more practical pitch into this market than a watch or heart rate monitor, with Curi. This is probably the smallest shrink of the PC module so far and is intended to generate, log and transmit data on movement. It was demonstrated by a musician playing a virtual `keyboard’ by simply moving fingers in specially designed gloves.
Once again, Intel is matching the hardware subsystem with appropriate development tools, in this case the Intel Knowledge-builder toolkit.
My Take
I can’t help but see this year’s IDF as the start of a major experiment that needs to be observed by many other big-­name players in the IT business. Intel currently stands to see its markets either cut from under it by more flexible competitors or just fade away as the lifecycle of its whole ecosystems gently runs down. It has to do something, and new markets such as VR and IoT could ­ indeed should ­ be lifesavers. But at the same time it has to offer more than just the necessary bricks and mortar of chips alone.
It has to offer pre­built walls and roofs, plus architect plans that can short circuit development cycles and develop markets faster. But that means users accepting its leadership and potential orchestration of future developments.
After all, where would the software business be now if MS­DOS, or applications like WordPerfect, 123, and Pagemaker, had all come from Intel?
Image credit - Man wearing virtual reality goggles. © Sergey - Fotolia.com. IoT concept with cup of coffee © Melpomene - Fotolia.comRead more on: Internet of ThingsIoT robotics and AIThe new professional and IT as a service 