
Amidst the barrage of announcements about drones, VR headsets, autonomous cars and 5G wireless networks, one item not highlighted at the Intel Developers Forum (IDF) keynotes may ultimately prove to be the most significant to the company: the joint agreement with ARM for Intel to act as a foundry for ARM processors.
Specifically, the announcement means the entire ARM technology stack known as Artisan IP that includes design information for the CPU core, graphics processor and system interfaces will be supported for manufacture on Intel’s next-generation 10nm process technology. The only 10nm customer mentioned at the event, LG, is using it for mobile devices and that market will undoubtedly remain the largest for ARM SoCs for many years. However it certainly won’t be the only one and that could spell trouble for Intel’s data center and IoT business units.
By trying to protect and maximize the profits of its x86 franchise, Intel ignored the mobile market for long enough that ARM emerged as the de facto standard for powering mobile devices. Whether Apple, with its custom ARM-based A-series SoCs, Samsung with a mix of custom Exynos and merchant Qualcomm-based products or any other maker of phones and tablets, they all use a variant of the ARM processor and instruction set. Designed for low power, ARM chips were a perfect fit for mobile by sacrificing raw performance for battery-saving efficiency. Continued advances in design and manufacturing technology have narrowed the performance gap to the point that the iPad Pro, the current state of the art in mobile processing technology, now delivers benchmark performance comparable to some laptops and Intel’s advanced processor technology will only accelerate the rate of ARM performance improvement.
This is just the way Clayton Christensen described disruptive innovation overtaking incumbent products [comments added],
Companies [like Intel] pursue these ‘sustaining innovations’ at the higher tiers of their markets because this is what has historically helped them succeed: by charging the highest prices to their most demanding and sophisticated customers at the top of the market, companies will achieve the greatest profitability.
However, by doing so, companies unwittingly open the door to ‘disruptive innovations’ [like ARM SoCs] at the bottom of the market. An innovation that is disruptive allows a whole new population of consumers at the bottom of a market access to a product or service that was historically only accessible to consumers with a lot of money or a lot of skill.
As Christensen first observed, the rate of performance improvement for disruptive innovations is higher than that for sustaining products and greater than the upward increase in user requirements and expectations. The result is that incumbent products increasingly become expensive overkill while disruptive technologies eventually meet the needs of most users. By abandoning the mobile processor market and agreeing to act as a foundry for ARM products, Intel tacitly admits that disruptor ARM has won that battle. As an aside, it is worth noting how ARM achieved this. It wasn’t primarily achieved through having massive fabrication capability  of the kind that Intel routinely deploys, but by licensing its IP. However there’s cause for concern higher up the value chain in the data center, where Intel owns the processor market, generates about half of its operating income, while unlike in PCs, revenue is still growing 5-10%.
Intel lost mobile, but can ARM compete in the data center?
ARM has never been a realistic challenger to x86 for data center systems until recently, however retracing its rate of progress in mobile devices, 64-bit ARM SoCs are rapidly becoming viable alternatives for certain workloads. For example, Cavium’s ThunderX line has several variants designed for network, storage and I/O-intensive compute applications like front-end Web servers. An analysis of another ARM design from AppliedMicro, its third-generation X-Gene product, shows performance comparable to Intel’s mainstream Xeon E5 CPU,
AppliedMicro’s real competition, however, is Intel. X-Gene 3 is on track to surpass Xeon D and even many Xeon E5 processors in per-socket throughput while delivering respectable per-thread performance. X-Gene 3 crushes the current Xeon E5 in memory bandwidth, and we don’t expect Intel to address this problem in Skylake to avoid undercutting its high-margin Xeon E7 business.
Mobile powerhouse Qualcomm is slated to release its long-awaited ARM server chip this fall and has a joint venture with a Chinese province to manufacture systems for its domestic cloud computing and telco market, which is estimated to be at 2.5 million servers this year. Even high-end workloads are migrating to ARM. Fujitsu just announced that it chose ARM processors over x86 and SPARC (yes, they are still around) for a new supercomputer, not based on performance but due to the vibrant ARM software ecosystem and the ability ARM licensees have to customize processor designs.
By agreeing to manufacture ARM-based devices, Intel will only accelerate their rate of performance improvement and encroachment into its data center business. Intel invented and was first to market with 3D transistors with its Tri-Gate process (what everyone else calls FinFETs) that allow shrinking devices to 10nm and smaller without exacerbating efficiency-robbing leakage current while providing better performance at a lower voltage. Although foundries play marketing games with their process node names, on many measures Intel continues to have the leading technology.
Intel’s move to become an ARM foundry was both predictable and inevitable. Predictable given Intel’s Altera acquisition that instantly turned the company into an ARM licensee since Alterna has used ARM IP for many years. By moving Altera manufacturing in-house, Intel would automatically gain expertise at building and optimizing ARM products. Inevitable since Intel is one of the largest semiconductor manufacturers with arguably the largest CapEx budget devoted to processors and logic devices. With fabs running well into 10-figures, it behooves Intel to amortize the investment over as much output as possible. Given PC sales in permanent decline, mobile was the only sizeable replacement market.
My take
Intel remains an incredibly profitable company, with $1.3 billion in operating income from over $13 billion in sales last quarter. However its legendary Grove-inspired paranoia can seem like desperation as its announcements careen across the tech landscape from admittedly hot consumer categories like VR and small drones to deep infrastructure like silicon photonics and AI-optimized processors. I agree with Martin Banks that this year’s IDF looks like “the start of a major experiment.” Unfortunately, it also smacks of Intel throwing a bunch of ideas against the wall to see what sticks. Some of these experiments may succeed, but one thing is sure: Intel will remain a manufacturing behemoth.
Keeping Intel’s costly assembly lines full presented it with a difficult choice, but continuing to turn away ARM business was unwise. Yet Intel’s very manufacturing prowess will only undermine the dominance of its proprietary products and hasten the day when it no longer owns the data center.
With cloud builders focused on optimizing the balance of performance, cost and efficiency, and more willing to try alternative processor architectures for different workloads, it’s unrealistic to think Intel can maintain more than 95% of the data center market. Working with ARM won’t help Intel’s margins, but will provide manufacturing revenue to offset the inevitable competitive erosion.
The question for customers is simple: will you continue to specify Intel, go for a mix and match approach or sit on the sidelines and wait?
Image credit - Stock photosRead more on: Cloud platforms - infrastructure and architecture 