
 
Although ServiceNow is typically associated with IT Service Management, in the past year or two it has been making a big play for other areas of the enterprise. And whilst I’m sure this is a strategy that ServiceNow is addressing very aggressively internally, it also has a lot to do with its customers (IT departments) championing the benefits of the service delivery platform to other enterprise functions.
ServiceNow’s platform has allowed IT to push out the product into new areas and across new workflows and from the customers I spoke to at its annual user event a couple of weeks ago, it is being very well received. It might be worth reading my post on the benefits of ServiceNow’s cloud platform over other vendors in the industry.
Unsurprisingly, one of these biggest enterprise ‘targets’ is the HR department. Given the success of Workday and the general appetite for ‘modern’ HCM applications, it’s a no brainer that ServiceNow would want to position itself in this sector.
And in terms of anecdotal evidence, we at diginomica have noticed that ServiceNow has had a significant presence at some of the industry’s leading HR events – it is pushing hard.
Given all this, I thought it would be a good idea to catch up with Jennifer Stroud, ServiceNow’s HR product lead, to find out where she thinks that ServiceNow’s ‘sweet spot’ is and how the company can compete with the likes of Workday (clue: it kind of is, but it kind of isn’t). It’s also worth nothing that Stroud’s background is delivering HR at TeleTech and has years of hands on experience in the field.
So why is ServiceNow the obvious choice for HR? Stroud explained that she thinks that HR is a service that is delivered to employees, but is still being delivered badly. And given that ServiceNow specialises in service management, it’s a good fit. She said:

What we are seeing with leaders across the globe and across industries, and it doesn’t matter the size of the organisation, is that so many are struggling with this disorganised service model, which is heavily email and spreadsheet reliant. So they are working very hard and cleaning out inboxes and creating a great deal of overtime to answer all these emails and to make sure their employees have what they need. But they have no vision in terms of what’s really going on in their organisation. If you ask them what a service level agreement is, they don’t know.
It’s just about getting as much work done as you can. And what that ends up creating too is a dissatisfaction in the employee base. Employees have a certain expectation when they come to a company these days and it’s different than even a few years back. In their personal lives they are used to interacting with Amazons and the like, where it is easy to get things done. It’s seamless, they can see their order history, they can see the status of their order. Employees are really demanding that companies provide them with better support.

And if you get service management in HR right, according to Stroud, then you’re on a fast track to better employee retention rates. She also believes that if you view HR in this way, as a service management operation, then it allows other departments to take responsibility for meeting employee needs too. Stroud added:

A great service management tool can help organisations structure on-boarding across the enterprise. Even though on-boarding is typically seen as a HR initiative, it’s an enterprise initiative, and it’s a tool that can span across the enterprise and orchestrate all of that to ensure that an employee is productive day one. That’s very powerful for an organisation in many ways, not least of all from a cost saving point of view.

However, I also asked Stroud why she thought ServiceNow could take on the likes of Workday, given that we generally hear that customers are pretty happy with the solution and it is very much considered ‘next generation’ both in terms of delivery and its use. But ServiceNow isn’t necessarily looking to replace Workday installations. Instead, Stroud argues, it can be used to complement Workday’s capabilities with a good service management layer.
But – and it’s a big but – Stroud also added that whilst ServiceNow is happy to complement Workday, it is also buildingthe solution so that it works out of the box and fulfils all of the needs of HR in the enterprise (although ServiceNow still has some way to go in this regard). She said:

Let’s take Workday, we work very closely with them, we have an integration built into our product already. Workday is a great tool and it is a great structure and very different of the HCM tools of the past. However, there is no case management, no knowledge base. What you see is what you get. You can’t create a portal around it. If you want to make changes, it’s really difficult to do. But we don’t intend to replace the Workdays, we complement and integrate really well.
My philosophy, what I believe, is giving customers a choice. Even though we complement Workday, there’s also overlap. I wasn’t brought on board to evangelise the product as it is, I was brought on board to continue to build the product, enhance it. My vision is to create a tool out of the box that meets the needs of HR professionals. We are getting there and the quicker we can get there the better. So there will be more and more overlap, but what it then comes down to is giving customers choices – which delivery model overall meets your needs?
We have a great solution, but truly the power comes in terms of the overall platform and what the customers can get from that. Inherent in the platform is the knowledge base, the service level engines, the content management, all of that’s inherent.

Stroud admits, however, that ServiceNow still has a lot of work to do. Some of the examples she cited that the company needs to build out or improve upon include analytics, case management, leave of absence, on-boarding, applicant tracking, performance management, tuition reimbursement, employment verification and taking time off. ServiceNow has some of these capabilities already, but Stroud wants to make them better.
And it seems that part of the plan may not be building all of this itself. Stroud said that the biggest challenge for ServiceNow was getting to this ‘out of the box’ solution at speed. And being able to win new customers outside of ServiceNow’s current customer base. She said:

Speed is our main challenge. How do we ensure and work so that the HR industry sees us as that solution they can go to. So really our strategy right now, where we are gaining traction and adding one new HR customer every business day, is really from our current base of IT customers where we have champions. Which is easy because we have those champions there, we can go in and really tell that story. That’s where we are having the success, which is great.
But we really want to be able to go out and stand alone, that’s really our focus. What’s the quickest way to get there? Do we build it ourselves? Some of our partners have already built this out, do we leverage that?

My take
It would be easy to dismiss ServiceNow as just another vendor trying to get a slice of the HR cloud action (which to an extent, it obviously is). But what makes me believe that there is a strong appetite out there for this type of ‘service management led HR product’, is that over 70 customers of ServiceNow had already been building out their own versions for HR on the ServiceNow platform. They were asking ServiceNow why they hadn’t got their act together and built one for them. If the company can do this quickly, before enterprises begin to tie themselves into new cloud set-ups with other companies, then it has a fighting chance.
Disclosure: Workday is a premier partner at time of writing.

Read more on: HCM and the digital future of workIT service management 