
Engineers are inherently hyper-rational creatures, driven by data, logic and equations more than sentiment, feelings and emotion. It can be tough for an engineer-led company like Intel to contend with competitors skilled in the arts of marketing, perception and spin. That’s seldom been a problem in Intel’s market of integrated circuits where its customers are other engineers evaluating components, not consumers falling in love with a brand.
However, with technology pervading every crevice of society and companies realizing the strategic benefits of real or perceived technological superiority, the quantitative world of specs and measurements has evolved into a qualitative morass of superlatives and cherry-picked ‘facts’.
Add in media narratives filled about the death of Moore’s Law, ARM chips supplanting the x86 and competitors beating it to the next major process technology and it’s enough for many customers and investors to question whether Intel had lost its edge.
Eventually, even the most coldly rational of us reaches a breaking point and Intel showed that it’s had enough at an event last week where it sought to regain mindshare, reassert industry leadership and demonstrate its ample prowess in process technology and manufacturing.
Lies, damn lies and measurements
Take one look at the roster of speakers that included former CFO and current EVP of manufacturing and operations Stacy Smith, Senior Fellow and director of process architecture, Mark Bohr and the leaders of Intel’s next-generation process technology development projects and it’s clear that Intel intended to make a high-profile statement that it won’t take talk of its looming laggardship lying down.
Smith opened up by decrying those that turn process technology into an arm’s race stating,
What Moore’s Law enables is not a race. … It is a cooperative undertaking to set a high standard across the industry, in which different companies have different areas of expertise. Intel’s role has been, and will continue to be, that of the technology leader driving Moore’s Law.
Although he’s referring to the ecosystem of equipment makers and university researchers that help develop much of the manufacturing technology Intel uses, the backdrop of these comments are frequent stories about the foundries for most mobile device SoCs, Samsung and TSMC, beating Intel to release next-generation 10nm process technology. It’s a sore point that Smith directly confronts,
That leadership may not be obvious from the news. Sixteen nanometer, 14, 10, 7 – it looks like a horse race. The problem is that those figures, which are numbers that used to have real, physical meaning, no longer mean anything at all. There needs to be a metric that captures a process’ ability to deliver usable transistors to chip designers.
Smith proceeds to counter the perception that the company has reached the limits of its ability to miniaturize microcircuits by contending that Intel has a technology roadmap for the next three process generations that will push circuit geometries down to the scale of a few dozen atoms at 5nm. Indeed, as Bohr details in his presentation, the pace of miniaturization is accelerating to what Intel dubs hyper scaling.

Bohr also goes into a technical discussion of how competitors cherry-pick measurements to make their technology sound better than is with process node names that don’t achieve the historical doubling of circuit density.
But recently – perhaps because of the increasing difficulty of further scaling – some companies have abandoned this rule, yet continued to advance node names, even in cases where there was minimal or no density increase. The result is that node names have become a poor indicator of where a process stands on the Moore’s Law curve.
Bohr then proposes a standard density measure that accounts for the mixture of logic and memory circuits found on today’s devices. The problem is that gaming benchmarks and specs has been happening since the dawn of the computer industry and is something Intel itself does when touting the benefits of a next-generation x86 processor by selectively citing performance tests.
Although the equivalent of a SpecMark for circuit dimensions is certainly needed, Intel is savvy enough to know that it won’t be the exclusive metric for semiconductor process leadership as long as less sophisticated buyers and analysts pay attention to convenient individual measures like transistor gate width selected to make a particular product look superior.

Mindshare for the foundry business
Arguments about microscopic node geometries and circuit density were once the sole domain of IEEE technical publications and conferences. They were primarily of interest as a means to judge the internal efficiency of a chip manufacturer. However, the labels have become much more important now that Intel is in the business of selling its manufacturing services.
The brains of almost all mobile devices are designed and built by different companies. For example, while Apple has assembled a formidable design team for its A-Series mobile processors, they have all been built by either TSMC or Samsung. Now that Intel has admitted defeat in the mobile market, it needs new ways of amortizing the astronomical $10 billion cost of a new fab.
What better way than tapping into what Smith says is a $23 billion market for leading-edge foundry manufacturing that’s growing 14% annually. With the long-term decline in PC sales unlikely to reverse even as smartphone sales are expected to surpass 1.5 billion units this year, it’s clear that Intel needs a piece of the mobile SoC market and becoming a foundry is now the only option.

When it comes to the foundry business (if not the technology), Intel is playing catch up, with TSMC estimated to have about 70% of the market for latest generation components thanks in large part to the tens of millions of high-end iPhones it supplies every quarter.
That’s why Intel’s manufacturing event was more than just whining about deceptive marketing labels and included a significant announcement of a new foundry technology and services.
The foundation of Intel’s foundry technology is a new iteration on the three-dimensional tri-gate transistor structure it first brought to market in 2011.
Intel has since adopted the de facto industry standard term, FinFET, for its transistor design and introduced its 22FFL 22nm foundry process optimized for low-power and mobile products. Although both Samsung and TSMC introduced similar technologies last year, Bohr claims that Intel’s design provides performance comparable to 14nm processes, higher density than competitive 22nm products and dramatically better efficiency for battery-powered devices.
Intel also highlighted is full-service foundry offerings that include design services, software, pre-built standard cells (modules) and an ecosystem of design and CAD software partners. Smith sums up Intel’s pitch to foundry shoppers by reiterating the mantra that Intel has a three-year lead in technology, massive scale that provides competitive advantage and a commitment to the foundry business.

My take
Non-specialists, even those in the technology business and IT, can quickly get lost in the details of semiconductor design rules, device characteristics and circuit performance, however Intel’s event is broadly important for several reasons.

First, the company exposes some misleading marketing practices around process node naming that imply some companies have managed to leapfrog technological roadblocks that have slowed the traditional pace of Moore’s Law.
More importantly, it shows that Intel is taking the foundry business very seriously and is out to win new hardware designs across business categories, from smartphones to cloud infrastructure.
Intel is among a select group, including Samsung, TSMC and GlobalFoundries (the reconstituted manufacturing arms of the old AMD and IBM Microelectronics) that can deliver leading-edge foundry technology. Of these, Intel and Samsung are the only two with sizeable businesses in chip design and products.

For outsiders, this can seem like an argument about who can build the best picks and shovels when you’re in the business of mining gold. In today’s world, companies with the Midas touch need the ability to incorporate proprietary IP into custom hardware. Should Intel be able to repurpose technology optimized for its proprietary x86 CPUs into a widely applicable foundry platform (a big if), customers will find that its technological supremacy translates to competitive advantage in faster, more efficient products with shorter development cycles.
Image credit - via Intel presentation and fotoliaRead more on: Cloud platforms - infrastructure and architecture 