
Brian Krzanich, Intel CEO
Intel had the misfortune of announcing its Q4 2015 earnings in the midst of a global financial market meltdown. However it wasn’t the current numbers so much as the 2016 outlook and executive commentary that prompted a stampede to sell Intel stock. While the rest of Wall Street was having a very bad Friday, losing over 2% on the day, Intel shares got crushed: down nearly 10%. Of course, the stock market is an imperfect measure of enterprise value, one that’s susceptible to emotion and herd-following, so Intel’s divergence the day after executives threw cold water on a solid quarter with their typically cautious outlook, is an overreaction. Nevertheless, over the past year, while the broader U.S. stock market has dropped 7%, Intel shares are down over 17%. Clearly, the secular decline in PC sales and Intel’s resulting transition to a more diversified product portfolio focused on big data centers has caused investors to wonder if the company’s best days are behind it.
The proximate cause of the rout in Intel stock wasn’t its Q4 results. The company reported revenue of $14.9B, up just over 1% from the 2014 quarter and ahead of analyst expectations. Ditto for earnings of 74 cents, the same as a year ago, but soundly beating Street consensus of 63 cents per share. But look beneath the covers and there was obvious weakness along with some accounting gimmickry. Although gross margins were up from a year ago, they dropped 1.1% sequentially while annual operating profit margins were down in every business: most importantly -4.3% in the Client Computing Group (CCG, i.e. PCs) and -2.3% in the Data Center Group (DCG) which together account for almost 90% of Intel’s revenue. Furthermore, sales in DCG, Intel’s growth engine in the era of PC diminution, rose a mere 5.3%, far below executive’s promise of “mid-teens growth” and even analysts’ lowball 6% Q4 target. Although sales to enterprise data centers have been lethargic all year, Intel CEO Brian Krzanich said that big cloud providers like Amazon, Facebook, Google and Microsoft, an important market that grew an impressive 40% for the year overall, softened in Q4. While Krzanich contends this was a temporary pause due to a freeze on new infrastructure builds to avoid disruption over the holidays, it would be devastating if it persisted.
For 2016, CFO Stacy Smith said on the analyst call that the company expects:
Revenue growth in the mid-to-high single digits relative to 2015. This outlook is higher than our previous guidance provided in November investor meeting.
Much of the increase accrues from the Altera FPGA business, an acquisition that Intel closed at the end of December. Although small, at about $400M in revenue, Altera is strategically important as it allows Intel to create customizable hybrid products combining traditional CPUs and field programmable, application-specific logic in the same package. Yet, even single-digit growth is a big improvement from 2015 when Intel’s revenue fell 1%, mostly due to a 7.6% decline in chips for PCs. Still, the stock reaction indicates investors doubt Intel’s guidance in light of continued shrinkage in the Client group (down 1.2% for Q4), weakness in the data center, small and uncertain prospects for its nascent IoT Group, a failed mobile strategy and no credible presence in the emerging, but important automotive tech segment. Overlay this with a macro obsession with China’s economy, where the Shanghai stock index has cratered almost 20% just this year, and Krzanich only added fuel to the pessimist’s narrative when he said,
Our team on the ground in China has gotten fairly cautious about what is going on in China right now. As you know, that is the largest PC market, so we are just little cautious on the growth rates there.
Tangible signs that Moore’s Law is slowing down
Other causes for skepticism are a couple of non-operational contributors to Intel’s future earnings growth. First, the company announced that it is extending the depreciable life of its sizable investment in capital equipment by 25% from four to five years. According to Smith:
This change in depreciable life drives approximately $1.5 billion and lower depreciation expense for the year.
However the change is particularly disturbing since it’s a reminder that the rate of Moore’s Law technology improvement is slowing. Indeed, Intel announced earlier in 2015 a lengthening of the ‘tick-tock’ cycle time between process node shrinks from 2 to 2.5 years. A rapid pace of technological improvement, sustained over decades, together with Intel’s leadership in process technology innovation and semiconductor manufacturing efficiency have been the engine of its success. Any sign that the technology treadmill is slowing is worrisome. Still, CFO Smith cautioned analysts from interpreting this slowdown as a sign of corporate lethargy.
Please do not take the accounting of the depreciable life to be somehow signal that we are letting our foot off the gas on process technology cadence and process technology leadership. That is the heartbeat of the company and we are driving it hard. The accounting just as looking at how long that equipment is economically viable in our factories and it is pretty clearly five years as we go forward.
The other and much less significant accounting contributor to Intel’s ‘growth’ in 2016 is a lower tax rate of 16%, down 9 points due to the reenactment of U.S. R&D tax credits, other one-time items and its decision to invest and not repatriate prior years’ non-U.S. earnings.
Not all is gloomy
Although Intel’s report and executive’s comments were full of cautionary signals, the stock reaction is largely a function of the current temperament on Wall Street where mixed news is viewed with a ‘glass half empty’ pessimism. There is still plenty to like at the world’s largest chip manufacturer:

PC-centric CCG isn’t in free fall. Although sales dropped almost 8% for the year, year-over-year declines slowed in the second half and sales were even up sequentially the last three quarters. PCs aren’t dead despite analyst estimates of big sales declines last quarter, some of which omit increasingly popular convertible tablet-PC hybrid touchscreen devices like Microsoft Surface.
Over half the products sold in CCG use Intel’s latest generation 14nm process node. This not only provides a competitive performance edge, but lowers costs. Furthermore, the group’s sales mix is shifting to higher-end and more profitable Core i7 and K products, undoubtedly fueled by PC gamers upgrading to the fastest possible systems.
More than 60% of Intel’s operating margin now comes from businesses other than PCs showing that the company is successfully diversifying.
Cloud and communications service provider sales grew 20% for the year making DCG less dependent on the vagaries of enterprise IT budgets.
Altera may not have come cheap, but integrating programmable elements with Xeon server chips will provide strategic differentiation as the data center market becomes more stratified, with designs tailored to specific workloads, and competitive as products from ARM and IBM OpenPOWER partners begin to squeeze Intel on the low and high end respectively. Krzanich said Intel will sample hybrid FPGA-Xeon parts in a multi-chip package this year with production slated for 2017. On-die integration of programmable and traditional cores will occur in 2017 or later.
Intel has a compelling roadmap of server CPU upgrades slated for later this year including moving to the next-generation Broadwell microarchitecture and 14nm process node. Since server chips lag the PC microarchitecture by a generation, Xeons probably won’t see the new Skylake architecture until 2017.

My Take
Nature abhors a vacuum and markets abhor monopolies so it was unrealistic to expect Intel to maintain 90%+ market share for both client and server processors. Its client dominance ended when Intel initially ignored mobile and eventually responded with too little, too late. Its server business will increasingly by threatened as ARM, POWER and GPUs (primarily NVIDIA) peel off certain workloads. Intel’s lead in process technology means it will continue to have the best general purpose server chips around, however as cloud providers like AWS and Azure usurp more enterprise workloads, their need to optimize cost, performance and efficiency will create openings for alternative compute platforms. Furthermore, the technical prowess of companies like Google, Facebook, Microsoft and others means they can create their own system designs; designs that will increasingly use alternative processors. This means Intel simultaneously faces a new set of competitors and sophisticated buyers with plenty of bargaining leverage. Still, we don’t underestimate Intel’s ability to respond with compelling products and aggressive pricing.
Enterprise buyers facing server refreshes this year should pause before automatically upgrading to the latest Intel system. Server-class ARM chips from AMD (Seattle), AppliedMicro (X-Gene) and Cavium (ThunderX) are likely to provide better price-performance for low-end or I/O-intensive Linux-based workloads like Web and storage servers and also highly distributed, scale out applications like Hadoop. OpenPOWER, which is building a large ecosystem and customer base in China, may also be a better option than high-end i7 Xeons for large memory applications like transaction processing, data warehouses and business intelligence.
Featured image via Modern interior of server room in datacenter, © Fotolia
Read more on: Cloud platforms - infrastructure and architecture 