
Brad Smith – CEO Intuit
The more I look at Intuit’s performance reports, the more I appreciate just how disciplined and close to the user market they are becoming in what is proving a successful transition to any device and services. Q3 FY2015 showed that up well as the company beat out estimates and is raising revenue expectations for Q4. However, a slightly soft view on EPS dampens enthusiasm.
By the numbers:

Reported third-quarter revenue of $2.2 billion, above the companys previously set guidance.
Grew U.S. TurboTax Online units 13 percent in the tax season and total U.S. TurboTax units 9 percent, excluding Free File Alliance.
Grew total QuickBooks Online subscribers by 55 percent.
Added more than 120,000 QuickBooks Online subscribers in the third quarter, ending with 965,000 paying subscribers worldwide.
Increased revenue guidance for fiscal 2015.


 
Looking forward to the 4th quarter:

Revenue of $720 million to $745 million.
GAAP operating loss of $120 million to $140 million.
Non-GAAP operating loss of $25 million to $45 million.
GAAP loss per share of $0.34 to $0.36.
Non-GAAP loss per share of $0.10 to $0.12.

The company expects to end the year with north of one million online subscribers. More to the point, Intuit claims to have grown its international user base to 150,000 while its moves to put TurboTax onto any device are paying off. However, take up of the self employed online offering was insipid at 15,000.
During the analyst call, CEO Brad Smith said:
The reality is that we delivered revenue above our guidance range even as we achieved our goal of growing our customer base faster than revenue. This was driven by stronger product mix, improved attach rates and a new bundle.
Our efforts to reinvent the tax prep category are clearly paying off. TurboTax’s mobile innovation enabled customers to start and finish their return on any device for the first time. Total mobile app downloads were up almost 70% year-over-year and the ability to finish on any device more than doubled conversion for those that started out on a mobile device.
Later in the year, Intuit plans to release its annual CD version but with substantially no new features. Although it was not made clear my guess is this will force march customers to the cloud and mobile versions. Is all this as good as it sounds?
The short answer is ‘kinda.’ Having played with the mobile and cloud versions of QBO for the US market, I’ve been surprised how easy it is to get a useful handle on taxes with smooth bank transaction import, allocation and notification methods.
However, there are some gotchas, such as putting a pound sign in front of dollar amounts on the mobile version. Disconcerting that and with no obvious way to change the symbol. I’m guessing QBO acquires the mobile’s ‘home’ from the embedded operating system.
The biggest weakness is that QBO SE assumes a bank receipts only basis for accounting and while it gives a nice summary of bank transactions, there’s no obvious way to include cash expenses, billings and the like. For that functionality, users will want something like Xero. But let’s not underestimate the work Intuit has done, nor the comfort that comes from simplicity.
In the meantime, I look forward to hearing how the company progresses at the next call.
Read more on: Financials 