
Just days after the Treasury Committee issued a severe warning to HMRC regarding its Making Tax Digital plans, stating that the project could end up being a “disaster”, the National Audit Office has released the dire findings of its investigation into the department’s outsourcing deal with Concentrix between 2014 and 2016.
Concentrix was signed to help reduce the rate of error and fraud in the personal tax credits system, to a rate of blow 5%. HMRC had promise to bring the rate down itself, but had failed to reach this target by 2012, and so looked at third party providers to “create more processing capacity and innovation in the use of data”.
According to the investigation Concentrix consistently failed to meet its performance targets, customer service levels were shockingly low and the estimated savings from handing the deal over were well below the forecast targets.
The contract has now been terminated and HMRC is managing the assessment of personal tax credits for fraud in-house.
Given how recently this contract was implemented, it’s likely to raise concerns about HMRC’s ability to effectively undergo change management programmes – particularly as it looks to wind down its longstanding Aspire outsourcing deal and go ahead with its £1.3 billion Making Tax Digital project.
HMRC is also struggling to balance the in-sourcing of technical skills, whilst also cutting staff in other areas, I am told.
The findings
The deal between HMRC and Concentrix was signed in May 2014 and was intended to provide HMRC with the capacity to review and correct personal tax credits as part of the department’s compliance process. Under the deal, Concentrix was responsible for assessing the risk of error and fraud in a proportion of cases.
However, by August 2016 MPs and the public raised concerns that Concentrix had incorrectly suspended or terminated a number of claimants’ tax credits awards. For instance, the company mistakenly believed claimants were living with individuals unconnected to them.
There were also a number of complaints regarding claimants’ ability to contact Concentrix to discuss the award, and HMRC realised that the contract was not working as it intended.
It was initially estimated that the deal with Concentrix would save the government £1 billion over the life of the contract, largely attributed to the fact that an additional 1.5 million personal tax credit awards could be investigated each year.
However, in March 2016 HMRC reduced its forecast of expected savings to £405 million for two main reasons, according to HMRC. Firstly, there was a two month delay to the start of the contract because of problems developing the IT to transmit and manage cases; and secondly because Concentrix was working fewer cases than originally expected.
Concentrix consistently failed to achieve more than half of its performance targets for a sustained period during the contract. The report states:
Its performance was worst during the peak renewals period in mid-2015. For example, in July 2015, it answered an average of 4.8% of calls within five minutes against the target of 90%.
HMRC paid Concentrix only for the percentage of cases meeting quality standards
throughout the contract. In October 2015, HMRC introduced a further penalty that
reduced the commission paid to Concentrix when it failed to meet customer service
targets for handling calls and post.
By September 2016, there was a backlog of 181,000 open cases. In the month prior, Concentrix had estimated weekly call volumes to be at around 8,000, but in some weeks during August was receiving well over 48,000.
And to make matters worse, during August 2016 Concentrix was also affected by IT failures, following a routine technical update. This prevented staff from accessing or updating claimant details for a total period of 26 hours. There were then another two additional IT failures, creating more pressure on the call centres.
In November 2016, HMRC and Concentrix agreed to terminate the contract with immediate effect.
The results
It’s fair to say that the outsourcing arrangement was nowhere near as successful as had been intended. And whilst the report notes that savings had been realised, these were hundreds of millions of pounds lower than expected and HMRC has now brought staff back in-house to manage the work.
The National Audit Office said:
The contract with Concentrix delivered estimated savings of £193 million against a payment of £32.5 million. Estimated savings are assessed as £223 million net of opportunity costs of £30 million relating to the diversion of HMRC staff to complete Concentrix cases.
The payments to Concentrix included £23.1 million in commission and £6.9 million that related to mandatory reconsiderations where decisions were overturned and HMRC agreed as part of termination not to adjust payments to Concentrix, along with amounts for partly worked cases and sub-contractor costs following termination, and additional IT-related costs.
HMRC did not meet any severance costs for staff leaving Concentrix following the agreement to terminate the contract. Concentrix told us that it made a loss of £20.5 million on the contract.
HMRC will not replace Concentrix with another third-party provider. It transferred 243 staff from Concentrix under TUPE regulations who will now work on tax credits error and fraud interventions. HMRC told us it had concluded that the risks of a third-party arrangement to customer service outweighed the benefits, notwithstanding the ‘net positive’ savings against costs it reports.
My take
This report raises a number of concerns that HMRC should take seriously. Given the extensive changes that are occurring at the department under the Making Tax Digital plans, it should serve as a reminder of the difficulties in effective change management. The recent Treasury Committee report into HMRC’s over ambition and inability to stick to timelines rings true when you consider how recently this deal took place.
Image credit - Image sourced via HMRC's Flickr Read more on: CentralDigital government and public services

