
IoT value – @cebess
One area where there was a great deal of discussion at the SAP SapphireNow conference was the Internet of Things. The information presented was from a different perspective than most organizations dealing with IoT issues. It was not looked at from the device’s perspective just the enterprise. I didn’t really hear anything about device management or security concerns that permeate most IoT materials.
When I think about the Internet of Things, I do so from the model visualized above. SAP’s focus at the conference was on the aggregation of the data into information on which decisions can be made, so mainly on the four center circles — the code and higher value generation issues rather than the ‘things’ and the actual edge of the enterprise.
They describe their offerings as providing:
“a comprehensive solution portfolio that enables intelligence at the edge and automating processes at the core”
The described goal is to process data from any kind of machine, sensor… and merge it with the transactional business data (that SAP has been known for in the past), as well as with the yet-to-be-structured (I hate to use the term unstructured since the only way we can consume the data is if we structure it) social media data available.
SAP’s IoT efforts were focused on:

Text analysis: Extracting and processing yet-to-be-structured data from sources like social media.
Geospatial processing: Storing, processing, manipulating, sharing, and retrieving location-based information. After all these devices are in the world somewhere, for a reason.
Operational intelligence: Enabling end-to-end process visibility to facilitate deeper insight and understanding of what’s actually happening.
Series data processing: Understanding trends and eventually forecasting likely outcomes (and hopefully taking action on the context developed).
Graph engine modeling: Improving visualization. Since more than 50 percent of our cortex is focused on processing vision related information that seems like a good place to make improvements.
Multitenant architecture: Improving efficiency while at the same time providing isolation and services.

SAP is fixated on integrating the information through HANA Cloud Platform and its support for IoT announced at the event, analyzing it and even automating the response, although this automation capability is definitely in its infancy.
I talked to a number of individuals across various SAP groups and although the concept of systems-of-action was understood, I rarely received answers based on the same tool or approach. SAP’s approach to automating business processes and knowledge work needs to be sewn together into a real strategy that everyone can put their shoulder behind – this human augmented automation approach is inevitable.
New service modeling, simulation and validation techniques are going to be needed which I didn’t really see any evidence of at this event. One of the issues with any kind of highly automated knowledge work is that it will help you do stupid things just as quickly as the ‘right’ things, so the brakes are at least as important as the accelerator. Maybe I just missed it.
What I didn’t miss was that Siemens has chosen SAP HANA Cloud Platform to build the Siemens open cloud platform for industry. Siemens stated intent is to simplify industrial customers’ ability to create additional value through products and services as well as boost their own production capabilities. Industry deployments like this should strengthen SAP’s IoT capabilities and accelerate advances.
Although right now SAP’s focus is primarily on pulling the information into their analytics engine and mining it for contextual understanding. I am anxious to see what tools can be brought to bear to take the latency out of the enterprise response to events and focus human attention on those areas that need creativity – after all, when I say I am only human, I’m saying: I’m creative. I like to do things differently. Not all the business needs that creativity.
Disclosure: SAP is a premier partner ant time of writing and covered most of the author’s costs for attending SAPPHIRE Now.
Image via the author

Read more on: Internet of Things 