
Evelyn Delehanty
When the Irish Tax Institute (ITI), a professional membership and educational body serving the country’s tax advisors, began the hunt for a new database to underpin its online research database, TaxFind, all signs pointed in the direction of a NoSQL approach.
TaxFind provides the ITI’s members with access, on a subscription basis, to around 300,000 pages of tax content – including over 8,000 pages of Irish tax legislation, technical papers from the organization’s seminars and conferences, and thousands of articles from over 25 specialist tax publications. This information is stored in Microsoft Word, PDF, XML and HTML formats.
With its existing relational database creaking at the seams, the ITI was looking for a way to ease the headache of uploading new content to Taxfind, to speed up user searches and to increase their relevance, explains Martin Lambe, the ITI’s chief executive, adding:
An additional drawback with our existing approach was that content wasn’t rendering properly on smartphones and tablets. That got us to the point where we realised we needed to try something new.
Like many other organisations that need to publish large amounts of content online, the ITI decided that a NoSQL database, with its document-centric, schema-less approach, could provide the answer, giving it the ability to manage documents based on their actual content (by indexing the words and values they contain), rather than simply managing at the document level. This led it, after some investigation, to MarkLogic, a NoSQL database company that already counts as customers large publishing outfits such as the Press Association, Wiley, Conde Nast and Springer.
In February 2015, the ITI appointed 67 Bricks, a MarkLogic partner, to oversee the implementation. A big concern, says Lambe, was the migration of content between the old and the new databases, but 67 Bricks was able to handle this without any issues or cost overruns. The project took around seven months to complete and the difference it has made to the way that the ITI delivers content to members is significant, according to Evelyn Delehanty, the organisation’s information services manager.
For a start, it means that the ITI no longer has to rely on a third-party services provider to load content into the system, as it did with the relational database. Says Delehanty:
We don’t have huge IT resources or admin functions here to be able to spend a lot of time uploading or updating content on the platform. It pretty much all comes down to a team of one – me – but this has significantly reduced the admin work I need to do to around one or two hours per week.
This is despite the fact, adds Lambe, that the ITI is now publishing more content to Taxfind than ever before:
Every year, with the announcement of the Irish Budget, new tax legislation comes into force. In the old platform, we only ever had the most current version available. With MarkLogic, we’re able to include older editions too and now have them all, going back to 2009. This means that tax professionals can compare changes in this year’s legislation to the situation six or seven years ago.
The future
A major time-saver has been MarkLogic’s ability to automatically ingest information from third-party websites, such as those run by Ireland’s Office of the Revenue Commissioners (usually referred to simply as ‘Revenue’), the country’s primary tax authority. This means that, when new tax guidance is published, it is snapped up by the MarkLogic database and immediately made available to users of TaxFind.
Looking ahead, Lambe and Delehanty have plans to continue to develop Taxfind further, using MarkLogic’s capabilities.
A key element of the project, for example, was the development from scratch of a specialist tax taxonomy – a dictionary, in effect, of tax terminology – that was used to classify content and thus enhance MarkLogic’s built-in search capabilities. Says Lambe:
We already had indices created for all of our publications, so we pretty much took that list and used it as the basis for the taxonomy. These indices turned out to be a very good starting point – they’re pretty granular, so we were able to work backwards from there to create the taxonomy for classifying content and linking it to other, relevant pieces of content.
In 2016, Lambe and Delehanty aim to continue work on this taxonomy to improve search further, and are also investigating the possibility of providing users with a ‘track changes’ view of content that would highlight where specific sections of tax legislation have changed over the years.
Finally, there’s the prospect of using MarkLogic to serve up audio-visual content on Taxfind, mostly presentations from the ITI’s seminars and conferences. For now, that’s just on the organisation’s wishlist with no definite implementation plans in place, says Lambe, but the technical capability to do this is already in place:
Cost is always a concern for any chief executive – but my primary concern with this project was providing a platform that was fit for purpose for our members. No matter how much money was spent, what we were proposing to deliver had to be a big improvement on what we previously had. I’m pleased to say that objective was achieved.
Read more on: Analytics planning and data analysisContent marketingCRM and customer experienceNoSQLUse cases 