
Infosys attracted the headlines last week when it announced plans to hire around 10,000 Americans to service its US client base. But is this a genuine desire to expand the US footprint on the part of the Indian outsourcing giant or a pragmatic response to immigration sabre-rattling by President Donald Trump?
For his part, Infosys CEO Vishal Sikka presented the move as a forward-moving step for the firm:
Since joining Infosys nearly three years ago, it has been my personal endeavour to help us get much closer to our clients, to co-innovate with them, on their most important business problems. Having lived in the US for nearly 30 years, and being a part of the incredible innovation here, I truly believe Infosys can help clients bring innovation more directly into their businesses, as they create and drive their digital transformations. We can achieve this by enhancing our ability to attract and recruit local top talent across the United States, by harnessing the global scale of Infosys, through software and platforms, and by educating and training people in the necessary skills.
It was of course an announcement that was welcomed at the White House where President Donald Trump has been threatening to act against companies that he regards as hurting US workers, citing the H-1B visa scheme as a particular bone of contention. Trump said last month:
We believe jobs must be offered to American workers first. Right now widespread abuse in our immigration system is allowing American workers of all backgrounds to be replaced by workers brought in from other countries to fill the same job for sometimes less pay. This will stop.
So it was hardly surprising that his team were declaring the Infosys announcement as validation that pressure from the top is working, with a spokesman declaring:
We’re glad to see companies like Infosys see opportunities in the American economy again.
Interestingly, the first beneficiary of the Infosys decision will be Indiana, home state of Vice President and former Governor Mike Pence, which will be the location for an innovation centre that should employ 2000 staff by 2021.
Pence’s successor as Governor Eric Holcomb (Pence’s successor) joked during the announcement that it was an inevitable move – “You can’t even spell Indiana without starting with India” – but in reality it’s one that’s costing the state a rumored $31 million in conditional tax credits and training grants, the largest inventive package in the state’s history. Patriotism doesn’t come cheap.
Peer pressure
The question now will be how soon it is before other overseas providers to the US market feel the need to follow in Infosys’ footsteps. According to N. V. Tyagarajan, CEO of rival Indian outsourcer Genpact, there are now more conversations around the subject of onshore delivery capabilities than before:
I would say clients come in with all kinds of requirements. For quite some time now, we have seen – and this has got nothing to do with the current environment – we’ve seen our processes and our relationship with clients include a lot more onshore component than it used to have.
It’s a driver of why we are with an operating delivery footprint of more than 10 centers and more than 4,000 people, that’s happened over the last five years. Is there some more reasons to have some clients have their conversation? The answer is yes. Do we have all the firepower to be able to bring different permutations and combinations of global delivery, onshore delivery, onshore delivery from different parts of the US, and digital transformation prior to onshore delivery, digital transformation prior to global delivery or vice versa? The answer is we can do all of the above and different permutations and combinations depending on the client.
He concludes with a prediction that he expects to see the onshore footprint grow “a tad higher”, but asys this is a continuation of a trend that has been underway for the past give years anyway.
Over at Cognizant, the messaging is similar with CEO Francisco D’Souza stating that his firm hired 4,000 US citizens last year and exepcted to “significantly ramp up our US-based workforce” in 2017. While insisting that this is “largely” in response to client requests for co-location, it’s clear that the threats to the future of the H-1B scheme aren’t far from mind:
While we still seek visas for highly specialized and skilled talent, we’re reducing our dependence on these visas. In fact, during the most recent filing period on April 1, we applied for less than half the number of visas we sought last year and we expect to further reduce our need for these visas going forward.
As a US company, we’re committed to hiring and re-skilling employees, not just in the US but really in all the markets around the world where we operate. Specific to the US, we’re hiring more here. We’ve got what we think are very innovative training programs with colleges to help train the next generation of technology workers. We’re expanding the number of our US-based centers.
Domestic reaction
All of that has to be music to Trump’s ears and a start contrast to the stance taken by some domestic technology providers. Apple has been a particular thorn in the President’s side, with Trump declaring during the election campaign last year:
We’re going to get Apple to build their damn computers and things in this country instead of in other countries.
To date, he hasn’t succeeded in that objective. Apple CEO Tim Cook did appear to blink last week when he announced that Apple would launch a $1 billion fund to promote advanced manufacturing jobs in the US. But that’s sleight of hand in many respects. There’s no actual commitment to those jobs being at Apple – this is an investment fund and the money will most likely be channelled into third parties.
Over at Oracle, CEO Mark Hurd last week took a firm stand in a ReCode podcast during a media briefing day when he stated:
We have been very supportive to immigrants. They are studying in some of the best schools in the country. We let them come and learn here. Why won’t we let them work here?
We have many talented engineers at US universities. They have come from some place other than the US. We would like to hire them. We are doing a lot of R&D here at the campus. We want growth and need talented people to spur innovation.
That’s interesting for two reasons – firstly, the role of his co-CEO Safra Catz as one of Trump’s technology and business advisors and secondly because India is where you’ll find Oracle’s second largest workforce of developers and engineers and its largest research and development investment outside the US.   So, all told, Oracle has a big interest in squaring circles on this issue.
It’s notable perhaps that Hurd followed up on his comments with a Trump-friendly emphasis on the firm’s ambition to ‘repatriate’ much of its overseas investment to the US:
We have our money overseas to the tune of $50 billion. We need that back and invest here to drive growth.
He’ll get no argument from the Oval Office there.
My take
With the declared America First philosophy espoused by the Trump administration, we’re going to see a lot more moves like that made by Infosys in the months and years to come.
And while attention has been focused on the H-1B visa recipient firms and the Indian outsourcing giants in particular, it’s something that domestic US tech vendors are going to find themelves under increasing pressure to address in public.
Some are taking remarkably robust stands already. Eric Schmidt, Executive Chairman of Google parent company Alphabet, minced no words when speaking at MIT’s Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Lab last week, declaring:
The single stupidest policy in the entire American political system was the limit on H-1B visas…Stupid government policies that restrict us from [having] a fair chance of getting [the best] people are antithetical to our mission [and] the things we serve.
On the other hand, in a podcast for American Public Media, Microsoft CEO Satya Nadella signalled his support for Trump’s H-1B review which he described as:
… a good thing because I think every country should look at their immigration policy and in this case, it’s about American competitiveness. Ultimately, it’s about high-skill labor and a review that says there is the right use of [H-1B] and misuses of it and we promote more the right uses of it, all the better for American competitiveness. At least at Microsoft, when we think about H-1B, it’s mostly about high-skilled labor that allows us, an American company, to be globally competitive.
That’s a stance that won’t do Nadella’s chances of picking up a seat on Trump’s new American Technology Council any harm and may allow his voice to influence future strategy on talent immigration to the US tech industry.
One thing is certain – this is a subject to which we will have to return many times over the coming months.
 
Image credit - YouTubeDisclosure - At time of writing, Oracle is a premier partner of diginomica. Read more on: DiversityOutsourcingTalent management 