

You will find more statistics at Statista
A casual observer might be forgiven for thinking that Facebook’s relative ubiquity equates to an advertising done deal, with Google being the net loser. Research from Statista suggests a different picture (see embed above.) In one sense, the results should not surprise. State control in China, for example, would preclude social networks from achieving enough traction to be especially attractive to advertisers. Then there are cultural differences to consider.
Last year, Zanna Pupele provided an interesting analysis of the Russian social networking scene in which she said:
Note the fact that the Russian language internet space has its own well-established name – this highlights that it’s not just a language issue, but that the whole mentality is different.
According to the same report, Facebook was in fourth place in Russia with 20 million users compared to VK.com with 50 million users.
The Statista report does not attempt to suggest reasons why there should be such a disparity between the social networks and search. It is not unreasonable to theorize that social networks are destinations to ‘be’ while search is an action that you ‘do.’ Similarly, when thinking about the importance of discovery, I can’t remember anyone ever telling me they ‘Facebooked’ something but ‘Googling’ something is part of the common vernacular.
One point I will question: Statista’s assertion that the search engines have nothing to fear over the long haul. On the one hand, we have Ben Thompson noting about LinkedIn earnings:
A (relatively) small site like LinkedIn isn’t really competitive with programmatic advertising in particular when it comes to display; moreover, LinkedIn has (rightly) appreciated the fact that since most of their revenue does not come from advertising, pursuing advertising dollars no matter what — i.e. embracing programmatic advertising — isn’t a great idea given the effect it would have on the user experience. And so their display advertising revenue is shrinking.
Thompson’s ongoing thesis is that it is the biggest network that wins and therefore since that is Facebook as it relates to the world he views, then you can guess the rest. I think the issue is different as it relates to any comparison between search and social networks.
I’ve already pointed out the ‘do’ and ‘be’ difference but more broadly, search and social networks serve different purposes. For example, I may well search for a good or service. But then I am far more likely to use a recommendation engine like Yelp or Trip Advisor to discover whether my preferred choice makes sense rather than go to Facebook. Advertisers that play on Facebook are assuming that uses will become engaged with their content. I have doubts.
In referring to the ‘battle’ between search and social media advertising, Juliana Casale says :
While paid social media and search advertising methods are taking up a lot of attention in tech journalism, email marketing is still one of the highest performing channels for customer engagement, and content marketing drives a considerable amount of short- and long-term traffic to websites and product pages. Some channels are a great fit for user acquisition and not so much for retention; others are perfect for targeting millennials and ineffective when it comes to the 55+ set.
In the end it is the numbers that speak most loudly. Taking the most successful of the social networks, last quarter, Facebook reported year over year revenue growth of 38.9% to $4.042 billion, an uplift of $1.132 billion. That’s both impressive and substantial for a company of its size. Google grew a more modest 11% to $17.7 billion. That was $1.772 billion in absolute terms. Still impressive and still more than Facebook is likely to achieve for the whole year, even with optimistic forecasts pegging growth at 34%.
In the final analysis, the to-ing and fro-ing of arguments around this topic must be confusing to any marketer trying to understand where they will get the best bang for the buck. If anything, I’d argue that the argument is built on a straw man that fails to recognize the different purposes each serves.
Read more on: Digital and content marketing 