

Andy Headworth
There’s an assumption that everyone is au fait with social media, but they aren’t as much as you’d think. There are large gaps in knowledge, particularly in the SME space.
So says Andy Headworth, founder of Sirona Consulting, which advises organizations on recruitment and social media. Headworth is author of Social Media Recruitment: how to successfully integrate social media into recruitment strategy, a guide including international case studies and examples and explaining how to apply social media to the talent question.
In Headworth’s opinion, while the idea of social media in recruitment has gained widespread acceptance among chief executives and HR professionals, there’s still relatively little action, particularly in smaller firms. It’s something they know they should do and indeed want to do, but they have too many other pressing issues demanding attention.
But the time for procrastination is over. Pressure to find talent in the last 18 months to two years has intensified and the usual recruitment channels are failing to haul in the catches they once enjoyed. As Headworth observes:
The perception is that job boards and recruitment agencies and advertising and marketing aren’t working.
And social media is considered by many as the key to filling those nets once more. Trouble is, warns Headworth, recruiters are failing to do their homework into social media upfront and are “jumping in with two left feet”, when it would be better to stick a toe or two in the water first.
Social media is not simply a new channel to market or another place to post jobs and receive application, warns Headworth. There are three main ways to use social media in recruitment, he believes.
First, social media is ideal for sourcing people – you can find pretty much anyone you want because most professionals have a digital footprint. Second, it opens up the ability to communicate more easily with people and third, it’s a way to properly engage with potential candidates.
The first step for any organization must be to work out exactly what kind of people they want to recruit and then work out where they hang out online.
That may sound obvious, but in Headworth’s experience, it’s something that many organizations fail to do. If you don’t know in detail who you are looking to recruit, then the danger is that you will be looking in all the obvious hunting grounds and fighting over the same few candidates with everyone else. Headworth notes:
You need to understand what you’re doing in the first place and the objectives. Sounds mad, but people do it [social media] because they think they should.
More than just LinkedIn
It’s more than a case of scouring Facebook and LinkedIn. Many professionals have been driven off LinkedIn, according to Headworth, fed up with being hounded by recruitment agencies trawling for talent. They’ve found alternative places where they feel safe and where they can communicate with like-minded peers.
In-house recruiters must follow them there, but they must handle the situation carefully, learning how to engage with people and build trust rather than forcing them to look for somewhere else to hide.
It’s far more effective, suggests Headworth, to pick one specific type of job applicant and target one or two platforms where those people meet online rather than take a scattergun approach. It’s a case, Headworth observes, of connecting with:
the right network and the right audience.
Measuring return on investment on social media recruitment can be challenge. Just as consumers research a product online yet buy in-store, job seekers don’t stick to one channel. So, they may apply for a job through traditional means, but the recruitment trail may lead back to a marketing campaign in Twitter, months before.
You got talent?
Rather than obsess over each channel, companies need to take a more holistic, big picture approach. But companies can find that challenging, according to Headworth:
I fully understand the need for ROI, but the bigger picture is the important thing – the objective rather than doing social media because marketing said so.
There’s also often a “disconnect” between recruitment and marketing and the rest of the business, when each should feed into the other. Job adverts can be banished to special careers page buried on a website, rather than allowed a slot on the homepage, because that space is reserved for branding purposes. Says Headworth:
Marketing departments do social media of some description, but a lot of them won’t let recruitment teams anywhere near that channel.
It is possible to work out the ROI for using social media, but when asked to do so, Headworth’s pushback is to ask what the ROI of that company’s existing recruitment process is. The answer, he says, is:
Silence every time.
Those organizations already comfortable with social media and analytics will be combining the two into predictive recruitment, suggests Headworth, analysing the data available to start making decisions about the people they are hiring and their cultural fit with the organization.
This could involve studying a candidates profile across social media to determine whether they would fit in with the company culture. Headworth explains:
They look at how you construct your conversations and your network – whether you have a network in the industry and will you be a good fit with the company.
But it will only be the top 5% of organizations, if that, which will be pushing into this kind of area. Most will still be doing the basics for the next few years. And that goes for the vendors too, believes Headworth, which have been very slow to incorporate social media and mobile platforms into their offerings.
There’s a huge mismatch, notes Headworth for example, between the numbers of people who search for jobs using their mobiles and the relatively few number of jobs advertised this way.
However far along the social media path recruiters decide to go, one thing is clear: they have no choice but to start walking, says Headworth:
Social media is absolutely mandatory now because it’s where the candidates are. It’s non-negotiable as far as I’m concerned.
My take
Recruitment is an obvious application for social media, so it’s interesting that in Andy Headworth’s experience, many companies have yet to use it to good effect.
The key take-home for me is that social media is not simply another channel to market. Its strength lies in its ability to make connections, to be able to trawl the network and contacts of individuals and groups to find talent.
It’s the old Six Degrees of Kevin Bacon effect: you’re only a few steps away from the person who would be perfect for the job, providing you know how to tap into their network and crucially, how to talk to them properly.

Read more on: Analytics planning and data analysisCloud platforms - infrastructure and architectureHCM and the digital future of workSocialTalent management 