

Just as the Easter break began, the Department for Business, Innovation and Skills announced a consultation to assess the sale of the Land Registry to the private sector. The sceptics amongst us would consider the timing of the announcement a little cynical, given that most of us had begun enjoying our long weekends by that point.
But anyway, that aside, having had some time to read the consultation document and consider the plans I’ve begun to question the privatisation of running one the government’s only properly organised datasets within the broader context of the Government Digital Service’s plans for Government-as-a-Platform and future data registers.
We need to be considering this now. Whilst the government’s data is largely a mess and there are few authoritative lists on anything really, it’s not particularly easy for the government to 1) build digital services using that data 2) make money off that data by either offering services or privatisation, or 3) for anyone to do anything particularly stupid with the data.
However, as the Government Digital Service’s plans for creating a number of authoritative registers progresses, in order to underpin its plans for Government-as-a-Platform, I think it’s only right to be aware that this could mean the sale of a number of future registers to the private sector.
The possible sale of the Land Registry has brought criticism from a number of people and organisations that claim that in the private sector’s hands it could lose its integrity. However, the Treasury is anticipating its sale could bring in over £1 billion in cash.
In isolation this sale needs thorough debate. But what if it is considered in the broader context of a number of registers in the pipeline? Is the plan to sell those too? I think this is something that needs to be considered from the get go.
The consultation
 The Land Registry is responsible for maintaining the records on ownership of land and property across England and Wales. And as I noted previously, it is one of the few data registers that is worthwhile in terms of accuracy and usability.
But the plan is to create more of these for a number of other data points.
To be fair, it’s worth noting that the government’s consultation states that the plan isn’t to sell the data to the private sector, but to rather move the use of the data to the private sector. It states:
This Government believes that it is important that the Registers continue to be owned by government, and this proposal would not change that. The data within the Registers is protected by Crown copyright and database right as material created by a public body.
Okay, that’s good to know.
However, the arguments put forward largely centre around digital innovation of services being more likely in the private sector if the use of the register was handed over. That and the money the Treasury would get from the sale, of course. It states:
There are benefits to moving Land Registry into the private sector in return for receipts that can be used to reduce public debt or fund other public spending. The key test is therefore whether or not there is a strong case for continued public ownership.
Land Registry is at a critical point in its existence. Its functions are critical to enable the government to meet its commitment to build one million more homes by 2020 and increase home ownership. To continue to deliver the standard of service its customers expect, Land Registry needs to further modernise and digitise the services it offers to provide a more accessible, quicker and more efficient service.
And whilst the consultation notes that the Land Registry has managed to provide some good guitar products – such as MapSearch and Property Alert – it states that it has struggled with “wholesale business transformation”. The document also goes on to say that whilst digital transformation is possible in the public sector (citing some of the Government Digital Service’s successes), it also adds:
Digital transformation could also be brought about if Land Registry were in private ownership. A new owner could bring new knowledge and investment into the organisation and could ensure Land Registry accelerates its transformation into a more efficient and effective service delivery organisation with clear contractual obligations and controls to meet appropriate standards.
This could enable it to maximise the potential of the information it holds and diversify the services it offers, whether it is for professional customers or private individuals trying to buy or sell property. All these factors could support an improved, faster transformation into the digital world, and deliver an improved service to customers.
As the organisation becomes more digital, so the potential value of the data increases. With the right protections, private sector ownership could Land Registry consultation incentivise the organisation to make the most of this potential, maximising the accessibility of Land Registry’s data and driving the creation of innovative, new products for the public.
Future registers
So what do we know about future registers?
The idea is that if the government can create a series of data sources that are considered ‘true and clean’ representations of whatever they are meant to refer to (much like the Land Registry), then these registers can be tapped into easily by departments, and controlled by the citizen, for the delivery of digital services.
Messy data = incoherent and siloed services. Think of it like the transport network. If the government wants businesses to be able to easily transport goods between each other and to citizens, it needs a good underlying infrastructure to make that happen – the transport network.
Data registers and ‘data-as-a-service’ will be the new underlying infrastructure for next generation public digital services.
The plan at present is for different departments to take control of a number of different registers that fall into their domain. So for example, the Foreign & Commonwealth Office is working on a register of country names and it will be responsible for owning and maintaining that register.
But once these registers were established and in use, would the Treasury see an opportunity to sell them off as we are seeing with the Land Registry. The consultation document doesn’t shy away from this and says:
Land Registry could also take on additional responsibilities, particularly with respect to other existing, or newly proposed government registers.
And here we get to the crux of it. The government, once having established some useful, new registers, could then sell the operation of these registers to either the future company operating the Land Registry or some other interested party.
Let’s not forget that this company/these companies won’t just be responsible for administering the registers, but they will be able to drive the “creation of innovative, new products for the public”.
Was that not the role of departments within the context of Government-as-a-Platform?
As someone on Twitter rightly pointed out to me this morning, this comes down to politics and what you view the role of government to be. But if the plan is to sell data registers to the private sector to provide endless public services, this should be articulated now.
Is there an alternative?
I’m in the very early stages of my thinking in this, as I’ve just read the consultation document today. However, it appears to me that the government’s plans seem to be focusing heavily on short-term financial gain, over long-term possibilities.
As I understand it, the current proposal is for the government to maintain ownership of the Land Registry data, whilst handing over operations to one private company to make the registry more ‘efficient’ and inspire private sector innovation of digital services.
But what about an alternative whereby the Land Registry operated a semi-open model, which allowed private sector companies to use the data and operate services if they wanted to? There is obviously demand for this data in the market if a company could be willing to pay £1bn+ for it. Would it not be better to open up the data, licence it out (to fund operations and maintenance) and let the market compete on services? Would this not be a better way to drive standards, levels of service and innovation?
It would also mean that the government could compete with the private sector if it saw the need.
As I said, I don’t know if this is a feasible model, but surely something along these lines would be better than handing the operations of this data to just one company? We’ve seen how that’s gone in the past when we are talking about what is essentially national infrastructure (BT?).
My take
We need to realise that this isn’t just about the Land Registry. With the development of new registers, this is about our new national infrastructure. And that government needs to be transparent about what it has planned and consider the alternatives.
Read more on: Data privacyDigital government and public servicesRegulation

