
Vendors of all stripes are fond of issuing FUD laden warnings that the Uberization of business is just around the corner if not an immediate threat. While there are plenty of businesses where that might apply – and arguably has applied in ages past – I’m not convinced it is as clear cut. Let’s stop and think about this.
Back on the 2000’s Charles Phillips, then president at Oracle, was effectively given a $25 billion check by Larry Ellison, then CEO, to go scoop up as many of the software industry’s players as he wanted. That was predicated upon Phillips’ theory, which he developed while an analyst at Morgan Stanley, that the software industry was fragmented and ripe for rollup. That was an incredibly successful strategy for Oracle because it meant they could eliminate competition, while at the same time guarantee an income stream via maintenance dollars in the software equivalent of perpetuity.
The story is not that simple because no sooner had Phillips pretty much completed the task, SaaS and then more broadly cloud, became the software operating model du jour. Ten years on (roughly) from when Phillips engineered the early big buys, we’re in the middle of another upheaval that sees Oracle, and other enterprise vendors moats around their core business model starting to crumble. But for a while at least, Oracle had a very good run, injecting a degree of efficiency in the software business model that would otherwise have been hard to build. Now let’s switch to Uber.
A short Uber history
Uber has taken an inefficient delivery model that has traditionally been tied up in the hands of local monopolies and blown it up. Uber was not the first but so far, has proven to be the most aggressive and, on the face of it, most successful. The question comes, is the Uber model sustainable? This is an ongoing topic of conversation on the subscription only Stratechery site. Ben Thompson, who runs Stratechery, likes to put Uber related stories as proofs that his Aggregation Theory works and, is in effect, more superior to Clay Christensen’s Innovator’s Dilemma theory for disruption.
I’m not going to argue the merits of either theory. Like all economic theories, they are capable of being torpedoed although both carry a degree of gravitas that is well worth study. Perhaps for another day. On Uber specifically, he says:


Previously, taxi companies integrated dispatch and fleet management. Uber modularized fleet management by working with independent drivers
Uber is integrating dispatch with customer management, enabling it to scale worldwide


In his post for today, (subscription required – buy it, it’s worth it) Thompson brings up another interesting point:
In Why Uber Fights I laid out in detail that the “moat” that matters in ride-sharing and other similar two-sided networks is consumer preference (not drivers, as most presume):
There is a strong “rich get richer” dynamic as drivers follow riders which increases liquidity which attracts riders. This is the network effect that matters, and is in many ways similar to app ecosystem dynamics (developers follow users which increases the number and quality of apps which attracts users)
The issue, as I go on to detail in that piece (definitely read it if you haven’t), is that drivers are high-information participants in the network with a significant stake in maximizing their revenue; therefore, drivers are much more likely to be aware of and participate in multiple networks. For riders, on the other hand, ride-sharing is a commodity that is not central to whatever it is they do every day, which means they are much more likely to settle on one service and stick with it unless they are given a reason to change.
What I’ve found
I’ve been using Uber almost exclusively the last eight months to the exclusion of almost all other forms of transport. It is fast, it is cheap, it is convenient. I use Lyft from time to time but at much lower frequency. Most of my Uber travel is to one or two locations and to/from airports in other cities. This is what I’ve discovered over many conversations with different drivers:

When there is little Uber coverage then it is only the professional drivers who are consistently available for any service.
The professional drivers use both Uber and Lyft as they seek to optimize demand.
Most drivers believe Uber pays better but that Lyft treats them better. This is odd because their attitude to Lyft translates into better revenue under certain circumstances.
Concerns are growing that there may be an over supply at certain times as part time or ‘pin money’ drivers come and go in the market.
The ratio of full time to part time drivers is swinging in favor of the full time professional.

Those are the main topics and as you can see, they are morphing over time. There are some variations like the drivers who cruise from town to town in search of the optimum revenue earning opportunities whether that is UberX or those who only come out at surge price rates.
The Uber moat
Thompson’s most recent discussion was in the context of Lyft entering into a form of coalition in other territories against Uber. Even so, his next point is pertinent to this discussion:
Uber can realistically compete all over the world with a centralized service that scales both in terms of users and in terms of local business realities thanks to zero distribution costs and zero transactions costs, and the best option for competitors is to engage in a complicated and time-consuming tie-up that runs the risk of causing a lack of focus in their home regions. Such is the power of owning users at scale.
In short, Thompson thinks Uber runs away with the market. There is no question that Uber has solid mindshare but I am equally interested in the supplier side of this discussion. In a conversation with ‘Peter’ inside the Stratechery system, Peter says:
Companies like Microsoft/Intel were protected by very strong network effects, lock-in and economies of scale, pharma companies are protected by patent rights, companies like Coke are protected by very strong brands. Uber’s moat appears to be weaker; yes there is a bit of technological head start, a little bit of scale and a little bit of consumer preference/inertia/apathy — while the package looks quite attractive, I’m not convinced that it is an advantage that is made to last. Put differently, is Uber’s competitive moat any stronger than, say, Samsung’s competitive advantage 3 years ago.
How does this make sense when put into the context of the enterprise and the technology it buys?
The enterprise perspective
Thopmson’s Uber argument relies upon acceptance of the service as a commodity. In enterprise terms, that ought to equal accounting and HR administration at a minimum. The question of buyer behaviors and preferences is an ongoing topic of discussion among colleagues. We note for example that the average buyer often behaves irrationally, making decisions that appear tied more closely to the need for self preservation than a reality that makes sense when weighed against the cost/benefit calculations we’re all required to undertake. But there’s a flip side to that coin. Buyers that have invested many years in getting these commodity functions ‘right’ are loathe to switch. They are often willing to pay the price the commodity provider requires to keep the lights on.
This creates dilemmas far beyond whether a company should swap out its tried and trusted system in favor of a cloudy shiny new thing. In my most recent conversations with brand leaders across many industries, one thing comes over time and again. We need the data from those big hairy systems to feed all the other stuff we’re looking at. But even then, we are going to proceed cautiously because the Uberization of which we’ve heard so much, is not always clear in its potential impact.
On the supplier side, we see numerous conflicts as suppliers attempt to parse their legacy business models into the future in some sort of ordered manner. The point being that they’re not really sacrificing anything much by way of margin while making the switch. Note that margin isn’t the same as revenue here. Much like Uber may be cheaper than your average taxi but not so much as to make a dramatic difference to the money going out in cab rides.
My guess for the enterprise software cloud providers is that the value they need concentrate upon is much more to do with the convenience of operating their service plus the ability to do a whole lot of other things as well beyond the commodity offering. Will they therefore get past the commodity issue or not? We don’t know for sure but so far, those same legacy customers have largely proven to be incredibly sticky.
As a final thought on this gnarly topic, I want to throw the Xero experience into the mix. Xero has used a tidy sum raised in investment to fuel extraordinary growth. Tied to growth is a growing ecosystem of integrations to other services. Rather than be a platform – which I consider a weakness – Xero has chosen to make its software easily integrated into all the other services an SMB might need. This means Xero may be the cloud based commodity provider of accounting for the SMB but it is also the onramp for services those same SMBs need. This is a differentiation of which the expanding Uber service might well be proud. It is also the model I believe the large enterprise vendors will have to follow.
Have I just convinced myself that Uberization is real? Hmm…
Read more on: Analytics planning and data analysisCloud ERP financials and supply chain 