
The twin forces of technology and globalization are driving deep changes in the world of work, but organizations may not be adapting fast enough. That’s one of the takeaways from a new global study released this week by ADP’s research arm.
The 2016 ADP Research Institute Evolution of Work study is based on interviews with over 2,000 predominantly white-collar workers and their employers in 13 countries — the United States, Canada, Mexico, Brazil, Chile, the United Kingdom, France, Germany, Netherlands, Australia, China, India, and Singapore.
The overall tenor of the survey suggests that, despite a surprisingly positive view of the trends they expect, most workers believe their own employers will be slow to embrace workplace change. The report finds that:
In general, employees do not believe that employers will address their evolving needs in the workplace.
The survey discovered that employees have a more short-term view of when trends will occur. Many trends that employees already see happening around them today are trends employers do not see happening for a couple years from now.
Popular change, little impact
The three most popular changes, for example, were viewed positively by more than 80% of respondents, but a much smaller number expected the change to impact them significantly at work:

Using tech to learn anything, anytime, anywhere — less than two-thirds (64%) said this was already happening, and only 46% thought it would impact them a lot at work.
Being able to work from anywhere in the world — less than half (49%) said this was happening today, and just two in five (41%) expected much personal impact.
Having the choice to work on personal interests or things that impact society — barely a third (35%) saw this happening already and even fewer (33%) thought it would impact them significantly.

Even the trend towards performing all work from a mobile device was seen as some way off, although with some regional variations:
Respondents in North America and Europe especially believe this trend will have very little impact on their work because they believe this is a bit further off in the future and not as likely to materialize. Whereas, emerging economies in Asia Pacific and Latin America have higher penetration for mobile devices than internet, and thus believe that this trend will impact them a lot.
Technology dominates
Interestingly the two trends that were most feared (both scoring a 45% negative response) were regarded most negatively by younger workers:

Companies will exclusively hire contract workers on a project-by-project basis
Automation, smart machines, and AI will replace people for repetitive work

Overall, it’s technology that dominates the trends being seen now, according to the ADP report:
Workplace trends already being seen include the use of technology to learn anything at anytime and anywhere, the use of technology to allow for deeper personal connections across time and space, the ability to search globally for talent recruitment, and the need to learn new skills rapidly.
Work structure changes will take longer, people believe — especially those that give them more autonomy and self-direction:
Then there are trends that people, particularly employers, think are a bit further off in the future. Indeed, this is the case for trends that emphasize freedom and flexibility for employees to get their work done in a way that is best suited for them.
As for the notion that connected digital technologies are set to flatten the traditional hierarchical organization of companies — a transformation diginomica calls frictionless enterprise — few respondents expect to see this happen in their own workplace:
Both employers and employees also tend to think that the trend toward dissolving individual departments and a hierarchical structure will have little impact on their work, possibly because they do not believe that this trend will happen.
My take
There seems to be a disconnect between what people see happening in their personal lives and what they expect to encounter at work. ADP warns that enterprises risks losing the support of employees if they don’t move faster, and I’m inclined to agree with that conclusion.
Image credit – Graphic of hand holding magnifying glass over people © princerko – Fotolia.com. 
Read more on: Future of workHCM and the digital future of work 