
There is a term floating around the content management industry that makes it fun to say “is your content rotten”? The truth is, no one would ever call their content rotten (at least not in public). But in internal circles, it’s a question often asked. And a question that often goes unanswered.
Time to change things up a bit.
Time to clean out the ROT
First, let me tell you about rotten content – or ROT content as the official term. ROT stands for redundant, out-of-date (or obsolete), and trivial. We can talk about ROT from many different perspectives but for our discussion today, let’s talk about it in terms of the quality of content on your website and how you manage it.
Think about the last time you did research on a product. You went to a vendor website to look for information. Did you find what you wanted? Or was it out of date? Maybe the blog wasn’t updated in a couple of months, or the posts that were there were fluffy pieces that were useless. Maybe the product web page contained information from two releases ago, but you read on some media site about the latest release (which is what caught your attention in the first place).
It’s not sufficient to say you were disappointed. This vendor potentially lost a big deal with your company; you lost the opportunity to use a product that could have helped save money and make your team more efficient.
This kind of thing happens a lot. The content on a website is published, managed when the marketing or web team has time and can get a developer to help out. Cheap resources are paid to produce boring content for the blog, and no one ever takes the time to step back and ask if the information that is there is what is really needed and up to date.
It’s time to take a different approach to managing your website content – one that requires you to think more strategically about your content.
Content as business asset
At the Intelligent Content Conference, attendees were surveyed on how they treat their content (PDF link – an ICC and CMI study). Ninety-two percent said they think of it as a strategic business asset.
They should. The right content, delivered at the right time to the right person or audience is critical to business success because it is what people are looking for. Content about your product, content about the market or industry, content about the best way to do things or the lessons learned from others. There is a lot of content you can create and share that brings value to your company.
The interesting thing is that although many perceive content as a strategic asset, it’s not exactly created and managed like one. Most are creating content as single assets that can’t be repurposed, broken apart or, when they are, managed appropriately:

Figure from CMI 2017 content management and strategy survey
There is a lot that goes into ensuring you can properly manage content. Any web content management expert or vendor will tell you that. But not every content management system can support treating content as a business asset easily, especially if you’re using WordPress.
In CMI’s study the following capabilities, key to success, are under utilized:

A formal workflow process for planning, creating and delivering content (53%)
Content Performance analytics (50%)
Structured Content (32%)
Personas (51%) and Journey Maps (33%)

Let’s talk about these capabilities a little more:

Workflow Processes: Every organization has a different process for managing the creation of content. Usually, that process is clearly defined – at least on the front-end. So they know who is creating it, when a draft is due, who provides insights to the content, what the call to action might be, and who reviews/approves. Then the process tends to fall apart. How long is that content good for? When should it be reviewed? When should it be taken down and archived or deleted? These are critical questions to address in the content lifecycle, but they are often missed. A blog is relevant forever right? As is a white paper. Not true. Your messaging will change, your visual brand will change, your perspectives, industry insights, customer perceptions, needs – all this changes and should require you to revisit your content and change it as well.
Content Performance: You’ve created what you think is a great website. Published some informative blogs and whitepapers. Are you tracking how well they are performing? What are your most popular web pages? Most viewed blog posts and downloaded white papers? If your white papers are interactive, what parts of the paper are viewed the most, how long does a visitor spend reading? And it’s not just about eyeballs on a page; it’s about time spent, it’s about bounce rates, it’s about how good you are at driving interest in additional content from a web page or blog post.
Structured content: This is a topic that marketers hate to discuss because it’s complex to understand and implement. Are you creating your content in a way that enables you to reuse it across your channels in different formats? We’re not talking about cross-publishing a white paper (on the blog, in the resources section, in an email). We’re talking about creating a single piece of content that you can leverage in different ways. A white paper for the resources section, a series of blogs for the blog, key social posts, partial sections for an ebook. Create once, use everywhere. Structured content may be hard to set up, but it’s so much easier to manage for ROT.

In the chart below, green means ‘Always/Frequently’; Brown – ‘Sometimes’ and Orange – Rarely/Never.’

Figure from CMI 2017 content management and strategy survey

Personas and Journey Maps: The lack of work on personas and journey maps is surprising in some ways, not so much in others. We’ve covered this extensively, so I’m not getting into details. Instead, I’ll point you to two pieces that are relevant to why and how you need to work with these (my piece on Four steps to a great content marketing plan and Jon Reed’s look at the  B2B buyer’s journey – what we’ve learned, and what we’re missing).
Governance and auditing: This one isn’t on the list above, but it’s worth discussing because many marketers don’t think about it as much as they should. When you move a piece of content on the website, or remove it, or adapt it, there are some things you need to do to support SEO (broken link checkers, vanity URLs, metadata, redirects, auto-redirects, link management, content scheduling and so on).

My take – can technology help?
It’s a good question, but it’s where things get sticky because there isn’t one tool that will give you all the capabilities you need to manage your content as a strategic business asset. Web content management systems have some of these capabilities in varying degrees. There are also content marketing systems that provide some of these capabilities, and a few others, like editorial calendars and collaboration capabilities. And then there are the governance tools that integrate with your CMS.
In the CMI study, most respondents acknowledged they don’t have the right tools, which tells us there is much work to be done with the marketing technology stack to ensure the foundational technology required to treat content as a business asset is in place.
To be clear though, technology can help, but it isn’t the first part of the answer. If you want to reduce ROT, then your content strategy needs to be defined, and that means you have to think about how you want to create and manage content. Many marketers don’t have the time to step back and think strategically, but they must take the time to do it and map a plan to move forward.
Image credit - Feature image - Dilemma concept © Family Business - Fotolia.com. CMI graphics credited and linked above.Read more on: Content marketingDigital and content marketing 