
The one constant in any article on retail in 2017 and beyond is that if Amazon isn’t already your competitor, it’s almost certainly going to be become so within a period of time.
Long before keynote cliches moved on to Uber and Airbnb, it was the retail book market that was the epitome of digital disruption. In that market, the travails of the likes of Barnes & Noble have been horribly evident for mnay years now – and things aren’t getting very much better for the US chain.
The good news is that the pace of decline has eased off a bit. The bad news is that the course trajectory is still very, very firmly downwards. For its most recent fiscal year, sales were down 6%, largely driven by a 6.3% fall-off in store sales, which was only slightly counter-balanced by a 3.7% increase in online business for the year. For the fourth quarter, that online number was lower – 2.9%. Meanwhile the Nook e-reader division continues to be holed beneath the waterline, turning in a loss of $7.9 million for the fourth quarter, while full year sales were down 23.4% to $146.5 million.
The person charged with addressing this ongoing decline and trying to come up with a strategy to co-exist in a world built on Amazon is CEO Demos Parneros, who took up the hot seat back in April after serving as operations director for six months. It’s still early days for him in the role and the current plight of the company can’t be laid at his door. That said, he’s got to articulate a convincing omni-channel strategy that exploits the offline retail presence, while ramping up the online profile to compete with Amazon.
There are some signs of this emerging as he says:
Over the past six months I’ve spent a lot of time visiting stores and meeting with our booksellers and customers. During those visits I’ve heard a lot of valuable feedback on the things that we do well along with some areas that we can do better. Most importantly, I learned that customers love and trust the Barnes & Noble brand; it all begins with this premise which provides a solid foundation to build from.
There is no question retail is changing and customers are shopping differently. We don’t view this as a winning or losing proposition, it’s just simply changing. Barnes & Noble has a rich history of evolution beginning with the transition from small format, mall stores to large super stores to competing online and launching our own digital platform.
The digital offerings are important, he adds, including the wretched Nook:
BN.com is an important component of our omni-channel offering to serve the customer. In our experience, a multi-channel customer is a more engaged customer that shops all channels and our goal is to continue to improve the BN.com experience including the redesign of our desktop and mobile sites which will be a phased roll-out over the current fiscal year. The goal of this redesign is to create a better user experience, make discovery easier for our customers and increase conversion. Nook is also an important component of our omni-channel offering to offer any book in any format.
The new book store
But in this new world, the one thing Parneros is convinced of is that there is still a place for the traditional book store where customers can browse the shelves, sample the books and have a cup of coffee on a comfy sofa:
There is no doubt the customers have a love affair with their book stores, and more specifically with their local Barnes & Noble store. They want their book store to be there for them, we just need to continue to evolve the experience and make it better for them. There are a lot of areas to examine within the store to stay current with today’s market and today’s shopping behaviors.
Today’s consumer wants to shop their way whether it’s a store, online, or using their mobile device. Our goal is to deliver great shopping experience regardless of which experience they choose. To accomplish this we’re examining every aspect of the business and our customer value proposition. We also see a big opportunity aligning our stores and digital offerings closer together. Our goal is to provide customers with any book, anywhere, any time, and in any format they choose.
Part of the challenge now is how to take that ‘love affair’ and move it on to a next phase. That involves re-thinking how stores look and feel and what role they play in an omni-channel retail environment. Parneros explains:
We are doing a number of things with store layouts starting with space productivity. Obviously we have stores that are quite large, and we have categories that are both in decline, as well as some that are growing. And so getting the puzzle right is an important part for us and the best way to do that is actually go out and do some and then measure them for a while, and then choose the winners and hopefully roll those. So that’s sort of a basic approach of the space tests that we’re doing.
We launched three test stores over the past year and continue to receive great feedback from our customers and book sellers. These test stores are smaller than our average store and feature a more intuitive store layout. They have better adjacencies and expanded food and hospitality offering and more omni-integration including an app that can help guide customers the location of a specific book, mobile checkout and advanced digital kiosk to help service customers.
It’s a race to get this right. Amazon last months opened a 4,000 square foot bricks-and-mortar store in New York, complete with the kind of digital integration that Barnes & Noble wants to offer. But Amazon isn’t upgrading an existing business model or retail infrastructure, but rather, starting as effectively a greenfield site without baggage. Two more New York stores are planned in the near future, bringing total outlets to nine – with the prospect of many more to come.
My take
Actually I’m going to duck out and just point to the take from Neil Saunders, Managing Director of Global Data Retail, who sums the Barnes & Noble status quo perfectly when he says:
Rather than toying around with Nook, B&N should focus more squarely on its online operation. This part of the business is in desperate need of attention, as is evidenced by the 2.9% growth rate for the quarter. This is an unsatisfactory outcome and shows that the small investments in digital made over the past year are not paying dividends. In our view, B&N is simply not an online destination for many shoppers buying books and associated items – something that the company needs to correct.
Image credit - Barnes & Noble Read more on: Retail e-commerce and the omni-channel 