
It’s easy to see the march of enterprise infrastructure to the public cloud as a two-horse race, Amazon AWS and Microsoft Azure, as these two regularly dominate user surveys and analyst commentary, but we’re far too early in the cloud migration cycle to be declaring any permanent duopolies. Even at upwards of $100 billion, cloud spending is but a tiny fraction of an overall multi-trillion dollar IT market, and infrastructure and platform services like AWS and Azure represent but a fraction of that. While each are $10 billion annual businesses growing at high double-digit rates, there’s plenty of upside for others and several potential competitors with pockets deep enough to compete in such a capital-intensive industry.
As the leader, AWS gets the most scrutiny and has the most to lose, but aside from Microsoft, AWS faces at least two other significant threats from different directions: Google Cloud in the public cloud and large online services insourcing in the private market. A good example of the latter threat is Apple’s rumored build out of private data centers to host various iCloud services and media. This got much attention since Apple has indirectly admitted using AWS S3 and Azure for iCloud photo and file sharing, with recent reports that it is adding Google Cloud to the mix. Although the exact extent of Apple’s usage is unclear, numbers in the half to one billion dollar range are rumored. If all of this went to AWS (unlikely) it represents a significant portion of Amazon’s business.
The details of the Apple story are actually less important than the trend it suggests: very large online services like iCloud, Dropbox, Netflix, Airbnb and others that grew up on AWS finally reaching a certain level of infrastructure size, spending and sophistication that it makes more financial and operational sense building their own clouds than continuing to pour money into the AWS money pit. As OpenStack pioneer and current Pivotal CTO Josh McKenty famously quipped, “AWS in this sense is like a crack dealer. The first hit is free,” however as your needs grow, costs, particularly for storage, will eat you alive. Hammering the point, McKenty added, “Amazon will cost you $80,000 a year for something you can buy for $3,000.” Of course, McKenty is an advocate for private, OpenStack alternatives, however his argument is particularly relevant to giant cloud services like Apple, et al, that have more than enough capital and technical expertise to operate a world-class cloud.
Don’t forget Google
The Apple rumors allude to another threat to AWS hegemony: Google. Google Cloud and App Engine are the I/PaaS services people love to forget, however the search giant has been continually adding features, lowering prices and refining a very granular usage and billing model that makes it much more utility-like than AWS. People are starting to notice. In cutting his rating on Amazon stock, in large part due to increasing cloud competition, one Wall Street analyst wrote (emphasis added),
We note Google’s recent Spotify win and talk of increasing Apple business shifting to Google have been highlighted as recent Google cloud wins. … Overall, we believe cloud remains in the early innings of a $200 billion plus TAM and we believe there is room for a few winners (e.g. AWS, Microsoft Azure, Google), though perceived increasing competition could limit multiples in the sector.
The analyst goes on to predict that Google will “narrow AWS and Azure lead in data centers,” praising the service for major customer wins (Spotify and Apple) and the long-term potential of the Bebop acquisition, founded by ex-VMware exec and current head of Google Cloud Diane Greene. Google is providing more evidence of cloud competitiveness at the GCPNext conference this week where it announced several major customer wins, including Home Depot, plans for 12 new cloud data centers and a boost in marketing.
Google’s price/performance advantage
A recent blog post by Brownlee Bakkum, one of the infrastructure designers at Quizlet, an online education site with 40 million MAU and among the top 50 busiest sites in the US, details why Google Cloud is winning potential AWS customers. Like many online businesses, cloud spending is one of Quizlet’s biggest budget items. Outgrowing its existing (nameless) provider, Quizlet narrowed the field to AWS and GCP and embarked on an extensive technical and financial analysis. The study focused on the basics: CPU, memory, networking and storage price/performance. In the end, AWS lost.
After stepping through the analysis and weighing our options we chose Google Cloud Platform. We believe GCP has better core technology, in particular its networking and disk technology. Additionally, GCP’s pricing model is better in almost every respect than AWS’s. Though AWS has a much larger user base and ecosystem, we have more confidence in GCP’s product roadmap and future potential, given the strength of its existing technology. Ultimately it was difficult to imagine not choosing the platform with the better tech and better pricing, so GCP was the winner.
Bakkum spends the next 7,000 words explaining why, but it boils down to better core technology and pricing.
Though it has fewer users and services than AWS, we realized that bread and butter platform technology / performance is more important and we felt more confident in Google’s core compute instance, networking, and disk technology. As a bonus: GCP’s pricing is strictly better than AWS.
Google’s pricing model, with sub-hour billing and automatic discounts for sustained usage, was particularly attractive since Quilzet rightly points out that while AWS Reserved Instances provide steep discounts, they also force buyers to either overcommit resources (negating a key cloud advantage) or spend significant amounts for much more expensive on-demand usage. Says Bakkum,
It’s virtually impossible to run reserved instances for 100% of your infrastructure. It’s hard to quantify this, but I would guess that most companies operating on AWS reserve only reserve 50-80% of their instances. … It’s hard to overemphasize how much friendlier GCP pricing is, and how poorly the AWS model works.
My take
AWS advocates will undoubtedly take issue with the significance of a few customer wins and one company’s analysis, but together these illustrate that Google is finally translating its vast cloud expertise into a serious AWS competitor. Although Google continues to suffer from being late to the public cloud market and an infrastructure that is optimized for the quirks of its own search and ad services, not the needs of the average infrastructure user, it is making up ground fast. Although still not the richest service portfolio, as this guide for AWS users demonstrates, Google Cloud has the requisite features for the majority of applications.
AWS has deftly exploited its first-mover advantage to dominate the public cloud market, however it is too soon to declare it the Wintel-like hegemon of the cloud era. While the expense and sophistication of cloud infrastructure constitute a significant competitive moat, it’s not an impenetrable roadblock: companies like Apple, Google, Microsoft and Facebook are more than capable of building similar, if not superior capabilities. Indeed, as I pointed out in a previous column, Azure arguably already has a broader set of application platform services than AWS.
For enterprises, the message is clear: don’t blindly hand your cloud business to the default choice. As with IBM, no one gets fired for choosing AWS, but that doesn’t mean they’ll get a promotion. Emulate Quizlet and do your homework. You may be surprised to find that Azure or Google Cloud are a better fit with your application architecture and/or provide more bang for the buck.
Image credit - White coat and hand holding cloud on technology background © twobee - Fotolia.comRead more on: Best of archivesCloud platforms - infrastructure and architectureOutsourcing 