
Theresa Palermo
So here’s an omni-channel retail story that’s a bit different. In this one, the retailer has experienced a decline in e-commerce revenues, but sees that being more than offset by new physical store growth. 
The retailer in question is Vera Bradley, the US provider of colorful, cotton quilted handbags, accessories, luggage, and paper and gift items for women of every age, which this week has embarked on a major brand relaunch, one with digital and social campaigns at its heart. 
With a new flagship store opening in New York’s SoHo, CEO Rob Wallstrom sees the rebrand, including the launch of a new verabradley.com website, as being a catalyst for growth: 

One of our main objectives this year is to complete our brand transformation. We believe this new brand positioning which we are beginning to launch in the third quarter will lay the foundation for comparable sales growth by the end of the year.
Our new SoHo flagship store, refreshes of key full-line stores, launch of our new verabradley.com digital flagship, and our comprehensive marketing initiatives will all deliver beautiful solutions to our Daymaker target customer and be catalysts for growth.

He adds: 

Having a third of our full-line store fleet in the new branding, launching the new verabradley.com digital flagship. We’re expecting those two initiatives to start driving comps quicker and then, obviously, supporting that with these great marketing initiatives and really driving traffic back.
For us we do believe that the biggest catalyst to getting comps positive is going to be the traffic inflection caused by those three activities. And so that traffic inflection is a combination of getting more of our customers back more often as well as bringing new customers into the brand.

The digital overhaul is crucial here, says Wallstrom: 

Relaunching our digital flagship remains a key part of our distribution and brand transformation strategy. The site has been rebranded to align with the new brand visual direction and to provide a more cohesive consumer experience.
The conversion to the new platform is targeted to go live in October and the new site will enable consumers to shop faster and easier both online and in-store. Our enhanced functionality will truly allow us to accommodate the mobile-first and cross channel shopping habits of our customers.
Among other things, some of the key features will be additional navigation and search enhancements, strategic segmentation and personalization, enhanced payment options and e-gift cards, order online, pick-up in store, and site capabilities for future foreign expansion.

But this isn’t a radically-different Vera Bradley that’s being pitched here. Wallstrom is keen to emphasise that all of this transformation is not about throwing the baby out with the bathwater. The retailer’s brand has value that needs to be retained, he insists: 

We are trying to make sure that even as we’re introducing all of this new marketing that we’re still celebrating our heritage, our core cotton product still is an important part of what we’ll be showing the consumer. So, we’re making sure that everything that we’re doing in the new repositioning is a modernization of our brand as opposed to a major shift.

Marketing to the girls
The firm’s approach to marketing is also undergoing a change, away from traditional glossy magazine formats and moving online and deeper into social, explains Wallstrom: 

We have to let the consumer be part of our marketing as opposed to being kind of stuck in more of a print mentality. We’re really moving to a digital mentality and an interactive marketing mentality.

Bringing the consumer further into the heart of the marketing activities brings its own challenges, he admits: 

Whenever you put a new marketing campaign out and you’re starting a social movement, you’re starting a lot of conversation, you’re allowing the consumer to be a big part of that conversation, as opposed to maybe a more traditional marketing campaign where you’re controlling the message. I would say that that’s the piece of it that’s probably a little bit harder to control. But at the same time, we’re incredibly excited about it because we think that’s what’s really critical to moving up to a more modern relevant brand.

The person charged with making the new digital/social marketing campaign, called It’s Good To Be A Girl, work is Chief Marketing Officer Theresa Palermo, former VP of Global Marketing and PR at Fossil. She joined Vera Bradley last summer with a remit to develop and implement marketing strategies across the company’s channels that will build brand awareness. 
Palermo is clearly conscious of the brand history that she’s dealing with here: 

Vera Bradley has always celebrated femininity and the power that it has created by connecting women together. In fact, the connection and bond of two amazing women is how we got our start.
Our new marketing campaign, It’s Good to be a Girl, is a celebration of that femininity. It’s a statement meant to demonstrate that femininity has real value and to create an optimistic voice to lift the status of women everywhere and of every age.
There are numerous reasons why it’s good to be a girl from sisterhood to the power of leading with empathy to having the ability to make all things beautiful. We want to celebrate all of those reasons. 

To that end, Palermo divides the marketing strategy into two components. The first is to increase brand visibility; the second and more ambitious element is to ignite what she calls “a true social movement”. 
To deliver on the first objective, she’s mixing up digital and physical channels: 

To drive visibility and relevancy, we have launched a comprehensive multi-faceted media plan with a mix of digital, social, experiential, and print. Versus years past, our plan this year offers a stronger emphasis on social, mobile video, and includes an experiential partnership with Madison Square Garden.
If you haven’t already seen, you will soon see our spread national advertisements in People StyleWatch, InStyle, Glamour, Cosmopolitan, 17 and Teen Vogue as well as a broad online media and digital investment, including Hulu, Pandora, Spotify, and the Condé Nast Network. This campaign in total will deliver over 225 million targeted consumer impressions.

Realising the second objective is hinged on an ambitious project to engage women in a social movement by gathering millions of reasons why it’s good to be a girl. Palermo explains: 

We’re inviting women from across the country to tell us in their own words why they love being a girl and we’ve created a digital gallery for women to share and connect with one another through their unique and varied reasons.

This is a campaign that will be staggered in its delivery with an ‘October surprise’ in the pipeline. For now, the conversation is just getting started, says Palermo: 

To get the conversation going, we have created a video content series starring Noël Wells, former cast member of Saturday Night Live and star of Master of None. Noël is interviewing fascinating women from around the country revealing hilarious, touching and shockingly shareable reasons that women love being women. To get involved, you simply need to #ItsGoodToBeaGirl.

My take
I’m totally not the target audience for Vera Bradley of course, so judging the effectiveness of the Good To Be A Girl mantra is beyond my ken. Wall Street seems impressed however, with the firm’s share price on the up, although that may be equally attributable to licensing deals with Lifeguard Press for signature stationery and home and office organizational products and Fox Chapel Publishing for coloring activity and design books and gift sets featuring Vera Bradley patterns.
Given that other retailers are ditching large parts of their retail real estate, it’s interesting that Vera Bradley is talking up expansion here and opening a new flagship store in New York. The iconic nature of the Vera Bradley patterns would seem to render the product range ideal for e-commerce. It will be interesting to see in the coming quarters whether increased online visibility reverses the downwards trend here.



Click here for diginomica’s special report on omni-channel retail, with best practice use cases and strategic advice from leading retail CEOs.
Image credit - Vera Bradley Read more on: CRM and customer experienceDigital and content marketingDigital enterprise in the real worldDiversityRetail e-commerce and the omni-channel 