
Anyone who tells you it’s easy to build your marketing technology stack uses a content management system and email and has a one person team. Even then, I’d bet it’s not that easy.
There are many things you need to consider when putting your marketing technology stack together, and only some of them are technology focused. That’s the takeaway from a new report from Lenati, and Chief MarTech Scott Brinker. Thinking strategically is one of these.
The report, ‘Marketing Technology as a Strategic Asset’,  based on a series of interviews with some top marketing executives from companies such as Adobe, SAP, Veeam and others. The report addresses four critical questions that marketers must answer to ensure they are not only selecting the right martech stack but also putting in place the implementation plan, communications, and skills needed to ensure maximum value from those expenditures. And because the technology is changing so fast, and consumer expectations along with it, they need to be prepared for the change that everyone knows is going to happen.
It’s not just a toolset
A lot of things have changed in the past couple of years as organizations of all sizes have begun to embrace the digital experience. We watched as the marketing department started to bring in technologies without the support of IT just to get something (like a landing page) up and running quickly. Much of this was cloud-based technology that could be set up and run without the need of IT developers and administrators.
We’ve seen the increase of tools and technology built for non-technical users to enable marketers to quickly make changes to websites, email campaigns and so on.
This approach to bringing in marketing technology – what many call shadow IT – is slowly changing. The recognition that the customer’s experience is the priority has pushed the work of marketing out of the brand awareness shadow into the forefront of how organizations define and deliver customer experience.
This evolution of the marketing department has meant that the tools and technologies that marketing needs to provide customers with great experience beyond brand awareness, and even the sale, are critical to how the business operates.
Marketing technology is now considered a strategic asset.
While we might recognize that marketing technology has become strategic to the organization, not every organization is there. The marketing department evolution is slower for some than others, and it`s not based on size. The evolution is based on the ability to adapt and change to putting the customer first.
Building the right marketing technology stack
So, how can a company get from toolset to strategic capability? It’s a process that takes time and transformation across the enterprise. But there is always a starting point. What I take from the report by Lenati and Brinker are some tactics you can adopt that will put you on the right path.
Treat marketing technology like an investment portfolio.
There’s no one way to select marketing technology. There are too many technologies that provide different capabilities and connect in a variety of ways. Look at the solution and its purpose – define a selection process for each type.
Why is this approach more strategic? Most technology selection processes are pretty cut and dry – define business need, outline requirements, submit the RFP, look at vendors, conduct some simple demos, make a selection, implement. This all happens inside the marketing department.
Depending on the technology and its purpose, though, more than marketing is involved. Sales, corporate communications, even service, and support, might need to get involved in technology selection; each might have some input on requirements that marketing may not see. There may be integrations required with technology outside marketing stack.
Also, some technology decisions are easier to make than others because they aren’t core technologies in the stack and you don’t necessarily want to get mired down into indepth selection processes to give new technologies a run.
Don’t pick a technology using generic workflows.
This idea came from Stefan Gass, VP of Marketing at Veeam. When you do a technology selection project, too often, the vendor provides generic demos that show how to use the technology. Your workflows may fit the generic example, but more likely they won’t.
Gass suggests to define high level workflows for the first stages of the selection process: Discovery, Business Requirements, and RFP, then created detailed workflows that the vendor can help implement in demos or proof of concepts.
Why is this approach more strategic? You are making your decision based on how the technology works for your unique needs. You’ve thought carefully about how it will be used, who will use it and how it will need to be implemented within the organization. Taking those steps upfront demonstrates how the technology affects the entire organization.
Enlist a change evangelist.
Marketing spends its time finding ways to sell the organization’s product and services to customers. To get buy in and support for new marketing technology that supports this objective, they need to treat their organization like they treat their customers.
Define the vision for why the technology is critical to supporting customer experience, outline the KPIs that will demonstrate that vision and put in place a strong communications plan to let everyone know how things are going.
What is this approach more strategic? A change evangelist continually communicates with the major partners across the organization who have a stake in how the technology is implemented and used. This person understands the vision and creates the story that needs to be shared across the company. They also need to help clear roadblocks and show progress, ensuring that everyone has input and insight into how the technology is used.
Design the stack for change.
A strategic approach to marketing technology is one that considers what will happen if a piece of the marketing technology stack is removed. Whether that removal is because the technology isn’t working the way the organization requires, or it’s acquired and enveloped into another technology, or simply shuts down, marketing needs to always be prepared to deal with the change.
What is this approach more strategic? The advice in the report is to look at the contracts, make sure you own the data, understand how quickly the technology can be removed and how that removal will impact other technologies and the stack overall. When you approach change as a fact of life, you’re always thinking strategically – what comes next? How will you adapt, how will the stack need to change?
Final thoughts
I’ve been involved in a few technology selection projects, some more complex than others. Some as simple as going out and getting a trial and testing. What I’ve noticed is that business requirements are always pretty clearly defined, but the business workflows are not. Implementing a technology is rarely a simple process, especially when it needs to integrate with other systems in the organization, but getting people to use it is often harder.
It’s harder because the selection team hasn’t thought through how the technology will be used day to day. Other groups are affected and need to be brought in – potentially changing their workflows as well.
Marketing technology is a strategic asset; its use cross departmental boundaries is clearly seen when you take the time to look at it from both a high level and then dive down into the day-to-day use. This is true in the smallest organization and the largest enterprise. For most, getting to strategic is only a matter of time.
Image credit - Marketing Strategy © patpitchaya - Fotolia.com.Read more on: Collaboration sharing and digital productivityCRM and customer experienceDigital and content marketing 