
Peter Coffee
Well, it finally happened – on a huge and quite non-theoretical scale. Now are you paying attention?
I’m talking about last week’s enlistment of a six-figure number of connected, Internet-active, utterly insecure devices as participants in a massive attack against a significantly important piece of global digital infrastructure. This kind of thing has actually been happening, moreover, for more than two years now. And we warned you this would happen if people were negligent (or perhaps the phrase is “naïve, cheapskate idiots”) about their duty to make connected things at least mildly responsible – before they made them powerful.
Really, we did tell you this would end in tears, with plenty of lead time to think about it and be smart while it could still matter. On April 2, 1999, I wrote in PC Week that “automation has outpaced the development of important safety features”; that “for every new hands-off interface, responsible buyers will ask about means of control”; that “policies on content are necessary but not sufficient; systems must detect and warn of unusual traffic patterns.” You can look it up.
Before anyone says that this was high-minded but infeasible advice, I’ll point out an example that I use at every opportunity: when Apple executives came on stage back in March of 2015, before they even showed us the Apple Watch for the first time, they talked about their introduction of their ResearchKit software framework – with proactive attention to security and confidentiality of personal data. Rigorous control of data transmission and access privileges were initial requirements, not afterthoughts.
I’ve previously called this “trust-first design”: “establish permissions, then construct secure containers, and only then collect and seek value from data.”
Even Apple’s somewhat older HomeKit – we’re talking about your lights and your air conditioning, not your body and your brain – imposes security requirements that have device vendors complaining that Apple makes it too difficult to build cheap hardware. “Apple is requiring device makers using both WiFi and Bluetooth LE to use complicated encryption with 3072-bit keys, as well as the super secure Curve25519, which is an elliptic curve used for digital signatures and exchanging encrypted keys,” reported Forbes in 2015, adding an anonymous developer’s comment: “This is one of those things that Apple does… They force an issue. It’s like that here. Regular Bluetooth has an issue — it’s not secure.” Apple is saying that the price of admission to their user base is responsible attention to raising the bar.
Attack space
We can’t anticipate and preclude every possible attack: there’s an asymmetry issue, where trivial oversights create massive vulnerabilities, and there’s also the side-channel issue – where one kind of system behavior provides clues for a completely different attack space.
For an example of the asymmetry issue, consider the simple but crucial role of pseudo-random numbers in security solutions. For once, a trivial careless error recently paid off for the good guys, when developers of the “MarsJoke” ransomware used a poorly implemented random-number generator that made it quite feasible to crack that malware’s encryption. Rather than paying a ransom to restore a victim’s access to their data, tools at the web site www.nomoreransom.org may be able to accomplish that result.
For an example of side-channel attack, consider the researchers who found that CPU chips make distinctive noises as they perform specific operations. “The researchers successfully extracted decryption keys over a distance of four meters (13 feet) with a high-quality parabolic microphone. Perhaps more intriguingly, though, they also managed to pull of this attack with a smartphone placed 30 centimeters (12 inches) away from the target laptop,” according to a report from three years ago.
If you saw someone crack a password by analyzing CPU sound signatures in a Mission: Impossible or Bourne-franchise movie, you would roll your eyes, but this is real – and this is not the only such cross-mode connection between simple observation and successful compromise. Even something as easy as recording the sounds of a keyboard can narrow the search space enormously – and that’s all that’s needed.
It doesn’t require the development of new physics or mathematics to address some everyday vulnerabilities. The pattern of fingertip oils on a touch screen may provide useful clues to the pass code for a smart phone, but a trivial software hack can randomly re-scramble the on-screen passcode keypad each time the phone is unlocked. You’ll give up the muscle-memory convenience of typing your code without even thinking about it, but you’ll deprive an observer of getting useful insight into what your code might be from merely watching your movements as you type it.
We’re looking across the board at two things that need to happen quickly. First, I’m optimistic that AI techniques will help us recognize and take prompt action against novel and unexpected attacks, simply by recognizing the unusual – at a scale we can’t afford with living brains. Second, I’m hopeful that we’ll see people accept the need for some reduction of convenience as the price of getting these risks under control. To borrow the example of Pretty Good Privacy creator Philip Zimmermann, we tolerate the cost and inconvenience of envelopes rather than conducting business with postcards: it’s about time we added that common-sense level of protection to an ever more fully-connected world.
We put number plates on our automobiles to make them identifiable, and to trace them to responsible individuals who are accountable for their actions in shared spaces. The European Commission observes, in what I see as a parallel notion, that “A potential obstacle for the achievement of a single market for the IoT has to do with issues linked to the capacity to handle a large diversity and very large volumes of connected devices, and the need to securely identify them and be able to discover them so that they can be plugged into IoT systems”: it’s certainly not too soon to get serious about making that happen.
Image credit - YouTube Read more on: Collaboration sharing and digital productivityCRM and customer experienceDevOps NoSQL and the open source stackGoverning identity privacy and securityInternet of ThingsIoT robotics and AIMachine intelligence and AIPartner ZoneSalesforceSecurityUX and application design 