
Innovation and disruption come at a price – and online grocery firm Ocado is a perfect case in point.
It’s spent millions on digital tech, not least in the form of its robotics-enabled warehouses. Last year alone it turned in a technology bill of £42.8 million, 27% of CapEx, up from £34.3 million the year before, while the firm currently employs over 1000 developers and technologists of various guises with more to come in 2018.
But when you’re spending the best part of £36 million to develop your own proprietary software platform in the hope that it will be snapped up by other retailers around the world, there’s a problem when those potential buyers aren’t exactly biting your hand off to spend money with you.
So it is that Ocado this week turned a £12 million profit in 2016 into a loss of £500,000 for last year, despite a 12.4% boost in revenues to hit £1.3 billion.
But for founder and CEO Tim Steiner, the party line remains emphatically that the right decisions have been made around tech investment, with the company pitching its platform as “secret sauce” for retailers:
Investment leads to innovation in our capabilities which benefits our customers. It also gives us greater efficiency, and both drive growth. At the heart of the virtuous cycle is our technology, unique, mostly proprietary and difficult to replicate. We continually invest in our proposition because investment in the quality and reliability of our proposition builds trust with our customers. And trust drives sales, which generates better operating metrics, allowing us to reinvest in our proposition.
He pointed to the two deals that Ocado has done for its technology platform – French supermarket Groupe Casino and Canada’s Sobeys – as proof that there is an appetite here, albeit one that takes its time to be satiated:
The recent deals we’ve done with Groupe Casino and Sobeys have been a validation of our technology and business model, a fact picked up by the markets, the media and our partners themselves, and some quotes here on the screen. And these deals were signed after our new partners undertook very extensive due diligence. We hosted multiple visits, and they took – they had much consideration before signing into those deals.
There are three questions that Ocado needs to ask itself as a business moving forward, argued Steiner:
Firstly, are customers going to continue to migrate online with all the benefits and convenience that online shopping brings, that they enjoy in their other interactions online? Secondly, do you believe that we have the best platform to meet these customers’ needs? And thirdly, do you think we can make money from this opportunity? We believe that the answer to all three of these questions is, yes.
There’s pent-up opportunity in the online grocery segment, he insisted:
There’s the big latent demand, not just here in the UK, but in every market where the service is available and priced competitively. So what is the scale of the opportunity? Well, if we look at the UK, already one of the highest penetrated markets for online grocery globally, the online channel is the fastest-growing segment of UK food retail. Our sales and those of our biggest competitors clearly show that even in the absence of any meaningful top line marketing, the online channel is growing strongly ahead of the market.
It’s also important to note that food lags behind every major retail category in the UK today. But given the chance, customers will go online to order food in the same way they’ve done with all the other retail categories. And if food achieves the same degree of online penetration as the other main retail categories, that would imply a market at least 3x bigger than it is today.
More to come
All of this means one thing – Ocado isn’t about to stop splashing its cash on technology innovation. Steiner has a ‘to do’ list of what’s coming up:
We’re making continued investment in robotics…innovations in robots that will do things like picking in the facilities, frame loading and other activities that will increase their productivity both for us and our partners.
We’re investing in Artificial Intelligence and machine learning, again, not just in the front-end using the consumer data, but also in the warehouses to help the robots operate more effectively, to help the layout of stock in the facilities and in many, many other areas.
We’re improving our fulfillment development capabilities. We had set out our store before saying that we thought we were capable of doing two or three deals. We’re working on how we can currently do many more than that, so we’re investing money to improve our capabilities to build multiple sheds at the same time for multiple customers.
All this means that we need more people, more software engineers writing code, more hardware engineers developing new kit. We’ve already increased the number of software engineers four-fold since 2013 when we did our deal with Morrisons. And we will continue building our team in 2018 with the addition of several hundred new colleagues.
The overall message from Steiner is a combination of pride and defiance at criticism:
Ocado is already well-known as an iconic and much-loved British retail business. Our role as a tech innovator and disruptor, however, is now coming into focus as Ocado Solutions begins to scale its customers.
The deals with Groupe Casino and Sobeys are a major validation of our business model. We are in a significant number of meaningful conversations, and we expect to do further deals with the momentum of these new signings building over time.
The opportunity is now. We mustn’t squander it.
My take
Jam tomorrow, delivered to your door.
Image credit - OcadoRead more on: Digital enterprise in the real worldIoT robotics and AIMachine intelligence and AIRetail e-commerce and the omni-channelRobotics 