
Pukka
You might be forgiven for thinking irrepressible chirpy TV chef Jamie Oliver is basically everywhere at the moment. A copy of his ‘Five Ingredients’ book is bought every 16 seconds in the UK, he has international profile, he’s just become the highly visible face of supermarket giant Tesco, he has a TV series on Channel 4 every week etc etc.
But of course, successful as he is, Oliver’s business has had its challenges too, with cash flow shortage and restructuring. That seems to have led to something of a sharpening of focus at the online end of the company, though for its Chief Digital Officer Darren Goldsby, you’d never know it, as the message is all one of joy and positivity.
Jamie is just like how you seem him on telly, and he’s very good at reading the Zeitgeist.
Goldsby affects a personable and slightly irrelevant style that seems to borrow some of his boss’s style, with a certain amount of self-deprecating humour and Estuary English, and he does tend to keep asking if we’ve all bought that Five Ingredients tome yet.
But don’t be fooled by the kidding around. Goldsby is as sharp an operator as the guy behind the brand and what turns out to be a considerable commercial empire, fronted by its website, e-commerce and mobile outreach work:
We have a lot of stuff; there are actually already 6000 SKUs associated with all things Jamie Oliver now, from the books to the cookware and the bakeware. We’re a tiny company, but we’re everywhere now – you can buy our pots and pans in Australia, and people do.
All those line items are managed out of the 130-strong company’s main UK base, which seems to be something of a constant ferment of activity incarnating the latest ideas out of the food guru, whose original Naked Chef TV show will soon be celebrating its 20th anniversary. Increasingly, Goldsby finds social media the best way to capitalise on these ideas.
A case in point was a recent notion that popped into Jamie’s nut two days before the company’s Christmas closure – how about a campaign to help people embarrassed by their Yuletide over-indulgence to go on a 5-day vegetarian new Year health kick? And the follow up question:
Why don’t we do it with that new platform you’ve just put in – that digital stuff?
Goldsby said yes – of course – though in the end the project only kicked off in May, tied to National Vegetarian Week. The way the campaign was delivered was to ask the existing registered JamieOliver.com user base to pay for content. This was possible for a brand like Oliver’s, Goldsby believes, as there was a willingness on the part of the audience to explore a new idea like that:
The core values of our brand are ‘simple, trustworthy and useful.’ And our audience believes that things we offer them to try will be simple and fun and want to give it a try.
The vegetarian project played to these strengths, he claims, as,
We controlled the experience and made it really simple to engage with.
The programme had something like 20,000 eventual subscribers, predominantly (84%) female, he says, delivered over mobile but supported by a Facebook discussion and community group. (Interestingly, for all the chat we hear about mobile SMS as a no-brainer way for people to pay for things, only 1000 of that audience chose to pay that way, with the rest overwhelmingly choosing more established gateways like PayPal.)
Another fun, but also highly effective, bit of outreach was a ‘jamiebot’ – a fun online thing where a punter put in an emoji, and ‘Jamie’ responded back with a relevant recipe. Goldsby says:
We kept this, again, as very simple and ensured that if you didn’t type in an emoji it wouldn’t respond. And yes, we had something for the zucchini and pooh emoji – the latter being a great recipe for chocolate mousse!
‘Diets don’t work’
What Goldsby took from these recent experiences is that digital transformation needs to be seen as nothing new or revolutionary, but more of a continuous process of improvement – and, fairly naturally given the culture he works in, should be like making great food: simple, fun and easy – but which is always nutritious and helps your ‘body’.
He encapsulates this in the claim – again, demonstrating admirable alignment with brand values – that ‘diets don’t work’ – by which he means restrictive, disruptive short-term programmes of change… which sounds like a lot of what far too many ‘digital transformation’ work can feel like to the rest of the organisation outside IT.
For a start, we’ve been doing zeroes and ones in business for quite a long time now, so nothing new there. And we aren’t going from one place to another – it’s an on-going process of improving the business. We should think of it as moving from a diet approach to one more like a continual journey of ‘nutrition’ for the business. And whatever else you do – only ever do things that fit your company.
This is much more effective for long term in IT terms, but a business should never forget the benefits of traditional good ideas either, he believes:
We recently had a live-streamed event in Austria where Jamie talked while cooking while using some of the cooking hardware and we shipped something like 60,000 pans – a lot more than we had bargained for – just because it was a good experience for the user and was great content We’re always going to be about things like that and the content – we’re never going to be the team building the virtual Jamie hologram.
Pukka!
Image credit - YouTubeDisclosure - Goldsby was speaking at this week’s ad:tech London.Read more on: Digital and content marketingDigital enterprise in the real worldSocial 