
A setback in JC Penneys’ efforts to regain Middle America’s affections through digital transformation as first quarter retail sales slipped.
As we’ve noted here many times, JC Penney is undergoing a turnaround following the catastrophic reinvention plan of former CEO Ron Johnson which sent sales and profits into a free fall in 2012 and 2013. Current CEO Marvin Ellison is looking to digital tech and e-commerce to reboot sales.
But after five straight quarters of growth, the firm turned in a 0.4 drop in sales, with revenue down 1.6% to $2.81 billion. On a more positive note, the company cut its losses, down to $68 million from $150 million year-on-year.
While describing the numbers as disappointing, Ellison says that it’s essential to concentrate on what JC Penney can directly control, regardless of the general sogginess of the US retail sector as a whole. In particular, he points to the digital transformation efforts:
Our online business continue to generate strong results. On a year-over-year basis, for the first quarter, our online SKU (Stock Keeping Unit) count increased over 50%, and our online supplier base was up nearly 20%. In addition, our mobile traffic continues to increase dramatically, but even more important our conversion on mobile improved nearly 50% in the quarter.
He adds:
We’re committed to becoming a world-class omni-channel retailer. While there are opportunities to improve our e-commerce capabilities, I believe we have the talent and the resources to catch up quickly. Our EVP of Omni-channel, Mike Amend, and his team have done an outstanding job of quickly closing a technology gap with our competition.
This was evident in the first quarter, as we delivered another significant increase in our digital business. In the first quarter, we continue to roll out buy online, pickup in-store same-day, and this capability is now available in more than 20% of our stores.
And in the first quarter, our store attach rate on BOPUS [Buy Online Pick Up in Store] was nearly 40%, which means there’s 40% of the customers who visit our store to pick up a BOPUS order also purchase additional items. We’re pleased with the early results and have plans to roll out BOPUS chain-wide prior to the back-to-school selling season.
It’s clear that e-commerce remains Ellison’s primary focus:
When I arrived at JC Penney, doing the turnaround efforts, e-commerce was dramatically impacted and really we had a philosophy that e-commerce should just reflect what we had in the store, just extend its sizes and colors. We’ve brought Mike Amend onboard, and he’s has recruited some great talent, and really inherited some talented leaders and they’ve really accelerated e-commerce in a big way.
There are innovations to come, he adds:
We’re going to be launching a new mobile app here in the next couple of weeks that we think will be a game-changer for us. It’s in beta and it’s performing exceptionally well.
We’re going to be rolling out buy online, pick-up in-store same day within the next couple of months.
The firm has also announced an expansion of its store footprint for major household appliances, which will be rolled out to 500 stores over the course of this year. The online team has played a significant role here:
We will be live on jcpenney.com nationwide next week, with over 1,200 items available to purchase from our partners from Samsung, LG, and GE.
The online team has developed a best-in-class online experience that will provide a simple process for customers to purchase an appliance, schedule a delivery, install the new unit and haul away the old appliance in one seamless process. We’re also very excited about adding this business to our omnichannel portfolio.
Know the customers
Ellison also places great emphasis on understanding his customers and to that end spends a lot of time on data collection and analysis. something he says that his predecessor and his executive team did not do:
As it relates to the customer and the shifts, we’ve spent a lot of time looking at data. I think one of the great lessons from the challenges that this company faced in the past is that, the leadership team did not embrace data. It didn’t really leverage data as a way of helping to develop strategy.
This was a major error, he adds, as such analysis has thrown up some interesting information:
What the data tells us about customers is that, we have really two types of customer, we have a current customer and an emerging customer. Now, the emerging customer is in her early-30s, she’s female, she’s multi-cultural, and she has kids.
So when we look at that customer, and we look at our current customer, who’s a little bit more mature, she’s also female, but her kids out of the home, those customers have different ways they consume media and they have different desires on what they shop and how they shop.
With this knowledge on board, JC Penney has been able to adjust its outreach to both categories of customers accordingly. Ellison explains:
What we’ve tried to do, and I think we’ve done it successfully, is make sure that we are very focused on digital marketing and modernizing our one-to-one marketing to really address that millennial emerging customer, while understanding that traditional media still matters to our current customer.
What we’re trying to do is just be very transparent about how we view the retail business and that is, we have areas that we know we can improve to get a larger share of our customer’s wallet and that ties directly to appliances, it ties directly to our expansion in windows area, that ties directly to looking at Ashley’s and Empire for pilots.
But it’s not all about online, adds Ellison. There are some things in retail that can best be delivered offline:
We think our Sephora inside JC Penney is a huge experience, experience you can’t get online. I mean, we’re going to be close to 600 stores by the end of the year, and we’re going to continue to open new locations next year. We think our salon environment is an experience you can’t get online. Very important to our customer and something that when we do it well creates loyalty.
So, progress online, but a bump in the road due in large part to macro-retail market factors. Ellison knows there is still work to do digtally:
We are still behind, and we know that. But I’ll ask everyone to go online next week and look at our new appliance site. That will give you a view of the talent and the skill level of our e-commerce team, because they’ve built that site from scratch, and we’re going to be nationwide selling appliances online starting next week. I think that gives you a glimpse into our confidence in that team and how we believe that will be a continued integral part of our future.
My take
Ellison’s doing all the right things. The slip in sales is less about what he and his team are doing and more about the wider weakness in the US retail sector. The core digital transformation work just needs to keep on track at this point, even as Wall Street has a fit of the vapors.
Image credit - JC Penney Read more on: Digital and content marketingDigital enterprise in the real worldRetail e-commerce and the omni-channelUse cases 