
JC Penney offer
We’ve take some detailed looks at at US firm JC Penney as a bell-weather example of digital transformation in the retail sector. Specifically the retailer is looking to digital to reinvent itself from old style catalog firm to an omni-channel organization that can recapture the Middle America heartland. 
As Black Friday approaches, JC Penney is looking to its online presence to give it a head start on rivals such as Walmart and Target. The firm has already begun a series of one-day-only pre-Black Friday deals online and will run this campaign through to 19 November. 
Then on 20,21 and 22 November, online buyers will be offered 24 deals per day via the website, before the official full-on Black Friday sale goes live online at midnight on 23 November, the day before Thanksgiving. 
The online onslaught will be combined with an earlier than usual opening time in store on Black Friday itself. The double-hit of online and offline will give JC Penney a lead, hopes CEO Marvin Ellison, the man who’s been pushing through the digital investment at the firm, who says: 

We’re excited with the growth potential of our omni-channel for the holiday season. [The] omni-channel team have made several enhancements going into the holiday season, including an over 40% increase in online SKUs versus last year to allow us to continue to drive this business.

We are committed to becoming a world-class omni-channel retailer. 
A big deal for JC Penney this Black Friday and during the upcoming holiday season is that for the first time customers can Buy Online, Pick-Up In Store (BOPIS) right across the US. According to Ellison, nearly 40% of total online orders are currently picked up in store. Growing that percentage is a priority for a very pragmatic reason, as Ellison explains: 
Forty percent of our BOPIS same-day customers make an additional in-store purchase of over $50 while picking up their order.
So having BOPIS nationwide is a big deal, he adds:

We didn’t have BOPIS in any store for holiday last year. [This year] we have it across the chain. This is a classic example of what we call a second-mover advantage, by utilizing updated technology to not only catch the competition but to leapfrog them.

To that end, Ellison is big on the need to improve the customer experience with BOPIS:

The customer experience with BOPIS will improve by the rollout of an Android-based mobile device to all stores. These new mobile devices, and we call them Mobile Warrior, will provide a mobile checkout functionality for customers to pick up their BOPIS order. No longer will a customer have to find a service desk or stand in line. They can simply identify an associate and have their order processed on the selling floor.

Elsewhere Ellison is looking to JCPenney’s decision to expand its home appliances business in-store as a complement to online activity and as a competitive advantage over internet pureplays: 

Oftentimes customers like to see large ticket items in person before making an investment, our Home Refresh strategy offers JCPenney a clear advantage and differentiation from our e-commerce competitors. 
We are extremely pleased with our decision to expand major appliance to over 500 stores. We opened an unprecedented 113 appliance showrooms in one week in an attempt to capitalize on the Columbus Day selling weekend. 
When we think about the coming holiday months, it really centers on the fact that this will be the strongest month and the strongest quarter for appliance penetration in the retail industry, and we’re going to have 500 net new showrooms and over 1,200 SKUs online in the most important holiday selling season for appliances.

All of this is intended to win back the affections of the MAM – the Modern American Mom, Ellison’s categorization of JCPenney’s core audience. The goal is simple, he concludes:

The new mission statement of JCPenney is to help our customers find what she loves with less time, money and effort.

My take
The importance of Black Friday weekend to the US retail sector is now recognised globally – and emulated outside of the US as well. Ellison’s teed up his firm to perform strongly against the competition and having the BOPIS capabilities on a nationwide scale will surely serve him well. 
Image credit - JC Penney Read more on: MobileRetail e-commerce and the omni-channel 