
The fourth quarter of 2016 was a significant one in terms of JC Penney CEO Marvin Ellison’s digital ambitions for the retailer – the first with Buy Online, Pick-Up In Store (BOPUS) same day capability.
That said, the strong momentum that the firm has appeared to have behind its omni-channel push appeared to stutter during that same period, with Ellison now talking in terms of a ‘2017 strategy’. That’s never a good sign, smacking of the ongoing ‘This year’s plan is…’ culture that has plagued many companies in their turnaround efforts. (Yes, Yahoo! that’s you I’m looking at!)
Ellison has made no secret of his perception that JC Penney needs to recapture the lost hearts and minds (and wallets) of Middle America and that he’s pitched digital thinking and tech as a means of achieving that. This is working, up to a point. There are some useful encouraging stats he can point to. BOPUS now represents around 40% of all online sales, while the firm increased its online SKUs (Stock Keeping Units) by 40% in the last quarter alone.
The CEO is also able to point to some happy qualitative customer experience figures:
We’re also pleased with the overall improvement and functionality of our website, to that point, ForeSee, which provides an annual customer service experience ranking of e-commerce sites, ranked jcpenney.com as the fifth highest rated website for 2016, highlighting a 300 basis point improvement over last year, making JC Penney one of the most improved websites in 2016…As we improve site functionality, enhance ship from store capabilities, and develop a much improved mobile app, we will continue to drive increased online revenue in 2017.
Offline closures
But here’s an interesting thing. For the full-year 2016 approximately 77% of all online orders touched a physical store – and it’s those physical stores that are proving to be the problematic element of the JC Penney omni-channel mix. That’s resulting in a decision to follow in Macy’s footsteps and begin a store closure program, with 140 locations on the hit list to begin with.
The chosen stores won’t find out their fate until mid-to-late March, but the company expects to take a $225 million hit to its earnings from the cost of closure program. That said, it will save $200 million a year in payroll and other costs – 6,000 employees are to be offered early retirement. Ellison explains:
We believe the relevance of our brick-and-mortar portfolio will be enhanced by creating a more inviting environment in our physical stores, so having Sephora, appliance showrooms and InStyle Salons are example of this type of environment we want to create in more of our stores. So, our decision to close approximately 130 to 140 stores will allow us to raise the overall brand standard of JC Penney and allocate capital more efficiently to a smaller base of stores. This will also allow us to implement our growth initiatives in a larger percent of our stores.
It’s clear that the complexities of achieving the omni-channel balance are kicking in, as Ellison talks about starting to “better understand omni-channel. This is a journey, is his underlying message:
Remember, we didn’t roll out buy online, pick-up in store, same-day companywide until back-to-school of last year. So, we needed to understand how that resonated with the customers and how we could leverage our physical stores to really serve the customers in an efficient way. When we started to look at that data, understanding where growth was coming from, how our customers responded to the new initiatives, as well as how we could leverage our physical stores to serve our digital customers, it became apparent to us that our footprint was too large.
As we started to make those decisions on which stores we would close, it came down to a couple of really basic criteria. First, stores that we believed the growth initiatives could be implemented in and that they would work. Secondly, when we think about geographics, well we believe that transfer sales could benefit us. And third, we wanted to make sure that we could justify the financial investments in stores, that those stores were operating at enough profit level that a capital investment would actually benefit them.
But stores are still important in the mix, insists Ellison, noting that over 90% of online returns actually take place in the store:
[This] creates convenience and also gives the customer a reason to come to the store to buy additional items. So, part of our challenge is learning how we simplify the in-store environment. And some of our recent customer survey data is telling us that the customer are responding very well to some of the store changes that the team has made to create an ease of shopping environment in the store.
Relative to optimizing the network from an omni-channel standpoint as we close stores, one of the key decision-making points that we made in deciding which stores we would close was to make sure that we still could service our omni-channel customer effectively. We’ll be very aggressive this year rolling out a ship-from-store initiative that’s going to allow fulfilment of online orders from a significantly higher percent of stores than what we’ve ever done in the past.
In addition to that, we rolled out Droid-based mobile devices to all stores this past holiday season that allows the associate to process a buy online, pick-up in store order remotely on the sales floor without having the customer to stand in line or go to any type of a service desk. And we’re going to continue to lean into BOPUS and lean into ship-to-store and we have some exciting initiatives we’ll be announcing in the next coming months around the optimization of our store and digital platform to create just a unique and really ease of shopping environment for our customers.
Data-driven
One of Ellison’s regular themes is that of the art and the science of retail. He’s keen to pick up on this idea when he talks in terms of JC Penney becoming more operationally data-driven:
Historically, decisions on pricing and promotions have been more instinctively and with very few analytics to drive our decisions. But in 2017, we restructured the internal pricing process. Now all of our pricing and promotional decisions will be made using a more data-driven approach. Although this may seem like a small change, [it is] some massive cultural change within JC Penney, and one that will deliver improved gross margin performance in 2017.
We had way too much art and not enough science. In some cases, we took couponing to a level that was unhealthy and we didn’t advertise it in a way that we could drive traffic. In other decisions we made, we took additional percents off clearance and when you do that..you need to have a marketing strategy to communicate that so you can drive traffic.
What we’re saying is that we’re going to have a more data-driven approach. We’re going to have more elasticity measurements on kind of what prices should be. We’ll have a better data set on our competitors’ price. We’ll have a better marketing calendar to communicate the activity, to have specific categories where we drive traffic and specific categories where we are driving more impulse purchases. Said another way, it’s just a more strategic data-driven process to take what JC Penney does well, but do it in a way that we can protect our margin more efficiently in the future.
This approach is also helping the retailer to understand who its customer is in 2017, he adds:
We have learned a lot. We’ve spent a lot of time on this. Historically, we were just executing based on gut instinct and what had worked in the past, but we hadn’t done any real detailed marketing segmentation until this past year. From that, what we’ve learned is over 70% of our customers are female, 70% are home owners. And we understand that our growing segment is a segment that we’ve coined the Modern American Mom, who is this multi-cultural female in her early 30s, with on average two kids and she works, and she manages most of her life through her mobile device and she’s in tune to social media.
The reason why that’s important, because it instructs how we communicate with this customer and it allows us to understand what we can put in the store and online that’s going to satisfy her desires. But in addition to that, we have a mature customer that still shops us, that’s very loyal. And we have to understand how we serve the needs of that customer as well. And so, those learnings have allowed us to understand how we reset key areas from an assortment perspective, how we market, the marketing media we use, and the effectiveness of how we can communicate.
Overall, it seems that 2016 ended with some bumps in the road for JC Penney’s omni-channel thinking, but Ellison’s argument is that from these come new insights:
We learned a lot of lessons in 2016. We made some mistakes, but we learned. And we think our 2017 strategy is designed from the lessons learned in 2016, but also from the successes. We are confident that because of that, the growth initiatives that we’ve laid out will actually continue to bear fruit for us for 2017.
My take
Getting the offline/online balance right is a story we’ve seen at a lot of ‘legacy’ retailers with real-estate to manage. JC Penney’s facing up to that challenge and it’s going to be a costly and delicate process to pull it off. But Ellison is facing up to reality here and for that he should be applauded.
Image credit - JCPenneyRead more on: Digital and content marketingDigital enterprise in the real worldRetail e-commerce and the omni-channel 