
Marvin Ellison – CEO JC Penney
We’ve been keeping a close eye on JC Penney and its attempts to recapture the heartland of Middle America’s retail affections. Late last week the firm announced third quarter numbers that saw sales up 6.4% year-on-year to $2.9 billion, beating Wall Street consensus expectations of $2.86 billion, while also cutting losses to $137 million.
And the share price plummeted 15% on the news. Or did it? JC Penney released its financials the day after rival Nordstrom shocked the market by pitching a gloomy message that customers aren’t spending as much as they should heading into the holiday season. Given that JC Penney is still undeniably in a weakened state mid-turnaround, it’s quite feasible that jittery retail market investors took out their frustrations on JC Penney.
CEO Marvin Ellison is still putting his eggs in an omni-channel basket:
It’s very clear to us that our efforts to improve omni-channel functionality while expanding our online assortment is key to our future. It is our belief that as we grow our private brands penetration and position these goods online, we will grow our top-line, protect our bottom-line and have differentiation from pure play, e-commerce competition.
Ellison admits that JC Penney isn’t up-to-scratch when it comes to key retail technology differentiators:
We are great at the art of retailing, areas of design, styles, store aesthetics, and merchandise presentation. We’re not very good, but improving, in what I call the science of retailing, areas of data analytics, inventory replenishment, assortment and item planning, and process execution.
But as a result of the world-class leaders in the areas of e-commerce, supply chain, store operations, marketing, and information technology that we’re bringing in and leveraging the talents of the existing team, I’m happy with the strides we’re making to enhance our overall process efficiency. The exciting takeaway for me is that we’re winning versus the competition. We are reclaiming market share despite significant opportunities that remain to improve the way we use data and customer analytics.
JC Penney has also assembled a pricing analytics team whose work will be essential moving forward, says Ellison:
Historically here pricing has been really managed by merchant by division and not really holistically or centralized. As you become an omni-channel retailer and price transparency becomes such a focal point, that that is not a go-forward strategy. We were very fortunate to have a leader in-house that has a strong background from a merchandizing, planning and allocation and finance and so we put a leader in that function.
We are going through the process of building a team and building a database so that we can have a more thoughtful approach to elasticity, to liquidation schedules, to promotional cadence and understanding the true value of promotions.
A lot of things that we do are from pure instinct. The good news is we have a lot of instinctive knowledge here. But what I’ve learned in retail is instinct that ties with data is very powerful. We have instinct without data and we’re building data to leverage the instinct.
Pieces in place
The necessary omni-channel infrastructure is also now in place to enable the firm to achieve its ambition to become “a world-class omni-channel retailer”, insists Ellison:
We have three large dot.com distribution centers strategically located with approximately 5 million square feet of space. Our new omni-channel and supply chain leadership teams are now taking steps to effectively digitize these centers to create a seamless connection between our digital and brick-and-mortar customers.
Among the other omni-channel initiatives in play is a pilot for Buy Online, Pick-up In-Store (BOPIS) same day. There’s also a mobile push, says Ellison:
We have some mobile devices that we’re going to be rolling out, and we are rolling out in the stores that will provide not only mobile POS, but the ability for an associate to manage that BOPIS transaction from the sales floor.
It’s all about differentiation, he argues:
One of the key things that any brick-and-mortar retailer must have as they compete online is the ability to have differentiation. As long as you are selling everything that every other e-commerce site is selling, then you’re putting yourself under enormous pressure from a pricing standpoint. But if you have a stable of private brands that have created some level of loyalty, that gives you a little bit of protection. And so we see that as a key point of differentiation, not to mention our relationship with Sephora.
J.C.Penney
The Sephora relationship is one that JC Penney will be drilling down on in the coming months, adds Ellison:
As we think about our business, it’s about the national brands that matter most to our customer. It’s about the private brands that you can only get at JCPenney, and about these exclusive partnerships with Sephora and Disney and InStyle that we will only have in our marketplace. And so those things we think will give us points of differentiation.
Sephora not only drives traffic and sales to JCPenney, it serves as a point of differentiation that cannot be easily replicated in our industry. Sephora attracts a younger demographic to JCPenney and gives us an opportunity to expand our brick-and-mortar and digital offering to this all-important millennial customer. We have a great partnership with Sephora and look forward to a bright and rewarding future.
In light of Nordstrom’s downbeat holiday season outlook, it’s interesting that Ellison is adamant that his firm is not about to repeat the mistake of last year of not having enough inventory in place to satisfy the needs of Black Friday. That’s meant spending on stock this year:
Due to significant inventory out-of-stocks in the third and fourth quarter of 2014, we made a strategic decision to invest in inventory. This inventory investment is centered on dot-com and basic categories in the store. Last year we exited back-to-school and Black Friday out of business in many of these very basic categories. Therefore, we made these strategic investments in inventory to help us drive strong top line sales in the third quarter, and it allows the company to enter the holiday season in an outstanding in-stock position.
He adds:
We are very pleased with our plan for the holidays. We know that the fourth quarter will really be defined by the period of shopping starting at Thanksgiving through the day after Christmas.
We are very well positioned with an aggressive marketing plan that’s going to drive up the number of impressions. We’re very excited about the gift-giving categories that the merchant team put in place. We’re very excited with being in position, and I can’t overstate the importance of the inventory investment going into holiday.
My take
Wall Street punished JC Penney for the wider sins of the retail market.
Ellison’s still got a lot to do to turnaround the firm, but all the necessary pieces appear to be slotting into place.
He just needs to make sure that there are clear signs of improvement in 2016 – as well as not screw up on Black Friday, of course.
Read more on: Analytics planning and data analysisCRM and customer experienceDigital and content marketinge-commerceMobileRetail e-commerce and the omni-channel 