
The collaboration software market is becoming very crowded. As my colleague Phil Wainewright has outlined in the past, there are a lot of companies vying for attention in this space. You’ve got the the more traditional players, such as SAP Jam, Microsoft, Salesforce and IBM. Then there are the document-focused providers, such as Box, Huddle and Google. Then there are a host of vendors integrating social collaboration features into the processes of their enterprise applications.
Not only this, but you’ve also got Facebook at Work entering the market (with some customers already signed up) and then there are companies like Slack that are growing very quickly and attracting a lot of attention.
So where does this leave Jive? I was keen to find out from the leadership team this week at the company’s annual user event how they perceive their fifteen year old company can compete and to hear what they view is their competitive advantage.
The answer? Experience, advanced capabilities, integrations and vertical knowledge. Jive has convincingly argued that although it may not be perceived to be as ‘cool’ as the new Facebook at Work or Slack tools, for enterprise customers it has gravitas.
Jive is pushing its Workhub as a key differentiator, which integrates with a number of applications and provides a mesh and context to collaboration happening across the enterprise. Jive argues that this is something that others can’t compete with.
CEO Elisa Steele said that there will inevitably be different types of player making up the collaboration software market. But she added that Jive’s differentiator is that it puts social at the centre of everything the enterprise does (via the Workhub). Steele said:
I believe that all of that came to the workplace in a way that wasn’t around just doing social, it was around getting something done in a different way. And it’s better. I would rather do it this way, than the old way. As businesses started to do that, I think we saw Jive create an explosive category, which used to be called enterprise social networking. That category is now starting to be broken down into different segments. And I think that’s right. I think there are different segments in the market. And I think that social features are going to show up everywhere.
Now, I also believe that our differentiation is about not about creating that capability as part of something else, but actually driving that capability as the core of how works get done, which is where we think things start. And Jive as a hub, with the integrations that we offer and the ability to work seamlessly between those applications, it’s intuitive and it makes sense.
Just a very basic example, like search. One of our customers literally has 2 million people searches a day in their organisation. How do you serve that? You don’t want your people spending time trying to find the right people for things. With the search capabilities of Jive being able to bring content, people and things to you, regardless of whether it’s in Jive or these integrated other applications, is a huge value proposition. Not just on search, but search is a good example to highlight Jive’s distinctiveness of the Hub concept.
Facebook at Work
 There has been a lot of buzz around the launch of Facebook at Work, and the company has managed to secure some high profile customers. However, Steele isn’t concerned, as she sees the Facebook at Work app as something that Jive was doing a long time ago. She said:
I think Facebook at Work is creating an environment that was similar to the environment that Jive started ten years ago, or twelve years ago. The ability to do activities, to be social, to post things, to get people’s feedback. I don’t see Facebook at Work solving the interactive intranet. Every company is looking to renovate their intranet, because it’s not working.
I don’t think Facebook is going to provide a solution to healthcare collaboration. That’s a very specific business pain point around the capabilities that we have.
But won’t companies be tempted to roll out a product that their users are already familiar with? One of the greatest challenges with collaboration software in the enterprise is getting buy-in and user adoption. Even the most successful of company roll-outs struggle to continue to keep users engaged.
Elisa Steele, Jive CEO
Steele, however, argues this won’t be tempting enough for most enterprises.
I think it’s easy to think that, but I know that enterprises require really strong enterprise grade security, identity and protection that is super important to the viability of the business. I think transcending a consumer app into the business environment is really difficult and a lot of work has to be done to make that an adoptive approach to business.
A level of sophistication
I also met with David Macmillan, Jive’s head of EMEA. He spoke about the direction of the market and said that Jive’s advantage is that buyers are becoming more sophisticated in their needs for collaboration software. They’re understanding the complexities and nuances around what a successful rollout means and that whilst the likes of Slack are great for fulfilling a small requirement, a lot of companies aren’t going to sign up to something that doesn’t scale up and for which there is no roadmap.
Macmillan said:
I think the competitive advantage is the relative sophistication of the buying audience these days. I think there are a lot of options. Those options all have value, but they’ve also got natural constraints and boundaries. I think as businesses are moving forward, they’re being more thoughtful because there is more knowledge and sophistication about what this topic is with respect to their requirements.
You can spin up great simple communities to get a task done in a Slack, but can you really deploy that across the enterprise? And can I manage it? And is it a true workhorse in terms of collaborative capabilities that also is directly associated with a business output?
Whether it be Salesforce, Facebook, Microsoft, IBM, they have terrific stories. They have very talented organisations that are great story tellers.
There is a difference between someone that wants to believe a story and someone that has a commercial demand. If the two are not aligned, then they will tend to move to the one that is more appropriate for them. If they don’t have a real demand, they might be more predisposed to the story. If they have a real demand they will want to understand if that enterprise platform is robust enough to handle those demands.
And one area that Jive feels it can really compete in terms of sophistication and robust offerings, is its vertical expertise. The company is pushing hard into the healthcare market, but also has a strong presence in automotive and finance. From my discussions with executives at JiveWorld this week, this is something that the company is going to develop further. MacMillan said:
What we’re doing is surrounding the engagement with subject matter expertise. So that contextually people understand that you understand. You have knowledge and insight. And experience with the issues that they face. You have experience about how to manage those issues.
My take
The work Steele and her team has done to modernise the Jive platform will stand the company in good stead, in my view. The user experience is excellent and the thinking behind the Workhub makes sense.
Will it be able to compete with everyone else in the market? I think so. There’s going to be room for plenty of solutions out there and it’s unlikely that enterprises will pick just one. As we’ve even seen with Jive, it is integrating with likes of Microsoft and Google to take advantage of the document sharing and it knows that sometimes people like to stay working in those applications.
The problem Jive will have is proving that it’s as relevant as the likes of Slack and Facebook, or even Box and Google. It’s heading in the right direction and has made moves to simplify it’s sales approach and its pricing and packaging to reflect that. But the competition is there and it will be tough.
Disclosure - At time of writing Salesforce is a diginomica premier partner. Read more on: Collaboration sharing and digital productivityFuture of workSocial 