
Taking a tumble
I’ve become accustomed to using Dancing With The Stars/Strictly Come Dancing analogies for Jive’s turnaround efforts. This week I can only pronounce it’s a case of ‘clumsy footwork’ as the firm announces it’s laying off 14% of its workforce as first quarter losses indicate that the promised turnaround just isn’t kicking in.
Some 100 of Jive’s 713 employees worldwide will be axed in the coming months as part of what is optimistically being pitched as:
a realignment plan designed to sharpen Jive’s go-to-market strategy, continue the company’s commitment to cloud deployments, and decrease costs to align more closely with revenue. This plan will accelerate the company to profitability.
The firm reckons that this ‘realignment’ will result in $10 million of savings, as well as a shift to more enterprise-centric sales focus.
At the same time as the lay-offs were announced, Jive reported reduced year-on-year first quarter losses of $7.4 million, down from $8.2 million a year ago, on revenues up 8% to $50.7 million. But customer accounts were down quarter-on-quarter and now total 981.
CEO Elisa Steele makes the case that the latest ‘realignment’ is reflective of the changing nature of the collaboration market:
The enterprise collaboration market that we helped create is constantly changing as new and existing competitors by for different segments of the market. In response to the shifting landscape we are evolving our strategies to optimize our market position and in some cases act differently than we have in the past.
Many of our steps have been in the right direction. However, change involves risk and some steps were not producing the results we wanted fast enough. So now we’re refocusing our go forward strategy based on what’s working and what’s not.
What hasn’t been working is the firm’s attempt to create “a higher velocity selling model” pitched at SMBs. Steele says:
We found that the investment needed to produce the desired return was not happening fast enough. Experiencing a higher level of churn during the first full-year, we determine that we can generate a better ROI by focusing more on our enterprise routes and we will invest less in the SMB market going forward.
Enterprise shift
Jive now intends to focus on pushing its Interactive Internet offering into enterprise customers. Steele says this is where the money lies as larger firms are more likely to have a dedicated collaboration budget:
There is significant market opportunity for internet replacements. Many larger companies have outdated an inefficient legacy Internet that are collection of static web pages have no intelligent search capability are difficult to update and barely used by employees.
Second, our Interactive Intranet solution is our undeniable sweet spot, because it enables businesses to create digital work experiences that employees actually want to use. Jive’s solution captures corporate memory and through intelligent recommendation and search enables knowledge reuse that increases productivity and speeds time-to-market.
Third, we believe deployments for this replacement cycle will increasingly shift to modern cloud solutions. Our cloud-based Interactive Intranet provides customers with an intuitive, easy to use solution that provides the ability to connect people, information and ideas together for greater employee engagement and higher productivity.
She adds:
This is the same trend we’ve seen across a number of other software markets, including enterprise resource planning, payroll, travel and expense, and a broader human capital management sector. We believe the same opportunity exists with Interactive Intranet.
Cloud adoption is one thing that is working, argues Steele:
An important accomplishment has been our growing emphasis on cloud deployment and the strong level of adoption by new and existing customers. This trend continued in Q1 as more than 40% of new and upsell sales activity and 85% of new logo business was related to cloud.
Customers benefit from a modern cloud architecture, which makes it much easier to stay up to date with our latest innovations and provides a simplified cost structure. For Jive the cloud streamlines customer upgrade to the latest product versions plus it’s easier to maintain and has a more profitable structure over time.
So going forward, the sort of customer that Jive will pursue is the likes of Virgin Media, which:
recently launched our Interactive Intranet solution to increase efficiency across its workforce by providing a central place for employees to exchange information. Find expertise across the business; stay up to date on company news; and collaborate on strategic projects.
This new internal community built on a success of its existing Jive partner community. Giving partners’ suppliers and now employees, a mobile optimized digital hub they can use to connect, communicate and collaborate with Virgin Media. The new Intranet will also leverage Jive’s integrations with Cisco and Microsoft outlook as well as Oracle, JIRA and sales force to help people more quickly accomplish their daily work.
But there will still be some skin in the SMB space, says Steele, despite the higher levels of churn and attrition there:
The churn that we experienced in SMB is not atypical of that market. It’s just something we don’t feel at least going forward that we’re going to tolerate at scale based on our need and our desire to be profitable.
We will not fully pull out of the SMB market. We will still have a portion of our team dedicated to that market because we see a need and a fit, but it will not be where we think we’re going to get the highest growth levels. That’s why we are reallocating our resources into what we called our enterprise routes, to be able to expand into our current customers and be able to provide Jive to larger customers who have not yet considered Jive. We want to focus our resources and be able to go after those larger opportunities with our sales organization.
My take
One comment made by Steele struck me as particularly telling. Talking about new customers and Jive’s cloud pitch, she says:
While, a few are hesitant to make the move in the beginning, they were ultimately very glad they did. [SIC]
Herein lies a problem – one of confidence and trust. Once buy side organizations get a bad feeling about a vendor, it can be very difficult to shake that off. See Yahoo! as the perfect case in point.
In a collaboration market where the likes of Box and DropBox are signing enterprise deals and aligning themselves with powerful allies such as IBM, Jive’s rather being left in the dance off and exposed to the public vote.
Steele expects the firm to return to profitability in the next quarter. We shall see how that works out.
But the firm’s 2015 objective was to achieve stability, when in reality, with this latest ‘realignment’, it’s still jitterbugging all over the dance floor.
Image credit - ABC/Dancing With The StarsRead more on: Collaboration sharing and digital productivityFuture of workMobile 