
Elisa Steele, Jive CEO
Jive Software turned in a set of quarterly numbers that suggest that things are moving in the right direction at any rate as part of its ongoing transition to the cloud. Net losses were down year-on-year from $9.3 million to $6.7 million, while revenues were up from $48.6 million to $51 million. 
But what most pleases CEO Elisa Steele is that around 60% of new and up-sell sales activity and 85% of new local business is now coming from cloud adoptions. She says this is part of a wider trend towards replacement of older internet solutions: 

There is a significant Internet replacement churn happening in the market as companies seek to update their inefficient legacy Internet with digital work experiences that are easy to use and deploy. 

She adds that: 

[Organizations] are looking to replace their outdated Internet with a modern cloud architecture that’s simple to use, provides a streamlined cost structure, and enables easy update to the latest product versions. Our cloud-based Interactive Intranet delivers these critical advantages and paves the way for greater employee engagements and higher productivity by intuitively connecting people, ideas, and information.
Customers tell us time and again how much they value our interactive Internet solution, because we help them stay ahead of the game, whatever their industry, and whatever their mission. We [enable] speed learning, knowledge sharing and collaboration that increases an organization’s productivity and reduces time to market. 

Steele cites a recent University of California, Santa Barbara study of enterprise social networking technology which found that company knowledge acquisition was faster for those who use Jive versus those did not over a six-month period: 

In fact, people using Jive experienced an 88% improvement in meta-knowledge – that is who knows whom – and a 31% increase in ambient awareness of who knows what. These results highlight the importance of a unified connected solution that meets the enterprises changing needs for people.

The firm is also increasingly able to identify and target its optimal customer prospects. Steele says: 

Our primary line of business targets are corporate communications and human resources. We are gaining more traction in these areas as we leverage our unique work hub, which is the basis of the Interactive Internet solution and enhances the use of external applications, maximizes productivity, and solves customer pain points.
An example is corporate communications professionals who want to keep employees invested in their organization’s mission. Our interactive Internet delivers critical news and information that employees can easily consume via their favorite devices. In fact, 85% of companies surveyed using a Jive Internet report improve strategic alignment at their company. Another example is human resource professionals who want to attract, retain, and develop talent to enable employees to be more productive.
Jive is a great fit for this use case, because our interactive Internet solution engages and empowers the workforce, while fostering a culture of connection that helps to retain talent. 90% of companies surveyed using a Jive Internet report improved onboarding time by an average of 30%.

Customers
As for real-world customers, Steele cites Huawei as new user of Jive’s Customer Community offering: 

Honor, an entity of Huawei Group, is a leading brand of innovative smartphones and other devices dedicated to younger generation. To encourage an end-to-end customer engagement for their Honor phones, the company created a digital place, where fans could connect with each other and easily access self-service support. Honor’s West Europe division shows Jive to launch their cloud customer communities in France, Italy, and the UK in July. Jive is enabling Honor to unite several social media engagement channels and give people a fun and useful way to engage with the brands, all while lowering customer support cost.

She also points to Lloyds Banking Group which became an Interactive Intranet customer last year with 1,500 users: 

Lloyds created an identity for their Interactive Intranet called Hive, tailored the right tools for their specific needs and implemented a demand-driven approach to increase employee adoption. Today, they have more than 26,000 users who are collaborating on content and sharing information. Lloyds is now expanding higher to the broader employees base and using it to help make their customers more visible to all colleagues.

Overall, the Jive vision is to become “the agnostic enterprise foundation for a unified digital workplace” which means being able to work alongside offerings from Microsoft and Google. This is an important differentiator, argues Steele: 

We feel working with Microsoft has a clear market opportunity. Microsoft estimates $10 billion market around SharePoint integration to loan that is generated by Microsoft Partner by extending both Office 365 and non-Microsoft app into a single digit workplace we have the unique ability to coexist. For those customers who are choosing Google for Work as their alternative to Microsoft are also viewing Jive as a complementary technology that offers incremental business benefit.
Our ability to work with both Microsoft and Google provides customers a full working solution and creates a meaningful competitive advantage for us that we intend to continue to develop going forward. 

She adds that the Jive vision is built on the premise that work today is becoming more fragmented and complicated.

Organizations are struggling to keep up with accelerating cases of technology as they seek to improve their competitive positioning. In addition, people are working in more ways from more places with more information and tools than ever before. Business leaders know they must provide their workforce and customers, technologies that are real time mobile, global, and heterogeneous if they want to stay competitive. It has to be simple, productive, secure, and contextual.
We envision that digital workplace that connects employees, customers, and partners in a single virtual work hub. Jive will not simply be a place or a destination, it will evolve into a pervasive virtual workplace. For users, it would remove the barriers of working in different isolated platform and allow central access to content, people, and information across the network.
For businesses, the virtual workplace would safely and securely enable collaboration of all types with the protection in control is required. We believe this will be a very powerful approach to help companies better understand their ecosystem as a whole and use this network to enhance their competitive differentiation. In support of this vision, industry analysts from top firms such as Gartner, Forrester, and IDC also see the market adopting collaborative tools and technologies to enable the digital workplace.

My take
Signs of life, but not out of the woods yet. But there have been some steps in the right direction. 
Image credit - JiveWorld Read more on: Cloud platforms - infrastructure and architectureCollaboration sharing and digital productivityHCM and the digital future of workUse cases 