
Elisa Steele
Last time we took a look at Jive’s turnaround transformation, we said it was was more a slow waltz than a jive.
Three months on, the company’s not exactly on track to win Dancing with the Stars just yet, but the footwork’s getting a bit faster as the firm turned in better-than-expected third quarter numbers.
Net loss for the third quarter was $8.8 million, compared to a net loss of $12.1 million for the same period last year, on revenue for the third quarter of $49.9 million, an increase of 7% year-on-year.
CEO Elisa Steele argues that the firm is delivering on its transformation strategy as expected:
At the beginning of my tenure as CEO, we embarked upon an ambitious and much-needed transformation to make Jive a better company for its customers, shareholders and employees. To drive velocity and grow market share, we had to reevaluate everything from our products to our go-to-market plan to the organization to support it.
This resulted in the by-now-familiar three-pronged strategy:
One, to simplify Jive’s products and solution; two, to attract new business through increased awareness and understanding of our offerings and three, to expand our reach and drive higher velocity by unlocking more opportunities with more businesses.
Customer take-up
This is starting to deliver results for customers, says Steele:
We completed a recent Jive study with our customers. They report on average a 28% increase in productivity, a 30% decrease in on-boarding time and up to a 50% reduction in the number of support tickets.
The firm has seen some good enterprise traction in the past few months, both in terms of up-sell and new business, she says:
Existing customers like Deutsche Telecom expanded their Jive-n deployments to realize additional value from their proven Jive-n solutions. In fact Deutsche Telecom recently shared publicly that they now have over a 100,000 registered users getting work done on Jive and we have many more customers in that range.
New enterprise customers this quarter included Johnson & Johnson and Starwood Hotels and Resorts. Our targeted go-to-market focus on specific used cases is enabling us to more effectively address this large and increasingly competitive market.
Steele cites NBCUniversal News Group as an example of the work that Jive is doing with its corporate customers:
NBCUniversal wanted to promote better communication and streamline how information is shared, so journalist and staffers know what’s going on across the organization. They also sought to create an environment where people want to share information.
Using a Jive-n solution, NBCUniversal successfully launched NewsConnect, a centralized platform that recreated the workflow for 900 employees to share information and story update. Based on the positive results we help to create they published a feature article detailing the new solutions, which is entitled Working Together how NBC built a new tool to improve collaboration across its news rooms.
Jive is also looking further down the food chain in order to expand its overall footprint:
To achieve our strategy of attracting new businesses and expanding our reach, this year we began targeting companies with fewer than 2,000 employees. These companies face similar collaboration challenges as larger enterprises.
As a case in point, Steele names SugarCRM as a good example:
SugarCRM is a high growth company that turned to Jive to solve three business problems. First they have dramatically increased their employee base and sought to streamline new hire on-boarding activities to increase productivity and reduce cost.
Using our internal collaboration solution, we provided Jive, HR on-boarding solutions that SugarCRM used to create a self service on-boarding community to more effectively handle new hire activities.
Second, they sought to improve their sales effectiveness and made Jive-n and their centrepiece sales portal for the entire direct sales team. And third, in the area of customer support, SugarCRM wanted to improve case deflection and drive pear-to-pear engagement. They purchased Jive-x to do just that.
Vertical focus
The firm is also driving a vertical-focused sales strategy. Steele explains:
We’re leveraging our success in certain verticals in lines of business to drive additional growth. As an example we’re already a leader in the financial services vertical where we work with 80% of the largest full service investment banks worldwide.
Healthcare is another good vertical example. Jive continues to successfully expand in this market with recent wins at ParkwayHealth, HealthStream, Inland Empire Health Plan, Advanced MD and Humana. We see a large and evolving opportunity in this vertical as healthcare organizations seek to utilize collaborative technology to optimize the delivery of healthcare and healthcare related program and services.
HR is also positioned as a growth opportunity, she adds:
HR decision makers are focused on the entire employee journey all the way from recruitment to alumni. We are analyzing customer demands in this area and looking for ways to simplify HR activities by providing a unified system of engagement, notifications and transactions.
Our new customers Starwood is an HR deployment example where we launched a pilot to deliver companywide virtual town hall to connect employees and increase engagement. The pilot was a tremendous success and as a result, Starwood invested an access for all employees and is even making Jive the key driver of their Sheraton 2020 initiative.
There’s still a lot of work to be done. The firm added 12 new logos to its customer roster this past three months, but there’s a need for greater velocity, admits Steele:
It’s going to take us more time to get to the numbers on the logo counts that we want to see from a velocity perspective. We’re in transition now of changing our selling model, our inside sales team and the investments we’ve made are relatively new. We see strong performance in the US and we continue to build it out in EMEA.
She concludes:
I think we just need more time and executing the strategy and driving that model forward.
My take
Seven!
And we’ll see how the footwork improves next quarter.
Read more on: Cloud platforms - infrastructure and architectureCollaboration sharing and digital productivityCRM and customer experienceSocial 