
Elisa Steele
So near, but not quite. Jive Software nearly made it to break even with its smallest loss to date  – $745,000 –  in its third quarter on essentially flat revenue of $50.7 million. 
For CEO Elisa Steele, the numbers are a sign that the firm is moving in the right direction, albeit slowly: 
We remain confident that we are doing the right things to evolve and optimize our business that will better position us to generate growth longer-term.
One of the key strategies at play is to focus sales team efforts on expansion into enterprise customers, where Steele argues there are fresh up-sell opportunities as well as new wins to be had: 

Fragmentation of people, information and systems has become a chronic condition in the Enterprise. Companies are dispersed functionally and geographically, businesses have complicated patchwork for systems, programs and apps that don’t talk to each other.
This makes it more and more difficult to find data, documents and experts as well as creates security concerns for IT teams. There is typically no single place for everyone inside and outside an organization to find and share knowledge and ideas. Fragmentation drives down productivity, increases cost and makes it tougher to be customer-centric.
There are also emerging trends in the workplace that contribute to this growing fragmentation problem. For example, organizational boundaries are becoming blurred as companies interact with an ever-changing workforce, engage with customers and integrate partners and supply chain vendors into their workflow.
More and more where teamwork is going to be replaced by automation and machine learning technologies and value creation is shifting to non-routine work that happens on rapid innovation as required. Networks of people with specific skillsets are coming together as required to create values through ad hoc networks, that spring up based on actual work patterns, not lined on our work chart.
And finally, it’s becoming increasingly difficult if not impossible to rely on one integrated stack to solve all of your communication needs. And this trend is only going to continue. This is the fragmentation problem added to peak as the hodgepodge collection of tools can drive more silos and make it even harder to get work done.

These are problems that need tackling by a cross-organisational group of stakeholders, she adds, driving a need for enterprise collaboration capabilities:


For CEOs, it’s strategic alignment and unification of their workforce. For CIOs, it’s the ongoing demand to digitally transform their organizations. For human resources, it’s a crisis of employee disengagements. For corporate communications, it’s a struggle to inform an increasingly diverse group of workers and for employees, things can get more complicated as they seek easier, more simple ways to work.

All of these constituencies can be served by Jive, asserts Steele: 

We empower CEOs to unify and strategically align their organizations by making work visible, searchable, and memorable from any device. As a matter of fact, Jive can improve meta knowledge, that is who knows whom and who knows what across the organization by 88%. This finding was published by Professor Paul Leonardi of the University of California at Santa Barbara.
We help CIOs modern their multi-system infrastructures by reducing total cost of ownership and streamlining IT operations. We help companies keep diverse – dispersed employees connected and provide sophisticated analytics for HR professionals to gain insight into engagement across the company.
Jive’s customers have reduced on-boarding time by 30% according to a customer survey conducted by a top global business consulting firm and Jive has proven the employee turnover helping to drive significant cost savings and a more productive workforce.
We enable corporate communications professionals to better align company-wide communications and measure the impact with data and insights. Companies use Jive have improved employee connectivity and increased employee satisfaction. And according to the same customer survey, 85% of customers experienced increased strategic alignment using Jive.
Finally, we enable employees and customers to interact and get work done more simply and more effectively. As we offer a better way to quickly find things and people, our Interactive Intranet solution also tracks and analyzes the meta data behind all those employee searches and activities across a multi-system network.

Use cases
Among the use case examples cited by Steele is American Express Global Business Travel (GBT), a joint venture between American Express Company and private investors led by Certares: 

GBT needed an engaging interactive communications channel to align GBT’s employees throughout a period of change and cultural transformation. The HR team’s goal were to transform the employee experience through a true digital workspace that centralize dialogue, information, tools and company intelligence to drive collaboration and effectiveness within GBT.

The solution was the launch of an interactive intranet dubbed UConnect, which was rolled out to 12,000 users in September last year:

UConnect has become the destination for employees to learn about and discuss corporate initiatives and strategies and to access company information and share documents. UConnect has also become a virtual water cooler for employees around the world to share ideas, best practices, and success stories helping to connect GBT’s global workforce. Thanks to Jive, GBT has fostered a collaborative, communications culture grounding in shared information, shared voices and participatory discussions. The company’s workforce is now more engaged and the response from employees has been overwhelmingly positive.

Steele also points to Western Digital which, following the acquisition of SanDisk in 2015, needed an interactive intranet solution to communicate integration progress across both firms: 

Jive won the business to replace multiple legacy intranets across the company, because of our differentiated collaboration hub solutions, which enabled Western Digital to link the combined company’s operational systems to make data easily accessible while retaining the knowledge base of information that comprised the corporate memory of the company. Additionally, Western Digital is a significant Box customer and it’s one of the largest companies that leverages the Jive and Box integration. 

That co-existence with Box is a theme Steele picks up on, making the claim that Jive is able to enhance investment in other cloud offerings, such as Salesforce and Marketo.  Steele cites Microsoft and Google as examples of this in action: 

Microsoft’s Office 365 and Jive tackle similar market opportunities, but address very different business objectives that are not interchangeable. Office 365 is a cloud office suite, Jive on the other hand allows different tools to be accessed across systems, which leverages and extends the value of not just Microsoft, but other applications used in the Enterprise. This allows for better cross-team collaboration, productivity and visibility. For many customers, the combination of both solutions working together provides greater value to the business.
To illustrate this further, when Jive is integrated with Microsoft, users in Jive can search for content stored in SharePoint, find people in active directory and publish documents or discussions directly to Jive from any Microsoft tool such as Outlook or Office 365. This published content is unavailable for collaboration and search within Jive. This capability matters, because users can simply work on the right content from any app and it’s easily leveraged no matter which tool they are using.
Jive also complements in extent, Google’s G Suite, another cloud office provider. Jive easily integrates across G Suite to enable users to capture conversations around documents, allowing for more in-depth collaborations that connects users at all levels.

My take
Progress, progress, but still a long way to go. But the firm is putting its internal house in order, with plans now to move to smaller headquarters in San Jose that get it out of a $3.5 million lease in Palo Alto as well as completing the 100 headcount reduction announced back in May. Will the next quarter see the firm finally move into the black? It seems possible. 
Image credit - JiveDisclosure - At time of writing, Marketo and Salesforce are premier partners of diginomica. Read more on: Collaboration sharing and digital productivityCRM and customer experience 