

The online food delivery business is heating up, with incumbent Just Eat acquiring two of its competitors – one in the UK and one in Canada – whilst it faces increased competition from new entrants, such as Uber, Deliveroo and Amazon.
Just Eat was founded in Denmark way back in 2000, a long time before mobile app ordering from local takeaways and restaurants was even an option. It relocated to London in 2006 and has seen significant growth over the past decade – expanding into a number of regions globally (largely via acquisition).
In it’s most recent results, Just Eat’s UK orders were up 28% for the quarter and it saw 33.3 million orders on the platform globally.
However, the rise of the smartphone has brought fresh competition, and Just Eat – along with other online food delivery sites – have been fighting it out for market share against the new entrants.
Just Eat is also experimenting with a number of new technologies that could see it differentiate itself further from the competition, as well as reduce its costs.
However, the first announcement today saw Just Eat agree to acquire SkipTheDishes, one of Canada’s largest online food delivery marketplaces, for £66.1 million. SkipTheDishes focuses on lower density metropolitan and suburban areas and currently has 350,000 active customers, with growth in orders over the year at 185%.
David Buttress, CEO of Just Eat, commented:
The acquisition of SkipTheDishes will materially strengthen Just Eat’s number one position in Canada. Canada is a phenomenally exciting country for online food delivery, with significant runway for growth and a clear opportunity to drive channel shift.
SkipTheDishes’ outstanding team, technological know-how and operational excellence has enabled it to develop a business model well-suited to Canada’s unique market conditions. It will complement our existing operations so that Just Eat is best-placed to address this fast-growing market.
Meanwhile, in the UK Just Eat has also announced the acquisition of its closest competitor, hungryhouse, for an initial consideration of £200 million. It said that a further cash amount of up to £40 million may also be payable, subject to the performance of hungryhouse between signing and completion of the transaction.
Just Eat said that the acquisition is consistent with its “strategic ambition to accelerate its growth and increase its market presence in every geography in which it operates”. hungryhouse’s business model is very similar to Just Eat’s and the two are considered more closely aligned than some of the other players in the market.
Commenting on the acquisition, Buttress said:
The UK has long been an engine of growth for Just Eat. While we have significantly expanded internationally in recent years, we have remained focused on building a high growth, sustainably profitable business domestically. Through this transaction, we would extend our market presence in the UK and sustain high levels of growth given the considerable opportunity in this market.
Heating up
As noted above, the online delivery business for food is becoming increasingly competitive. The likes of Uber and Amazon are expanding their business models into the market, whilst companies such as Deliveroo and Jinn are seeing strong growth in the big cities.
Just Eat, which has typically offered food delivery from more traditional takeaway restaurants, now faces the challenge of competing with delivery companies that tap into independent restaurants and chains that previously weren’t providing take-out options.
Although there is probably room for a few providers in the UK – the current operators are figuring out ways to drive down costs and increase availability, in a bid to gain valuable market share.
Just Eat, for example, recently announced a number of tech initiatives it is pursuing, which it believes could help it differentiate itself in the future. At an event in London last month, the company’s dedicated product development team showcased a number of projects that included:
• HoloLens: Just Eat is using AR to allow customers to “see a restaurant menu as a buffet” for them to pick and choose what they want to eat virtually, via an immersive experience.
• Connected home: Just Eat has integrated as a launch skill with Amazon Echo, and has also announced a new app for Apple TV (which is due to be released in January 2017). It also has an app on Xbox One, which will launch in time for Christmas.
• The Customer Care Chatbot: Built using the Microsoft Bot Framework, this new development sees AI integrated into the ordering experience to ensure that customers receive round the clock support and service.
• The Facebook Messenger Chatbot: customers are able to chat with the bot, whether they are ordering their usual favourite or trying something new, the bot supposedly offers customers a selection of different restaurants depending where their mood takes them.
• Starship Technologies delivery robots: In September, Just Eat began testing self-driving delivery robots on the streets of London, designed to increase delivery capacity for restaurant partners.
It’s the last point that attracted the most publicity for Just Eat, with pictures of robots roaming the streets of Greenwich, making deliveries to customers. And whilst Just Eat claims that the move to robotics is about increasing delivery capacity for restaurant providers – it will also inevitably help the company reduce its human capital costs.
It has been reported that the cost per delivery using the droid is around £1, whilst a human courier costs between £3 and £6.
Speaking at the event last month, Buttress said:
Technology is at the heart of everything we do at Just Eat. We are always seeking ways to help our restaurant partners grow and ensure new and existing customers have a reliable, convenient and, increasingly, fun experience when they order from us. Technology innovation helps us bring the greatest breadth of choice to consumers while giving our fantastic restaurant partners the tools and resources to further their own ambitions.
My take
Plenty of choice for consumers at the moment, but it’s a tough and competitive game for the providers. The ones that can offer the broadest choice, at the best price, with the quickest delivery – whilst maintaining a low cost base and providing the best experience – will be the ones that win. Not too much to ask?
Image credit - Image sourced via Just EatRead more on: Retail e-commerce and the omni-channel 