
Back in 2001, two women launched an application that would change the way that people donate to the causes that they care about. Zarine Kharas and Anne-Marie Huby recognised that the internet provided an opportunity for people to no longer be tied to paper-based collection of funds, and that online provided a world of people to tap into.
The pair launched JustGiving, providing fundraisers with a platform to share their stories and raise money for their causes. JustGiving has always been quick to adopt new technology, having also been wise to quickly incorporate social elements that meant giving could be amplified amongst social networks.
The platform now has over 20 million users and it has raised in excess of $4 billion, across 165 countries.
However, JustGiving wants to do more. It is now looking to the world of data science and machine learning to help it figure out what motivates people to give, in an attempt to drive greater donations. Mike Bugembe, Chief Analytics Officer at JustGiving, was speaking at Microsoft’s Future Decoded event in London this week, where he explained the company’s strategy. He said:
In spite of these really strong numbers, we still have the strong ambition to continue to grow in the world of giving. This is a difficult task. So what we did more recently was embrace some of the new transformations – we decided to embrace big data and data science. We started to see if we could harness all of the data that was being created, all of the massive volumes of data that was being created, and use data science to build algorithms that would bring us some of that game changing value that big data promises.
The journey we took started with us trying to understand the mechanics of our strategy. This meant using an algorithm to understand exactly what we needed to do to grow the world of giving. It came up with three specific things we could look at.
Bugembe explained that this algorithm directed JustGiving to address three main points. Which included:
• Increasing the number of pages and the variety of pages on the platform. The idea being that not everybody wants to run a marathon, but may be interested in setting up a page for their birthday, for example, where instead of a gift, they ask people to donate to charity.
• The second thing is that fundraising isn’t the sort of thing that we do every day. It’s difficult for a lot of people. People don’t know what images to upload, don’t know how to tell their story. They don’t know what sort of target they should raise. Or how to reach some of the people. JustGiving needed to personalize the pages and provide guidance on what works and what doesn’t.
• Lastly, JustGiving needed to do a better job identifying people that were passionate about very specific causes – allowing people to raise money outside of their immediate network.
Bugembe said:
So to try and get the big data to work for us on these three variables, we had to go back to the humble fundraising page. We had to look at it from a completely different perspective. We had to look at it the same way a machine looks at it. The fundraising page is effectively a collection of really, really valuable data points. Of course we collected a lot of the transactional information, we collected the data on who was fundraising, or who had sponsored you – but in this world of big data, we capture everything.
So we can capture your story and have a real deep understanding of the motivations. We can even see the text between the people that supported you. Are they your friends? Colleagues? But the data goes beyond that. We could also get observational data, we could see how people respond to the target on the page.
We saw that there are some people that want to be the first, when you’re on 0%, they want to be the first to support you. But there’s also another set of people that are pressing refresh every single time because it’s at 95% and they want to be the hero, the one that got you through to the target. Understanding these sorts of behaviours are really important when it comes to personalisation.
It’s all about connections
To achieve the three priorities, JustGiving began to understand that ultimately what is important to the fundraising business model is the ever-changing connections that drive it. For example, parents may feel more strongly about causes involving children. Or people that know people with a certain disease, may be more compelled to give to causes about that disease.
Bugembe said:
We knew that we had to use machine learning to be more personal, to make the pages more engaging. But because we are dealing with connections, this means we had access to graph data. The theory that allows us to understand that through a system of connections, how does generosity flow? How does opinion flow? How do people make decisions about what they are passionate about?
And JustGiving was able to do this using the Microsoft Azure platform. He added:
We had a small team of data scientists, so we were really blessed when they Azure platform showed up, particularly the Platform-as-a-Service offering. Because this allowed us to focus on the problem that we needed to solve. We didn’t have the resources to be able to recruit a whole team to start building the scaffolding around, to build the infrastructure.
What we needed to do was go directly to the problem, to the extent where for some of the biggest applications we have, we have a small team that can do both the support of that, but also the development of that. Scientists that could just focus on doing the mathematics, or looking at the economics and making that real, productizing it.
The PaaS offering from Microsoft really got us there. Got us to the position where we could build what we call our graph. Our graph is a system of connections and nodes. These are people, a snapshot of real data that is constantly moving.
Bugembe said that JustGiving is now able to accurately predict who is likely to fundraise, and the information they needed to make that decision. It can understand what type of event that person would be interested in.
The algorithm also gives people the help they need to make a story really good, it knows what target they should set, and can even tell you what you should add to your target to take you that bit further.
It also knows the people who care, it knows whether or not you are ready to give, or whether you just want to be engaged at that point in time, according to Bugembe. He said:
What you experience today or tomorrow, these things have an impact on us. It’s not static. The Give Graph is what we use to power our machine, and uses all the elements of the graph doing calculations – which would have taken three months to do in the past. This has to be as real time as possible.
Image credit - Social media and connections © Jakub Jirsák - Fotolia.com.Read more on: Machine intelligence and AIUse cases 