
In our update on Domino’s digital strategy, an interesting observation was made by CEO Patrick Doyle about the impact of online delivery services such as Deliveroo and Just Eat on the pizza firm’s own strategic thinking when it comes to the UK market. These haven’t had a negative effect to date, but the implication is that Doyle’s aware of their potential to be disruptive.
As it happens, Just Eat has just announced an expansion of trials of working with brand name fast food chains of the Domino’s variety, a shift away from its former core audience of independent restaurants – 27,000 at the last count. But with the likes of McDonald’s now doing deals with UberEats and Deliveroo, Just Eat has had to adjust its thinking to adapt to new market realities. Paul Harrison, Interim CEO at Just Eat, says:
We have always faced very strong competition, which now takes the form of US tech giants like Uber, and they are going after chains in the UK market. We don’t want to see too many chains sitting on the Uber platform.
Hence the revised thinking on who to partner with:
We are progressing our early-stage relationships with selected dining chains. We have added more to 180 outlets to our platform in this first half; but just as a reminder, what are we trying to achieve here? Firstly, we want to give our customers no reason to think that they can’t order what they want on that platform. So that includes working with well known branded dining chains, we should respond to that.
I think it’s fair to say there are offensive and defensive reasons for doing this. Offensive because our hypothesis is this will bring new business to our platform, but also those customers will place new orders that become new customers if you like for our independent restaurants as they win as well. Now that’s a hypothesis in testing these to prove out whether both of that works, both constituents win that’s important.
An early example of importance of getting this right can be seen in the growing (threatening) relationship between Uber Eats and McDonald’s, says Harrison:
 We want to be absolutely sure, especially now, that our customers have nowhere else that they need to go to order that food other than the Just Eat platform.
Turbulent
Harrison is in the CEO hot seat until September after a turbulent twelve months for Just Eat, during which its chairman died and its CEO abruptly left in February to deal with “urgent family matters”. Meanwhile a plan to buy UK rival Hungryhouse has run into problems with an in-depth probe by competition regulators.
But for all that, the company remains true to its mission statement, says Harrison:
Our vision is to create world’s greatest food community. We are pursuing this by creating a growing and dynamic market place connecting more than 75,000 restaurants with 19 million customers, both substantially up on the prior period.
There are two clear constituencies with which Just Eat deals, he adds:
For our restaurants partners, we provide our leading digital platform with a well supported global brand. For our customers, we offer the widest choice of restaurants from popular local independents to the international brands.
On the restaurants front, one thing on the Just Eat menu is the ablity to use its scale to negotiate exclusive discounts at supply agreements on behalf of the restaurant partners. Harrison explains:
I think we’re delivering clear value for our restaurants. In fact maybe 2,000 as you see in the UK taking advantage of these deals and we’re saving a lot of money and indeed it’s equivalent to 1% reduction in commission effectively on average.
Why are we doing this? It is not for direct financial gain, we are charging for these new services. However, if you consider that we’re faced with competitiveness in the form of some of the best-resourced global technology players, we’re seeking to make our relationships with these restaurant partners ever more valuable to them.
My take
From next month, Just Eat will have a new CEO in the shape of Peter Plumb, formerly CEO of MoneySupermarket.com. He’s bringing a lot of online retail experience with him and is hugely enthused by the prospects for Just Eat:
At MoneySupermarket, we led the markets using customer data and customer insights to really deliver a better service to customers and the competition and I think that’s really a theme that I want to burn into Just Eat as we go forward. I’ve seen a lot of digital platforms, Just Eat is the purest play digital platform I have ever seen. I think it’s a phenomenal business.
On the face of it, Just Eat looks well-placed to ride out the increasing competition in the digitally-enbabled food delivery business. For the first half of its current financial year, revenues are up 44% to £247 million, with international sales jumping to 43% of the total from 36%. Profits increased 46% to £49.5 million, revenue per customer rose 15% and orders made on its mobile app have seen a 36% increase.
What will be interesting about the repositioning to tap into deals with the larger chains is the potential impact it has on the planned HungryHouse acquisition which was announced six months ago.
The Competition and Markets Authority has stepped up its its inquiry into the £240 million deal over worries that restaurants could end up worse off by the two firms which have both specialised in working with independents, rather than the bigger chains. As such the CMA hasn’t seen Just Eat as in direct competition with Deliveroo and UberEats, but is concerned that the takeover would lessen choice for the smaller independent restaurants and result in worse terms.
If Just Eat’s strategic pragmatism about chasing the big chains in order to keep them away from UberEats and Deliveroo, that changes the game somewhat. It’s clearly going to be an interesting time for Plumb to take the helm.
Image credit - Just EatRead more on: Retail e-commerce and the omni-channel 