
Global provider of air pressured systems, Kaeser Compressors, is migrating its core business systems to SAP’s HANA platform – where it is looking to make use of the HANA Cloud Platform for its mobile web infrastructure, as well as SAP’s recently announced next generation S/4 HANA applications.
However, whilst CIO Falko Lameter argues that the migration is absolutely “worth it” and will protect the company’s IT for many years to come, he also states that creating a business case for the migration is very difficult because it’s hard to measure the value of a system that is underpinning your entire business.
Kaeser Compressors has been an SAP customer since 1992, when it began looking for a new client-server IT system to run on and decided to roll out R3. In recent years, however, the company has been looking to upgrade to a more real-time infrastructure in the form of SAP’s in-memory platform, HANA. Lameter said:
Now [SAP is] the core system of our global business. A few years ago, a new thing came up – BW on HANA. It was very fast but we didn’t have a use case for a fast business layer. So we weren’t so interested. But we were looking at what it was.
Fast forward to 2012 and Lameter began to reevaluate his position. He said:
In 2012 I understood that it was a new technology that had a dramatic effect on the software. SAP was our main system so we had to look and see if this made sense for us, it had an impact on us. Then we understood what HANA means – potential for new applications. It was clear that we wanted to go in this direction. In parallel there was an ongoing discussion about optimising our service. The combination of this led us to HANA.
The implementation
 Kaeser Compressors hasn’t completed its migration journey to HANA (as it is now looking at the cloud options and S/4), but has begun using the core on-premise HANA platform. Lameter said:
We are not using a lot of it at the moment, this is brand new. We are on the way to using it. So for instance we don’t use the HANA Cloud Platform at the moment, we want to start with it next year. We are currently using the HANA platform. The next step is to bring BS to S/4 on HANA.
S/4 Financials means that it’s more or less a modernisation and reorganisation of the legacy system from the Business Suite, a slimline in the data structures and a redesign of general ledger. All layers are optimised. The new interface [is great[ and we get the benefit of real-time information.
Lameter added that the company plans to use the HANA Cloud Platform for its mobile infrastructure, as he believes that the web nature of mobile applications means that they are difficult to manage on-premise. He said that this will be provided as a managed service by T-Systems.
One thing is clear is that we want to use the HANA Cloud Platform for everything that is connected to the web. Or related to the web. For instance this smartphone – is this comparable to the PC? No it’s not, a PC is a client. It needs a server. A smartphone is a web device, it needs a web application. Therefore it is a child of the web. That means I cannot influence this thing, I cannot design anything there. That means that this will be cloud. So I want to do mobile for the HANA Cloud Platform.
We will use the HANA Cloud Platform for all the Fiori apps and for our predictive maintenance custom design apps
Lameter said he didn’t consider cloud appropriate for some of Kaeser’s current on premise SAP systems, as he wants a direct, fast integration to machines on-site. Either that, or some of Kaeser’s systems are so customised that it makes them difficult to put them into a standardised cloud environment, he said. But Lameter did add:
We already have SuccessFactors in the cloud, we have Ariba in the cloud. The biggest question we have is to decide what to do with the sales, service and marketing – I think this may go in the cloud too.
The HANA business case
One of the biggest challenges facing SAP around the HANA messaging is convincing its current customer base that the investment is a worthwhile one. In other words, figuring out how the business case stacks up. For example, the UK and Ireland User Group recently found that SAP customers want to move to S/4 HANA at their own pace and at their own price.
So how did Kaeser Compressors make this work? Lameter said that in his case, it was about understanding the broader value of a new, faster business system – rather than a business case. He said:
Making a business case is usually done by controllers, they are the kind of people that know the price of every thing but not the value. This is the difference. The value of HANA is that you cannot calculate it in the business case, because it’s a fundamental architecture and it changes the way that you make IT. You have to make a business case for complete IT. With this platform we have an infrastructure that can lead us into the future.
Lameter added that the results have proven the worth of the investment.
For example, our controllers were excited when our reports were much faster, within seconds, not within 30 minutes or so. Because this system is much more responsive, they use it more. They use it daily. For example, our sales people were always complaining about our CRM performance. I haven’t heard anything since they’ve been on HANA. You feel good if you use SAP now.
Looking at system management, for instance if you have speed in system management, it makes it more simple. You load data and you have to wait and plan to do it on Saturday night because it takes 10 hours – now you can do it at lunchtime. The complete handling of the system is faster and for the system manager is simpler and more speedy.
Okay you could sit down and calculate all this, but it’s a lot. I’m sure that it pays back. It’s worth it.
Disclosure – At time of writing, SAP is a diginomica premier partner. 
Read more on: Cloud ERP financials and supply chainCloud platforms - infrastructure and architectureFinancialsUse cases 