
Kingfisher, which owns such brands as B&Q and Screwfix here in the UK, has announced plans to ‘unify’ its business and make some pretty significant digital investments over the next five years.
Not only this, but if you were in any doubt about the motivation behind the company’s latest strategy update, Kingfisher also took the opportunity to announce that it is appointing Rakhi Parekh as a non-executive director. Parekh has spent 11 years working across various roles at amazon.com.
Kingfisher said that the transformation plan should deliver a £500 million sustainable annual profit boost for the company by the end of year 5 over and above ‘business as usual’. But will it work?
CEO Veronique Laury dubbed the plan ‘One’ and is confident about future success. She said:
Following an in depth review of Kingfisher’s business last year alongside in depth studies of our customers’ home improvement needs, the leadership team announced the ‘ONE’ Kingfisher plan. This plan will leverage the scale of the business by becoming a single, unified company where those customer needs always come first.
We are excited to now reveal our new strategy and our focus over the next five years based on the three key pillars of creating a unified, unique and leading home improvement offer, driving our digital capability and optimising our operational efficiency.
With a clear roadmap now in place alongside clear long term targets, the size of the five year opportunity is significant. We do acknowledge the challenges ahead, however having already made good progress since March last year, and with 80,000 committed colleagues, we feel confident about our plan and look forward to moving on to the first year of our transformation.
The details
 Kingfisher said that because the transformation plan is above business as usual, it expects its performance to be “broadly in line with the macroeconomic backdrop in our respective markets” – i.e. it doesn’t expect too much disruption beyond what other similar retail businesses would experience.
It also said that it had limited expansion plans, but the Screwfix business will see some increased footprint in Europe.
Kingfisher’s plans comprise of three main pillars:

Creating a “unified, unique and leading offer” based on customer needs. This will deliver a £350 million annual profit uplift by end of year five at a total cash cost of £480 million. The uplift will be delivered by a 5% reduction in cost of goods sold, whilst also assuming higher sales.
Driving digital capability. This expects to generate £50 million in annual profit uplift by end of year five at a total cash cost of £210 million. Kingfisher said it would be investing in its core e-commerce platforms and would be building capability to enable it to “unlock” more of its complex customer journeys.
Optimising operational efficiency. This should deliver £100 million in annual profits by end of year five at a total cash cost of £110 million.

In 2014/15 Kingfisher brought in a total of £10.6 billion revenues and made a retail profit of £742 million.
In a presentation to investors dating back in October last year, Kingfisher gave some guidance that it was planning to move from a position where a significant portion of its business was tailored to meeting local needs and wants, to a future position where most of the products and stores were unified and essentially ‘one business’. See this diagram:

It also provided details of a unified ‘Easier’ IT platform upgrade, which Kingfisher said it would be accelerating and focuses on integrating its omni-channel capabilities and its staff’s ways of working. More details can be seen here:

A separate presentation also details how Kingfisher is aiming to meet its customers’ changing shopping habits, how it wants to engage with a more “digital savvy generation”, make it easier for customers to shop when, where and however they want to, become more efficient, increase mobility and be able to serve customers in the aisle.
Kingfisher also wants to introduce group-wide unified processes and integrate its systems. The company’s plans are pretty much what you’d expect from a modern retailer – such as seamless processes, modern ways to pay and a single view for the customer.
Internally, Kingfisher is also planning to improve its finance and HR tools. See the following diagrams:


Interestingly, Kignfisher also highlights in its presentation that it is aware that big IT projects fail (calling out a number of reasons, such as scope creep, integration issues and poor end-to-end functionality.
It said that it has addressed these problems by testing the system end to end, by running pilots and introducing management controls for scope creep.
The new hire
As mentioned previously, Kingfisher has also appointed Amazon’s Rakhi Parekh as a non-executive director. There should be no confusion about who Kingfisher see’s as direct competition in this space – it’s Amazon. This is true of many other retailers out there that have traditionally relied on physical footprint to reach customers (see our stories on Argos and Sainsbury’s).
Kingfisher CEO Veronique Laury said:
“Driving our digital capability is one of the three key pillars of Kingfisher’s transformation announced today. Rakhi’s extensive experience in digital and multichannel retailing will therefore be vital as we work to transform Kingfisher into a single, unified company where customer needs always come first.”
My take
Kingfisher is right to recognise the risks it faces in its core markets from the increasing popularity

of Amazon. This is only going to get worse as Amazon continues to invest in its market-winning logistics and as companies like Uber enter the retail space.
However, I remain concerned about the approach here. Multi-region projects that require high level integrations to ‘unify’ a business, whilst also carrying out big IT projects that are end-to-end in nature (i.e across the whole business) rarely go according to plan. No matter what Kingfisher says, this will be a huge challenge for it.
Also, five years is a long time to wait for results when you consider the pace at which the online retailers are moving.
Definitely one to watch.
Read more on: Retail e-commerce and the omni-channel 