
 
One theme at Knowledge 16, the ServiceNow conference taking place on Las Vegas this week is how Service Integration And Management (SIAM) and a use case at CERN can show how the delivery of services is becoming not just a core competence of any business, but also critical to the development of digitalization and its corollary – expanding and improving the customer experience.
These two are examples aof how service management is starting to move beyond the obvious role of orchestrating functioning services from available applications and into the management of many types of services across all businesses. This opens up the possibility that business managers may find that their one implementation of ServiceNow will have now have a wide range of new applications, acting as the hub for all services across the business.
The company is not planning to foresake its established IT-related stamping ground, however, as the announcement of full management support for services running on Microsoft Azure proves.
The move into SIAM is an internal development that adds some new capabilities to IT service management that are designed to strengthen any company’s control over the services it provides for its staff and customers and, indirectly, then improve the customer and user experiences when working with that company.
More detailed coverage of the ServiceNow SIAM developments will follow soon, but its most important aspect is likely to find a warm reception and a ready market amongst IT managements, so is worth a little exposure right now. Working with the service performance data collected by Service Now, it becomes possible to identify not only what services are under-performing, but what applications making up that service are the chief contributors to that under-performance.
New tools within ServiceNow will allow IT departments to drill down into any service performance issue to identify not only which application is the culprit, but also where the issue lies. For example, it can identify that an application not only has a large number of service tickets outstanding, but all the tickets concern one particular function, and the issue is not being resolved.
If that application is internally generated, the IT department can know exactly which part of its operations is in trouble and what type of remedy is required. But in practice many applications come from third party suppliers – the ISVs. And years of history shows that any IT department trying to prove beyond doubt that application X from supplier Y is the cause of a problem will face an uphill struggle.
One of the key objectives with the new SIAM tools, therefore, is to provide accurate and detailed evidence that application X is the cause of any under-performance of a service, which in turn gives the business a strong start point in any negotiations with supplier Y. This could stretch as far as termination of a contract on the basis of under-performance against an agreed SLA.
And for the business, it means it can trap an under-performing service at the earliest possible moment, and rectify as quickly as possible. This has obvious benefits for any internal services or operations, but is often even more important with customer-facing services, where poor performance can have a serious negative impact on current customer experience, and future customer expectations and purchasing plans.
CERN case
The experience of CERN, the European organization for nuclear research, demonstrates a complete different extension to the potential marketplace ServiceNow can consider targeting.
Again, a more comprehensive overview of how CERN is using ServiceNOW will follow soon, but suffice it to say that in this particular application, it is not being applied to the management of IT services or nuclear research facilities. Instead, it has found a niche in managing the myriad day-to-day physical services that are the lifeblood of every business.
For CERN these range from the small and every day tasks such as changing failed lightbulbs, through to less common tasks that come from its size, such as managing car parking over its extensive grounds. Here the owner of every car is known and one is found to be parked incorrectly the owner is emailed and given a short period of grace in which to move it. If not, it is removed, with suitable penalties attached.
The common ground that led to ServiceNow being selected to manage all these tasks is that to make them work effectively, they all need clearly defined and understood processes. These range from the reporting structure – what department needs to be informed about a light bulb or a poorly parked car – and clearly set process steps to provide a remedy.
The organization realised that the well-established ITIL process management model could be applied to the management of such physical processes as to IT-based ones, and lighted upon ServiceNow and its grounding in ITIL as the solution.
How seriously the company may want to pursue this potential market opportunity is a moot point, but it may well attract the interest of existing ServiceNow users that can then extend their service management capabilities in this new direction. It may even open up opportunities for the company to win the management of physical services and subsequently move in on IT services and other areas.
My take
If there is an underlying lesson for other IT vendors it is to understand the wider context of what they are selling. Here are some examples of how the concept of ‘service management’ can be applied far more widely than just monitoring the operations of some applications. A ‘service’ can be just about anything, and it can also end up a mess if its processes, and their interaction and interdependencies, are not managed correctly.
Image credit - Knowledge16Read more on: CRM and customer experienceIT service management 