
The formal announcement at last week’s Knowledge 16 conference in Las Vegas that ServiceNOW is to provide support for Microsoft Azure marks what looks like a subtle expansion in its direction into the world of service orchestration, and the wider management issues of Governance, Risk and Compliance.
Last month the company acquired ITapp for its orchestration capabilities. This is a key step to building and managing complex services that are constructed from other applications and services. And with Azure making it easy for users to add those applications and services in terms of procurement and delivering them to end users, adding the ability to orchestrate them into cohesive, tailored services is likely to prove a capability of some significance.
The real results of the acquisition, and the orchestration capabilities, are not expected to be seen immediately. Though it will be quicker than had ServiceNOW attempted development from a standing start, as Kevin Murray, the company’s Senior Director of Product Marketing, explained to Diginomica.
At our current rate of development it would have taken us too long to get there, and ITapp already was there. We are now in the process of re-platforming it into serviceNOW and we have said publicly that it will be 2017 when that is completed.
So a formal launch of such a capability can be expected for Knowledge 17.
The Azure version shows how the basics of such orchestration can be expected to operate, and Murray said it is a management issue Azure users are already struggling with. Right now those service are largely comprised of infrastructure that is on-premise. But increasingly, enterprise users are looking to add services that are not on-premise but come from SaaS providers or specific applications out in the public cloud.
So you may have a business service running on-premise but is pulling in services from AWS or Azure. Providing support for Azure gives users the visibility to manage this.
Which provider is next?
 It is therefore becoming increasingly beholden on ServiceNOW to support other cloud platforms to give them the visibility. That, according to Murray, is now job number one. The addition of Azure brings the number of service providers covered to three, the others being AWS and VMware. The latter targets the important enterprise market of on-premise cloud services.
Other service providers will follow, with the next one expected to be Rackspace, though Murray would give no indication as to when this might happen. Rackspace is, of course, a strong proponent of OpenStack, and such a move might be taken as an indication that all OpenStack-based service providers could then be included. Murray, however, indicated that such support would only be partial.
It’s not mutually exclusive, but there are different flavours of OpenStack, such as Red Hat of course. But there are core resources common to all of them that will be supported.
He indicated that the same views extend, for the present, to Google. It has not yet shown too much presence in the enterprise market, but ServiceNOW is ready and willing to support it as an when the right time arrives.
Platforms like Azure are intended to make it easy and straight forward for enterprise users to get into the cloud and, to some extent, they do achieve that. But in practice, life is not usually that simple or straight forward. For example, it is already common the enterprises to use multiple service providers, so the goal now is to provide a unified management platform for whatever they want to use.
This is a well recognised space, and he reckons the company is well-placed to be a cloud management platform, because it can provide an automation platform, a service catalogue and interface, and all the automation behind it to provision any of the services it supports by clicking on a button. In addition, service approval is automated, together with its provisioning and measurement, so the cost, consumption and utilisation of it can all be managed.
It can also provide this across multiple services, as well as providing a comparison of usage and cost across multiple sources. In a large enterprise, there will be many occasions that services come from different service providers. Indeed, there will be many occasions where departments do the shadow IT thing of DIY provisioning of cloud services.
Managing this positively will then become far more straight forward. For example, it should allow IT managers to say `just tell us what you want and we can fix it up for you – and make it safe to use.’
The most common requester of such services right now is the developer. They are going to develop in their environment of choice and that is either go out and get it directly, or do right by IT and go through the approved shopping system. And if IT has the ability to provide that then they also have the ability to govern it, manage it, and negotiate better rates. But it is when IT can’t do those things that problems occur.
With this Cloud Provider Framework others, such as its growing partner network, will be able to plug in through the APIs provided and exploit the capabilities as additions to their own services. In the long run this is likely to become a large part of the future ServiceNOW model, where the whole partner ecosystem is worth a large multiple of whatever revenue ServiceNOW generates.
GRC
Azure support has in fact been available since December but waited to make formal announcement for

a couple of reasons. One is that ServiceNOW wanted to spend time with Microsoft to help them understand what the support would offer, and is also working with Microsoft on other development and projects. One area being pursued here is working with Office 365 and Power BI, though no specific details are available as yet. So a Knowledge 16 formal announcement made sense for them.
There is also work going on, both with Microsoft and outside of it, on Governance, Risk and Compliance.
With regulatory conditions the way they are right now, people can’t afford to make mistakes.
Murray acknowledged that, in a highly regulated environment, if a company does not know where its applications and data are or what they are doing – for example, whether they are going out to a public cloud service or not – they can be in a lot of trouble. And the more application and services come from different sources and service providers, the more likely it is for a business to lose control of such important factors.
He also stressed that managing the delivery and continued availability of services is also becoming an important component of governance, for with the interlocking nature of multiple services now becoming increasingly common in the cloud, the failure of one service to work as planned, as and when required, can now kick a complete business service out of compliance.
An important point here is that neither ServiceNOW nor its customers are the arbiters of what it or is not compliant. Rather, that is the job of the relevant regulatory authority. So one of the best ways of ensuring the best chance of maintaining compliance is to keep those services ticking over properly.
My Take
Moving to take a bigger share of the management workload, especially where the orchestration of services is concerned, is an important one for ServiceNOW. It will set it competition with others, of course, including the very large ISVs looking to orchestrate services around their core applications. But the company’s size and independence may well give it an advantage on that score.
Image credit - Data center management by businessman with iPad @Fotolia Read more on: InfrastructureIT service management 