
Konica-Minolta is perhaps not the most obvious contender for place in the AI and Internet of Things (IoT) races. Known as a camera company back in the day, it is still in the image-related business, now making making office systems such as photocopiers and printers.
But now, in a step forward in terms of control and management systems for complete office environments, it has also decided to step sideways into the world AI and IoT control and management in a far wider range of applications, upto and including manufacturing systems.
The target market is the SME community, which might well see how they could make use of AI and IoT capabilities, perhaps for managing machine tools and other non-office systems, but then look at the cost of the control systems and decide to think again. At the moment, the upfront costs of implementing IoT of any kind can be a serious impediment for SMEs, even if they know they could build a new market using the technology.
Companies like GE Digital have gone some way to overcome this by offering its Predix IoT management environment as a cloud service. But that still requires a fair degree of integration and management experience to get the best out of it.
So the Konica-Minolta approach is based on the notion that, if AI and an IoT style of management and control makes sense in the office systems sector – controlling printers, copiers, image management systems and the like – then adding a more generalised IoT component to such a management system might well serve the needs of the SME sector rather well.
Workplace Hub
This then is what the company has built in the form of its new Workplace Hub, which was announced recently in Berlin but is not due to be formally launched until October. This sets out to combine IoT, data analytics and AI capabilities in a single system, which will initially be targeted at the company’s traditional market of office equipment. Most businesses will have a fair bit of that stuff and many will spend a good bit of their time hovering on the edge of losing control over it all, especially if departments set up the equivalent of `shadow IT’ capabilities to meet their own needs.
But by adding sufficient flexibility to the IoT capabilities so that it not only manages the office systems but also, for the sake of argument, the dozen or so 3D printers a business wants to start using for a new production process, it does mark a new example of an interesting trend.
For SMEs it is all about where integration makes sense This is the realisation that new technologies are less important in themselves than many of their proponents believe them to be, and the key factor is where and how they integrate into a business environment to make a workable `whole’.
So, if making the remote management of a bunch of `Type A’ tools (office systems) similar to a bunch of `Type B’ tools (for example, multiple 3D printers), those with existing `Type A’ skills may well have a head start in managing the new `Type B’ environment rather than having to start a whole new skills learning cycle.
According to Dennis Curry, the company’s Head of Workplace Hub development and marketing, announcing it now is a statement of intent for later in the year:
Yes, it does include IoT control for SMEs, and they get the control system for only a marginal price on the (office systems) control system they will probably be looking to buy this year anyway. WE see it as a means of empowering the workplace.
Konica-Minolta has developed the orchestration software itself, seeing that as the piece which will create real customer value. So that, according to Curry, is the piece the company wants to own. This work has been done in Europe, as Euro developers are seen as the best within the company:
They are the best at architecture and at the cloud. This has been a two-year development process and has been driven by the passion our customers have. I know every company says things like that but it has been driven by what they need next.
There is an upper limit on what an individual hub can manage but scaling options are available. It can, for example, be scaled out either into the cloud or the customers’ own existing datacentre. Alternatively, they can buy additional hubs and daisy-chain them.
The company is currently working with several potential partners in the IoT market, but nothing is yet signed up. But it already has a close relationship with HPE and Curry hinted that he expects to see them has one of the Workspace Hub partners when the announcement get to be made later this year.
I predict a riot
As well as IoT control systems, the Hubs also come with built in analytics tools, with a strong emphasis towards predictive maintenance requirements, not least amongst the company’s own office equipment systems. Curry says:
Using our analytics we have been able to predict with up to 97% accuracy whether one of our machines is going to fail in the field within the next two weeks. We will now also be offering predictions on security invasions on its connected devices, as well a workload and capacity planning predictions.
Though not part of the product mix right now, Curry uses a an interesting healthcare example to show hoe the Workplace Hub might be used. Here, a typical goal will be using the image analytics to examine x-rays and scans to autonomously identify cancers and pre-cancerous cells, and couple that data from patient records on age, lifestyle, diet and the rest to give predictions on the prognosis for any individual patient.
This is one example of that potential cross-over that is now becoming possible between using targeted, applications-specific analytical tools, and the inclusion of the analytics as an `addition’ within a more common-place set of tools and services. It can then be assumed that the trade-off here will be between cost and the quality and granularity of the analysis that is required and can be delivered.
Curry does see this as a spread in the range of markets the company can address, but it not a dilution of its core competences such as image processing and management, and integration. Indeed, he sees current trends pointing at integration becoming a far more important capability than it has been for some while:
For example, we are interested in the algorithms of AI, but that doesn’t mean we are investing in that area, well just leverage other peoples’ work. But we are investing in how AI is integrated to support our customers and the market. We want to be an AI and IoT integrator as a core competence.
Give us a job
Mention of AI, of course, these days brings forth the obviously elephantine room occupier of impact on employment, but Curry is not thinking in those terms, not least because the company is pitching Workplace Hub at the SME market, at least to start with:
Most SMEs have one guy responsible for IT, and usually they are struggling, so this can only help. It is not going to put them out of work.
Curry  sees many larger organisations with an established IT team not wanting to engage in a centralised AI/IoT environment across the whole business. Rather, he suspects they will prefer edge devices and systems that can be brought in relatively easily to handle the needs of specific jobs or departments. This, he suggests, will be a model that is not disruptive to existing employment patterns.
He also holds to the lessons of history that while every technology development has cut jobs in one area, it has always created more jobs in the new area, and that it is in the nature of humans to make sure this continues to happen.
My take
It is probably true that there is not a great deal of fundamental difference between typical office systems and many type of standard production tools, especially when it comes to the application of AI and management/control systems. So making IoT an `additional service’ of an office systems management environment could well have a lot going for it.
Yes, there will certainly be some SMEs working at the pointy-headed rocket science end of manufacturing which will require more than the Workbench Hub can offer. But for many, a room of 3D printers will make good business sense. And a system that can handle them, and the photocopier et al, will make probably make good sense.
Image credit - Konica-Minolta Read more on: IoT robotics and AI 