
British betting and gambling company Ladbrokes is thanking the “sporting gods” as it reports a profit of £25.2 million for the first six months of the year. This compares to a loss of £54.1 million for the same period last year.
And whilst chief executive Jim Mullen was quick to acknowledge that the company had experienced some “helpful bookmaker friendly results”, its also clear that Ladbroke’s investments in digital are working favourably for the firm.
The turnaround will be welcome news for investors, which last quarter saw Ladbrokes indicating that the digital investments were impacting the bottom line – with the company citing shop closures, software write downs and increased digital marketing spend.
However, it seems that Ladbrokes’ decision to implement a new strategy, following a short and intense internal review, is finally paying off. The company is attempting to attract and retain multi-channel digital customers that will use its new, digitally integrated ‘One Ladbrokes’ platform.
The results out today show a 13.1% year-on-year increase in revenue to £661.8 million, while pre-tax profits also surged 61.1% to £39.8 million.
Chief executive Mullen said:
These strong numbers show customers are responding positively to the new strategy at a time when the sporting gods have generally been on our side and we’ve enjoyed some helpful bookmaker friendly results. This combination has helped boost profits in the first half of the year.
History would strongly dictate that such a run of results in our favour would see customer staking suffer, but encouragingly these numbers firmly buck that trend and combine strong staking and a good margin. However, 130 years of experience in sports betting has shown us that we will endure a run of customer friendly results and margins will normalise. Despite this assumption on results and our intention to continue investing in marketing, we have slightly increased our full year expectations.
Encouragingly we have delivered a good performance across all the key customer metrics outlined in last year’s strategic plan and that gives us confidence that we are well placed to deliver against our stated 2017 targets. We have grown recreational customers, increased our football business, attracted more multi-channel customers and grown strongly in Australia. However, we are taking nothing for granted.
We will continue to compete hard on pricing, product and customer services and maintain a relentless focus on meeting and exceeding customer expectations.
Progress
Ladbrokes noted that the half year results indicate that progress is being made after a first full year of operations under the strategic plan. It said that the numbers show the customer is responding to the investments and that it is beginning to have a positive impact on numbers.
The company said that its multi-channel strategy had now delivered over 100,000 active users and had been rolled out to Ireland and Belgium – this number is from a standing start last August and 79,000 users have been recruited in the first half of this year.
Interestingly, Ladbrokes is using its in-store retail staff to help recruit users to the digital products and is rewarding them for the efforts. The betting maker said:
Our success in recruiting customers has been through improving the customer experience and motivating our retail colleagues who are the most effective sales people for our digital product. Over 9,400 colleagues have been rewarded so far with over 170 earning an additional £1,000 plus for their hard work.
Digital results
Ladbrokes said that total digital net revenue increased by an impressive 40.9% to £158.1 million, up from £112.2 million for the same period last year, which it claimed was down to “improved brand presence, product quality and stability”.
It added that it is staying clear of capital intensive projects and its focus is primarily on the customer experience.
In Ladbrokes.com, we have increased our marketing spend and the improvements to our products in H1 have been driven by a customer-focus rather than a technology-focus. We have deliberately steered clear of major capital projects. Our products have evolved to reflect changing customer demands and align the Ladbrokes experience to their own expectations. The response has been positive.
Ladbrokes highlighted, however, how telephone betting continues its long term decline, with many customers migrating to digital products and platforms. Amounts staked declined by 11.1%.
Interestingly, the bookmaker is also using its digital prowess to try and become a more responsible betting company, where it is making investments in data and algorithms to try and assess customers that may have a problem. Ladbrokes said:
As part of our commitment to responsible gambling we have continued to develop our retail algorithm which identifies changes in behaviour indicating potential problem gambling and assist in helping customers keep their gambling fun. It now covers all customers using cards in our retail estate on both machines and OTC products.
We have now begun to develop our responsible gambling facility in Gateshead and expanded the team there to grow our ability to track multi-channel players as well as build our analytical capability. We recently had our retail algorithm independently assessed and have been making improvements to its operations based on this work.
My take
Although Ladbrokes points to favourable sporting conditions for the uptick in its results, its clear that its digital priorities are beginning to pay off too. I’m also impressed with how the company is managing to manage and integrate both its online and offline channels, recognising that the two need to work well together, not in isolation.
Image credit - Images sourced via LadbrokesRead more on: Retail e-commerce and the omni-channel 