
This coming weekend, a global legal hackathon will be held at a variety of cities around the world.
I will be attending the London event which is organized and supported by Pinsent Masons, Agile Elephant, and Cambridge Strategy Group. What’s this about?
David Terrar, who leads Agile Elephant and is well known to us at diginomica had this to say:
The legal profession is ripe for the kind of disruption that has impacted many other industries. There are plenty of potential areas where the profession can be massively improved. The idea behind the hackathon is to offer an environment where people can come together and create new services and develop ideas that address deficiencies that exist in legal processes.

So there you have it in a nutshell. But why would I take a weekend out of my life to attend?
Previous experience teaches me that when you get a bunch of smart people in a room, ply them with pizza and the occasional beer then interesting things happen.
Teams lining up
Also, in discussing the event, Terrar told me that the following are known to be entering teams:

Pinsent Masons
LexisNexis
Hult International Business School
Vodafone

Other teams will undoubtedly emerge at the weekend.
Representatives from Hook Tangaza, Sumitomo Electric Finance UK, Legalytics, Fliplet, Cliffe Decker Hofmeyer, Thomson Reuters, Oxford University, City University and the UK Law Society are on the attendee list.
This is interesting at multiple levels. Having a team from a law firm is, in itself, an indication that there really isn’t much ‘new’ on the market. When I asked Terrar about the response from other firms, he said that despite making calls to more than 50 senior partners in well-known law firms in the UK, the response was, at best, tepid.
Deja vu – it’s 2005 all over again.
Is this a bad sign? Not at all. As we talked about the event, we both recognized that what we’re most likely seeing is similar to the response we saw in 2005 to the idea of professional accounting in the cloud – or, as it was called back in the day, SaaS.
The large firms and providers thought SaaS accounting was a fad with little chance of success. But, as we’ve seen with the likes of Xero (current market cap around (£2.3 billion), FreeAgent (IPO’d in 2016 at a valuation of around £34 million) and Kashflow (which was sold for an alleged £20 million to IRIS in 2013), the market is both sustainable and maturing. Today, the giants in the shape of Sage and Intuit are now in the game – albeit very late.
What’s most striking is that the cloud accounting solutions of today are a radical departure from prior generations with technologies like machine learning – currently seen as super cool but actually around for ages – baked into core offerings. Reporting, which used to be a nightmare is front and center. What’s more, lead vendors have created an ecosystem of add-on partners that are themselves, growing rapidly.
The capabilities that the new solutions provide allowed for the emergence of entirely new types of accounting firm. These firms place client advisory at the center of what they offer. Compliance is a given. Might this hackathon provide a glimpse of the future of the legal profession?
At the time when SaaS accounting emerged, it was estimated that there were about 130,000 UK registered Chartered Accountants. Data from the Solicitors Regulation Authority estimates the total number of currently practicing lawyers in the UK at 180,000. When you take into account clients and support staff, that’s a large market and well worth technology investment.
New technology opportunities
Today, the technology available to would-be entrepreneurs is way more advanced and ubiquitous than it was back in 2005. For example, IBM is making its Watson technology available to hackathon teams.
In 2005, agile development was only just emerging as a way to bring a product to market while the notion of Design Thinking as a way of problem-solving was years away from mainstream adoption.
From my perspective, this is an exciting event and so while I can’t be in attendance for the whole time, I shall certainly be on the lookout for innovation that comes from left field. It’s also telling that as a global event, others believe this is a worthwhile cause.
The UK event is being held at Pinsent Masons London offices at 30 Crown Place, Earl Street, London EC2A 4ES, starting Friday evening and running through to Sunday afternoon.
If innovation and coding for an industry that hasn’t seen much of both for some time is your thing, then do come along for as much time as you can give. It’s free.
I’ll be around from Saturday after lunch through to Sunday afternoon. It’s going to be fun and, I hope, will provide extraordinary insights into the future of the legal profession.
Image credit - Law theme with gavel scales books © Sebastian Duda - Fotolia.comDisclosure - Other than the fact I enjoy hackathons and like to see emergent technology applied to older service industries, neither I nor diginomica have any skin in this game. Read more on: DevOps NoSQL and the open source stackDigital transformation - frictionless enterpriseProfessional services 