
Whilst the turnover of leaders overseeing major projects in government has reduced in the past year, almost a quarter of central government’s major ICT projects are at risk – having been given an amber/red rating by the Infrastructure and Projects Authority (IPA).
The IPA is responsible for overseeing all of the costly and complex major projects in Whitehall, and has a remit for helping to support their successful delivery. Once a year it delivers an report that provides some insight into its portfolio of major projects (GMPP), rating them on a scale of green (on track for successful delivery) to red (successful delivery appears unachievable).
Whilst none of the IT projects this year were given the worst score of a red rating, nine out of the 39 projects (worth £18.6 billion) were given an amber/red rating – meaning “successful delivery of the project is in doubt, with major risks or issues apparent in a number of key areas”. And amber/red rating requires “urgent action..to address these problems and/or assess whether resolution is feasible”.
Some of these nine at risk projects include HMRC’s Making Tax Digital for Business, the Home Office’s Digital Services at the Border, DEFRA’s UnITy Programme, the Department of Health’s Health and Social Care Network and National Data Services Development Programme, as well as the Ministry of Justice’s Future IT Sourcing Programme.
It’s worth also noting that the government’s identity project, Verify, which is being developed by the Government Digital Service, and has reportedly been facing problems, has been given a green rating by the IPA.
In a foreword to the report, Caroline Nokes MP, Parliamentary Under Secretary of State for the Cabinet Office, and Andrew Jones MP, Exchequer Secretary to the Treasury, said:
It is our responsibility to ensure that the government is providing public services and spending taxpayers’ money as efficiently and effectively as possible. This year’s Annual Report on the Government Major Projects Portfolio (GMPP) shows how we deliver some of the largest and most complex projects in the world for the British people.
Projects on the GMPP reflect the government’s priorities: making our infrastructure fit for the 21st century, maintaining the security of the realm, and modernising and digitising our public services. As we continue to deliver these projects, their benefits will be felt across the nation.
Government Service Delivery and Transformation projects remain the most complex and challenging projects to deliver. This is unsurprising given the level of organisational and societal change they often require. We are getting better at understanding what it takes to deliver these unique programmes, and our enduring ambition in this area is reflected by the fact that, at 40 projects, it continues to represent the largest GMPP category by number.
In September 2016, the entire project portfolio comprised 143 major projects representing £455.5 billion in expenditure across 17 government departments.
With 40 projects, transformation remains the largest single category in the portfolio. ICT represents the second largest group with 39 projects, though these have the lowest total whole-life cost. ICT projects enable cost savings through the restructuring of legacy IT contracts and the development of new, flexible and more effective systems.
Interestingly, the report this year took a look at leadership capability for major projects and found that things may be improving somewhat in Whitehall – which is good news, considering that leadership is key to successful delivery and has been a sore point for government in the past. The IPA found that the turnover of leaders is actually reducing, which in theory should provide stability for delivery. The report notes:
We know that great project leaders deliver great projects. One of the IPA’s main priorities is to build capability in government by leading the project delivery profession. We do this by shaping career pathways, setting standards for how professionals deliver projects, and by providing world-class project leadership programmes such as the Major Projects Leadership Academy (MPLA). More than 400 professionals have enrolled on the MPLA and 250 have graduated to date.
This year’s report shows we are seeing consistency and continuity in project leadership across government, and perhaps early signs of a more encouraging trend: a reduction in the turnover of project leaders. The average turnover of Senior Responsible Owners (SROs) and Programme Directors (PDs) recently reduced to 8% a quarter, down from a previous consistent average of 11%. If this trend continues, it will mean leaders spend longer – around three to three-and-a-half years on average – in post on projects.
At risk
The amber/red ‘at risk’ IT projects mentioned above have already publicly identified as future problems for the government.
For example, HMRC’s ambitious Making Tax Digital for Business programme, which aims to bring the tax affairs of 1.6 million companies online over the next few years, has already been labelled a ‘potential disaster’ by the Treasury Committee. The House of Lords Economic Affairs Committee also recently said that the pilot being carried out by HMRC ‘does not follow best practice’.
Equally, the Home Office’s Digital Services at the Border project will likely not come as much of a surprise, given the debacle that has taken place in recent years to create e-borders. Recently, UK government auditors revealed that part of the nation’s anti-terror border controls systems “breaks down twice a week”, despite a £1 billion-plus price tag to put new IT in place.
Little further detail has been provided by the IPA about either project.
It’s worth noting also that Universal Credit, the Department for Work and Pensions’ welfare reform project, which has been plagued in recent years by setbacks and failings, at a great cost to the taxpayer, has been given an amber rating by the IPA (meaning successful delivery appears feasible, but significant issues already exist).
According to the report, the latest IPA Health Check proposed a total of nine recommendations for Universal Credit, which primarily focus on:

Automation and Full Service capability
A stable, high performing and resilient IT system
Operational MI hierarchy sufficient to drive the business
A workable ID assurance solution

According to the IPA, all have been accepted by the Programme, and action owners have been assigned and implementation action plans drawn up and are on track.
My take
The IPA’s annual report is always an interesting read, as it provides a gut check on where we should be focusing our efforts on over the coming year. It also provides a useful stick to hold up to government when it says ‘it’s all fine, we are all on track, promise’. The report is lengthy and there is plenty of data to mull over, so this piece is merely a snapshot of what’s in there. It’s worth downloading it in full to get a clear picture of how the government is progressing with its major projects. Ultimately, more can be done and some very high profile projects still face significant risks.
Image credit - Images free for commercial use Read more on: CentralDigital government and public services

