
Rupert Murdoch
The ongoing debate around Facebook and other social media giants attitudes towards data gathering and sharing has of course been mired in controversy for months now. It’s also led to a number of tech leaders speaking out in favour of controls and limitations being enforced. 
Most notably Salesforce CEO Marc Benioff has argued forcibly for some time that companies like Facebook should be regulated in a manner akin to the cigarette industry, such is the addictive nature of such social platforms. And last week we saw Microsoft CEO Satya Nadella use his Build conference keynote to talk up the need for ethics and order in an increasingly data-centric world. 
The Facebook/Cambridge Analytica scandal has made for some interesting fellow travellers in this debate, the latest of which I spotted is the Rupert Murdoch empire.  Yes, that’s how far we’re come in the past – a Murdoch minion aiming for the moral high ground for Rupert’s global behemoth and presenting a relatively legitimate line of reasoning. 
Of course, Murdoch publications around the world have been savage and eager critics of the likes of Facebook and Google and need no excuse to scream loudly for regulation and reining in as the publishers watch their ad revenues drift away. But Zuckerberg and Co have provided them now with an opportunity to sound like the voice of reason and that’s a chance that Robert Thomson, CEO of News Corp, isn’t about to let slip away. 
So it is that he takes the starting position that events have unravelled over the past few months along pretty predictable lines, claiming that the Murdoch family has been the Cassandra of the social media world. Now then is the implication, is time for the rest of us to wake up. Thomson argues: 
The social and political debate over the digital platforms and their influence has intensified in recent months as is certainly appropriate. For many years, News Corp, under the leadership of Rupert and Lachlan Murdoch, has highlighted the deleterious effect the platforms have had on journalism. The outcome of this debate will have a profound impact on our business and on the societies in which we operate.
He does give credit to Google for some of its recent actions, albeit with the caveat that there’s still a lot to be done:
The end of Google’s prejudicial first click free policy, which punished high quality journalism, has already benefited our masters and we appreciate the work of [CEO] Sundar Pichai in particular. It is however just a first step on the pathway to prominence. 
But now it’s time for Facebook CEO Mark Zuckerberg to follow this lead, he adds, with the focus on “virtue and veracity”: 
Authenticated professional news may represent a minority of the content on Facebook, [but] there is no doubt that the company needs trusted publishers to enhance and experience what has been polluted by fake news and ubiquitous ill-informed, sometimes malicious gossip.
Yup, that’s the Murdoch empire taking the high ground on ill-informed news and gossip. Welcome to 2018, everyone. 
Algorithm boards?
Thomson goes on to discuss the need for governmental action, supporting the case for the creation of algorithm review boards to ensure fair play:
The sheer amount of personal data collected by Facebook, Google and Amazon means that governments are rightly considering the establishment of an algorithm review board, which, if properly conceived, would provide the necessary transparency for individuals, clients and competitors concerned about algorithmic abuse. These algorithms are already potent, but they are destined to be much more formidable and there are abundance potential to skew news and skewer customers’ needs to be better understood and monitored.
An algorithm review board or ARB would be particularly useful in the oversight of companies which have horizontal dominance and use that leverage to dominate a vertical, such as Amazon with audiobooks and potentially Facebook with dating. 
Now, cynics will be chomping at the bit here to suggest that Thomson and Co might not be quite so keen on all this if it was Murdoch properties that had that potential for dominance. For his part, Thompson insists: 
We are confident that a renewed focus on provenance and on integrity will benefit our masters, our journalism and our advertising clients. We are learning more each day about the potential dangers of digital. Challenging these dominant digital platforms is important for our businesses but also meaningful for the societies in which we operate.
From a commercial point of view, News Corps continues its own digital expansion efforts with some signs of success. The Wall Street Journal had turned in year-on-year digital-only subscriber growth of 24%, a figure mirrored at the London Times and Sunday Times, while News Corp Australia is one percent behind on 23% growth. 
Averaging out at 20% growth across all premium publications, Thomson professes himself pleased at digital transformation progress to date. He focuses on the Wall Street Journal as a case in point: 
Digital paid subscribers at the Journal were up 24%, so they’re now 62% of overall subs. We’re seeing a broad-based interest in the Journal. Obviously, it’s a business-oriented publication, but also one with general appeal for a certain demographic and that is quite broad. The other thing to bear in mind with those subscriptions is that each of them is an opportunity to up-sell to higher priced, higher yielding professional information.
But despite such openly-voiced – and entirely reasonably – commercial motivations, it is to that elusive high ground that Thomson ultimately reaches: 
From a broader perspective, our concern has not just been for publications, which of course is our prime concern, but also for an ecosystem, which was digitally dysfunctional, one in which premium content was actually diminished in stature by the very fact that in Google searches, you won’t basically able to find it. That has changed and we applaud that measure by Google, but as I mentioned, that’s really step one on the pathway to prominence. 
So we’re engaged and thankfully these days, unlike the past, many more publishers are engaged, not only in the U.S., but globally and also more governments are engaged in the debate over what the digital landscape should like.
And of course, at the end of the day there’s the more familiar Murdoch-first motive: 
With more focus on that ecosystem, more focus on prominence, there should be more opportunity for us for more profits.
My take
As noted above, this is where we’re at in 2018 – lectures from Rupert Murdoch’s avatars on fair play, virtue and integrity.  If for nothing else, helping put this into play is reason enough to give Zuck another kicking next time he deigns to appear before legislators anywhere in the world. 
Image credit - YouTubeRead more on: Data privacyRegulationSocial 