
The Independent is reporting that LEGO has ended its advertising relationship with The Daily Mail. This is huge.

@StopFundingHate We have finished the agreement with The Daily Mail and are not planning any future promotional activity with the newspaper
— LEGO (@LEGO_Group) November 12, 2016
Over the last few years, media has taken increasingly biased positions on topics that matter to millions of people.
The Daily Mail is one of the more egregious examples, regularly printing stories that are barely rooted in fact but which are designed to support extremist views. A recent example is the way it attacked the British judiciary over its ruling against the UK government position on Brexit. Apart from the fact it barely reported the essence of the topic at all, the Daily Mail reserved its most disgusting rhetoric for attacks on the judges and the person who brought the action in a manner which some saw as a direct threat to British democracy.
Regular readers will know that diginomica takes strong positions on issues that impact people and especially around diversity and the various forms of prejudice that plague our industry. Only yesterday, I said that unbalanced, and by implication unfair content in media does no-one any good. If anything, it makes us dumber. I predicted as regards Facebook that:
Marketers are in the business of selling trust based stories. If they perceive that Facebook is taking little or no responsibility for that essential job then they’ll be gone in a heartbeat.
LEGO’s decision was clearly guided by similar principles but prompted by the actions of a campaign aimed at putting a stop to hate in the media.
A spokesperson for the campaign said: “Stop Funding Hate welcomes the decision from Lego. We are asking brands to listen to their customers when they tell them they want to stop funding hate, and that is what they’ve done. ”
“People are becoming more aware that the money they spend could end up supporting publications whose stories, language or portrayal of certain people, fuels division. This urgently needs to addressed. These headlines harm people.”
Lego is the first big company to agree to the campaigners’ demands.
Similar demands have been made of other brands including direct appeals to Richard Branson and Virgin to stop advertising in another British red top rag – The Sun.

Hey @richardbranson you seem like a nice chap – I’m sure you’ll #stopfundinghate with @virginmedia’s advertising money right?
— Ed Dowding (@eddowding) August 10, 2016

We applaud and support these efforts with the same enthusiasm with which we applaud technology leaders like Marc Benioff who has made clear that he will not tolerate anti-LBGQT legislation.
In a touch of irony, it seems that the Stop Funding Hate campaign enjoys its greatest support from Facebook Pages which have attracted almost 168,000 likes.
The next question comes – will other brands take notice and put their advertising dollars where their brand values matter or will they follow the least line of resistance and continue scattershot approaches through populist media that has a divisive agenda?
Image credit - via LEGORead more on: Diversity 