
There was some interesting recent news on the Harvard Business Review site about digital disruption in What So Many Strategists Get Wrong About Digital Disruption, that bolsters some of the things I’ve been posting here. Primarily it’s about business agility and business transformation and they are related. But also, author Freek Vermeulen offers concrete reasons why this time really is different and it’s the difference that attracts me.
I’ve argued that disruption is a meta-conversation about a thing when we should really be considering the thing’s impact. But it’s also the application of a heuristic, which I’ll get to.
No C-level officer in the real world wakes up in the morning saying, I’ve got to buy the latest digital gizmo today. More likely they ask questions like how can I stop customer churn? How can I better predict demand? Where is my revenue coming from? Then and only then do they enter the marketplace. But to listen to marketers you might think otherwise. They preach the gospel of gizmodo, flogging the market for the next shiny object. (Forgive me for lumping everyone together in this, I know there are lots of marketers who do otherwise. Perhaps I should refer to companies and not their marketers.)
Yet, to be clear, disruption is happening but that’s the headline and it applies to a small portion of companies with names you already know. For the rest the disruption is more of a slow burn or as Vermeulen says:
…some of the most common beliefs about how this will happen, repeated by conference speakers, self-proclaimed gurus, and consultants, have been oversimplified, misunderstood, or misapplied.
Perhaps that’s because a company’s business model has a lot to do with how all this disruption rolls out. As I alluded last time, B2C businesses run on a faster, or certainly different, cadence than B2B businesses. Direct consumer approaches that rely on network effects may be subject to winner take all economics so it behooves vendors to grab all the bright and shiny objects hoping to gain an advantage. But as the article states:
It is a misconception to think that network effects inevitably and always lead to a winner-take-all market. Sometimes that may be true, but there are at least as many network-type markets that can easily sustain a variety of players.
Think about airlines or car makers or chip fabricators.
In the B2B space, relationships matter at least as much as network effects and a product is much more than the commodity purchased but includes extended attributes like the information vendors and customers share over product futures and supply chains. Those extended attributes are constantly evolving and contribute to relationship stickiness on one hand or business agility on the other. Some digital disruptors actually talk about agility, or at least imply it, and that’s the diametrical opposite of a meta-conversation.
Agility enables both vendor and customer to transform their respective businesses to meet tomorrow’s challenges. To be sure in the process, transformation causes the purchase of a lot of technology but the difference is that at the end of the process you have a transformed business ready to take on tomorrow rather than a status quo business with a nifty and unusable new toy.
Many people already know much of this because they have experienced a hype cycle before but what makes this time different is that out of these transformations will come a changed landscape. A world that relies on the Internet of Things, machine learning, AI, and bots of all kinds will, in fact be qualitatively, different from the one we inhabit now. The disruptions that we’re used to typically cause a few percentage points of change in operating metrics so naturally we’ve all been trained to be eager to grab an improvement because, hey, markets are competitive.
This time around though, we’re not looking at a few percent one way or another; rather we’re contemplating a paradigm shift or actually many, thus it behooves us to get it right, which leads to another point. As I’ve been saying, it’s less likely that new technology will supplant people and their jobs and more likely that technology will change the nature of the human-machine interface. It takes time to get the relationship right and yes, some jobs may evaporate in the process but it would be mistaken to think that losing your job, as important as that is to you, represents the end of civilization. As Vermeulen summarizes it:
Business models and competitive advantages are complex systems. This means that they consist of multiple elements – some of them tangible; some intangible – which interact with one another, meaning that it is their combination that makes it work.
My take
Suspense is a killer. It saps your energy and ability to concentrate on the business at hand—it takes your eye off the ball. In times like these suspense is all around us and it’s natural to either do too much or too little. Running out and buying every last innovation that claims to fix a problem you’re not sure you have will make you feel good temporarily. Doing nothing with a smug sense that you can avoid thinking about alternatives is just as dangerous. Each approach relies on non-thinking by engaging heuristics, or rules of thumb, that worked well for us before, hence the eagerness to adopt the digital disruption. But we have a tendency to recall the successes and not the failures of our heuristics, which is a heuristic in itself.
The alternative, middle path, asks us to do the hardest thing, to ditch the heuristics and think seriously and concretely about what our businesses need to be and do in the future. When we do that the confusing web of futuristic alternatives comes into focus and decision-making is not hard at all.
Image credit - 拒絶する女性、ストップ、禁止、中止 © aijiro - Fotolia.com.Read more on: Digital enterprise in the real worldDigital transformation - frictionless enterpriseFrictionless enterpriseFuture of work 