
John Appleby – GM Bluefin
Enterprise messaging has been a hot topic in 2016 with Facebook, Slack and more recently Microsoft all vying for buyers’ attention. I am particularly interested in Slack because I’ve found good use cases that allow me to dramatically reduce the amount of internal inbound email that can be bucketed as ‘notifications’ around topics that are important but don’t necessarily require action. But there’s much more to Slack that that.
John Appleby, GM at Bluefin has taken Slack to a whole new level and I wanted to get his perspective on how it is going and the Slack lessons he’s learned.
Appleby, like many technical people has used a variety of workplace chat systems over the years, starting in 1995 with IRC, which is still popular despite its age. By 2005, the chat market had grown with tools like MSN Messenger (Bluefin’s then preferred choice,) ICQ, AIM and Yahoo Messenger. They were all big enough to work as standalone networks, with millions of subscribers.
This worked pretty well but it had some serious disadvantages. First, we couldn’t really talk about confidential or customer-specific things, because this was a public chat, and it was possible for it to be hacked. Second, we couldn’t easily block people who left the company from talking to everyone. I don’t know that this was ever actually an issue, but it didn’t feel right. Third, and critically, MSN put peer-peer instant messaging first, and group chat second. It actually pioneered great functionality like offline messaging.
Bluefin thought Microsoft Office Communications Server would be the answer but that turned out to be a dead end.
 Unfortunately, Microsoft did the unthinkable, and screwed up the basics. The tenet of communications is reliability, and OCS failed at this. You could never be sure if your message got through, or if it were read. OCS became Lync and then Skype for business, and whilst we have invested a lot of money in that platform, Microsoft added a ton of features: voice, video, screen sharing, file sharing, collaboration rooms, and a million things besides. What Microsoft have not done to this day is get the basics right. When you send a SFB message, you can’t be sure that it will arrive, especially if the person is offline. The war cry of Skype telephone conferences is “Hello… can you hear me? Hello…?”. Sharing screens or files is the roll of a dice, particularly if you are collaborating with people outside your organization.
When a Slack invitation in January 2015 caught his eye, Appleby was skeptical. He saw it as a web chat app that looked an awful lot like an outgrowth of social media. Putting personal preferences aside, the company already had a handful of tools which kind of worked. Rather than take on ‘yet another chat app’ Appleby ignored Slack. The company needed a clear use case.
Around September 2015, my US-based consulting team was starting to grow and we were developing an issue around creating a sense of team, when everyone was in a different city. A core team of developers started to use our Slack, and it seemed like as a tool, it might help allow us to feel more like a family, and help embed our culture, values and customer-centricity. We invited the US-based team into Slack, and setup some channels for conversations, and then one channel for each customer. This ensures we don’t break any privacy rules, and only the people involved in a project get to see the detailed conversations.
Slack only allows you to search 10,000 messages for free, and so I broke out my company credit card a few months later, which for $6.67 per user per month gives us access to unlimited integrations.
Today, Appleby is a firm believer in the value that Slack delivers but says that part of creating the desired sense of family comes from allowing people to converse on the things that matter to them in the way they want to chat, but not restrict topics to work related items.
Yes, we have #craftbeer, with a web hook to Untappd, to allow folks to share the beers they like. Analysis of this shows that Bluefin folks are most likely to drink an American Double IPA. But we also have #random, where you can shoot shit, and #rants, where it’s OK to have an angry rant – usually about Skype.
What about other learnings?
Second, we found as we grew big, the original #general channel can get really busy. We renamed it to #announcements, created a new #bluefin, and made #announcements read-only, and linked to our Twitter feed. As an aside, many of the early Slack users hated this change, because they felt Slack was becoming corporate.
Third, we found that some people just don’t get Slack as instantly as others. Partially this may just be because millennials get Slack so easily – they’re used to Snapchat, and this is like a corporate version of that. The important thing is to recognize those people, and spend some time with them. Get it working on their devices, and help them explain how we use Slack.
Fourth, spend some time on integrations. We integrated with Dropbox for document management, so people aren’t just uploading files to Slack. Discourse for structured forums, so we can retain a corporate memory (Slack is not a good corporate memory, though it does have a great search). GitHub for code, and many more. We even have a SAP chatbot which can search SAP’s knowledge base and download PDF versions of SAP Notes. In total we have around 50 integrations.
At diginomica, we have kept our Slack presence small so don’t have an issue with #general in the way Appleby describes but certainly understand his third and fourth points. My view is that the key to success with Slack comes from the integrations because it allows the message element to become the hub around the way things get done efficiently.
What happened next? As Bluefin’s Slack presence grew, it became clear that it had moved beyond ‘Appleby’s 2015 Science Experiment’ to something that could be regarded as a corporate standard. .
What’s more, we had just passed through a half million messages, and so we announced to the company that Slack was an official company tool, which folks were welcome to use. We also hardened up security using Two Factor Authentication (2FA), so we could manage corporate risk.
We now have the whole company on Slack, and around 70% of them are active on any given day. We are headed towards 250,000 messages a month, and interestingly around 63% of those are private messages.
Early on, Bluefin decided not to enable compliance auditing. This means that private chats are private between two users, and cannot be read by the corporate machine. Armed with that knowledge, this also means that having a chat over Slack is much more like having coffee with a friend, than it is writing a letter or email. In turn, that goes towards building and maintaining that family feel. But what about other benefits?
The incredible thing is how we can assemble a global team of experts for a project in a matter of minutes. In many cases I’ve been working on securing the customer project for 6-12 months, building relationships, documenting meetings, creating proposals. When it’s time to spin up a team, you invite the team into the private channel and 6-12 months of corporate memory is right there for them to consume. They can experience how we felt, the conversations we had, long before they were involved.
A big thumbs up then but what about the future?
The next part of our Slack journey hasn’t been written: we’ve been acquired by a company called Mindtree, which is many times our size. It will be interesting to see how our knowledge sharing cultures integrate, particularly since this is an area which I believe makes us special. We have the first 50 Mindtree Minds invited to Slack, as a test, but it hasn’t been too sticky. Yet.
I suspect that necessity is the mother of Slack adoption, and these folks will start to engage with the teams once they have a home in a project with a Slack team.
Appleby and Bluefin’s journey is not atypical but it is certainly instructive. Having many years’ experience with other similar applications helps but it doesn’t avoid having to apply a degree of change management skills to the exercise. The final word:
The number one lesson I learned from Slack is whilst a technology platform can most certainly be the home of a community, it does not provide any of the business change management around that. This is quite so critical because it is at its best as an actual community… and without the right adoption, you risk internal division in your organization.
Image credit - Bluefin and SlackRead more on: Collaboration sharing and digital productivity 