
Last week, diginomica reported on the Marks & Spencer (M&S) turnaround plan announced by new CEO Steve Rowe, in the wake of a sharp fall in pre-tax profits at the British retailer.
Rowe, who began his retail career aged 15 with a Saturday job in the Croydon branch of M&S and took the helm of the company six months ago, outlined a five-year strategy that aims to improve the productivity of its British bricks-and-mortar estate and includes a raft of store closures. As he told investors:
In the future, we will have more inspiring stores in places where customers want to shop that complement our growing digital offer.
On this point, diginomica wanted to know more. As online shopping becomes increasingly important to M&S customers, we wondered, will the company be reviewing how it uses its slimmed-down bricks-and-mortar footprint to support a more multichannel approach? (Right now, for example, customers can buy food online but still need to pick up in-store.) Might the company start using physical stores to fulfil customer orders of all kinds, for example, to reduce delivery times and costs?
For answers, I met up with M&S’s Patrick Bousquet-Chavanne at Web Summit in Lisbon. Since joining the company back in 2012, he has held a number of senior strategy and marketing positions at the company, sits on the board of directors and, in April 2016, was promoted to executive director for customer, marketing and M&S.com. So when it comes to closer integration between the M&S store network and its online offering, he’s at the heart of the action. He told me:
The announcement this week reflects a senior management team that fully understands and is tackling changing channel dynamics and consumer dynamics. We have to deal with those dynamics. Across the UK, retail growth is largely coming from digital. That dynamic has been painful at times: it puts tremendous pressure on the [physical] estate and we need to stay ahead of that. And we need to make decisions – so what we have said is that, over the next five years, there will be some fine-tuning and churning of the physical estate, because we are no longer playing in a world where [that physical estate] can remain static.
Logistics
While there’s not much there beyond the corporate line already outlined by Rowe, Bousquet-Chavanne did confirm that he’s thinking ahead on how that physical footprint might better serve online in future. In fact, plans to use it to incorporate online logistics are already in the works, he confirmed:
We’re just trialling [the idea of] customers buying online and us dispatching from stores. My thinking here is that [we] should be able to dispatch faster from local stores and deliver within one or two hours… There’s a lot of testing happening in that space and it’s about leveraging what we already have on the high street, and the capital investment we’ve made [in our physical network] over the years, without having to make new capital investments.
That might mean faster, more convenient deliveries for M&S customers at, crucially, lower cost for M&S. That’s a big issue, he agreed, and the key to this will be finding an economic model:
…that works on both sides of the equation. It’s very expensive to deliver online purchases, especially on the food side – but when the customer is demanding convenience, in an Amazon world, we all have to understand to what degree and at what cost we can achieve that convenience. It takes brilliant logistics to create a more efficient ‘last mile’ of delivery.
At the same time, he says, he thinks the physical M&S store network still needs to play a more rounded role in the M&S experience than purely acting as ‘mini warehouses’ for despatch of online orders.
I do see a day – and that day’s very, very close – when we are fully able to leverage the store estate for better human interaction in general, one that brings more knowledge to the customer than he or she would have with online-only. This to me is the key: an experience for the consumer that the digital world alone might not be able to deliver. So I’m thinking a great deal about the right integration between physical and digital. I call this our ‘phygital’ strategy – and that’s what this week’s announcement was about.
But we remain very confident that we can drive the business on both sides. And therefore for me, the role for marketing as a growth driver, is making sure that wherever and whenever the customer decides to shop, we present to them in a very consistent way.
Image credit - Marks & Spencer/YouTubeRead more on: Digital enterprise in the real worldRetail e-commerce and the omni-channel 