
Digitalisation, AI, Machine Learning – three subjects that are now commonly mentioned in relation to the future of employment, usually with a tendency towards negative connotations, ie jobs will be lost.
Well yes, some jobs will be lost permanently. A good deal, temporarily at least, will be no longer required, which is not quite the same thing. And it is this factor which is really set to drive the gig economy, particularly for those individuals that have a defined set of reusable skills.
It is also the factor that is set to change fundamentally the way businesses look on their staffing issues: fewer and fewer will ’employ’ staff, and more and more will hire-in individuals who together form project-oriented teams that last the life time of their collective contribution to that project.
What that then requires, of course, is a new form of service provider to fulfil the supply of individuals with the right skills. This is the role that Danish start up Worksome  is aiming to fill. The company has been operating in its home country for a couple of years.
The goal of the business is to target areas and industries where a skills gap exist. For now the skills target zone is for IT tech talent, not least because that reflects the company’s own heritage and skills base. But other areas and industries are already starting to follow. The aim is to use tech to identify talent in areas where it is really hard for companies to find, and match it with the needs of client businesses.
So far so sounds-like-most-other-recruitment-operations: but Worksome has a number of differences, not least being a strong desire to weed out those employers that like to use a tactic that many who are new to the gig economy are liable to fall for.
Just think of your profile
Anyone who has worked around the music business, for example, will have come to loathe the classic promoter’s speech, ‘There is no money in this for you, but think of the exposure, it will be great for your profile’. As the gig economy gathers speed and fresh talent joins in, this is a line that will be heard more frequently, and across the board, reckons Mathias Linnemann, the Chief Commercial Officer and a co-founder of Worksome:
It is a classic, and I think that’s something that’s totally wrong with this kind of work. One of the basic ideas behind Worksome is to make working as a freelancer sustainable in the long run so it becomes a career choice, so they can enjoy the best of the flexibility, the best of joining interesting projects, and work on what they do best and find really interesting.
(Worksome for its part declines all opportunities to work with such employers once it has identified them.)
Linnemann defines his job very much as matching talented individuals with projects, whether they last three weeks or three years. And that matching process is geared to accessing and analysing a much wider range of information about individuals than the traditional recruitment process of examining a list of qualifications.
He sees the company being at the right time, and with the right technology to take away the bias in qualifications and instead match the right overall profile for the right project. Technology is used to provide a vetting process that uses algorithms, coupled with a manual review, to determine which consultants and freelances are relevant to have on the platform in the first place.
When a company posts job requirement on the Worksome platform then the algorithms produce a shortlist – it is claimed in under five seconds – of the top relevant profiles matching the requested competencies, requirements, experience level and industry knowledge. These individuals are then invited to look at the project and bid on it if they’re interested.
As with any AI/Machine Learning environment, the more data available the more honed the system can become, so it is expected that this process should grow both in accuracy of placement and scope of skills resources being made available to client businesses. Linnemann explains:
To put that to work we need lots of data and, for the Machine Learning part of its work, we need lots of feedback on the actual quality of the work being done. And so we have mutual recommendation and rating systems.
This means that Worksome not only knows what work the individuals placed have done and the experience range they have acquired, but also subjective views of both the individual from the client company, and the client company from the individual.
Linnemann is aware that there could be, in the short term, some possible issues for individuals that sign up, for it may become obvious to their current employer that said individual is ‘on the market’ for fresh employment.
There are a couple of observations here, one being that employers need to be aware that, particularly with skilled individuals, there will be times when they feel – and probably are – under-employed and inevitably unproductive. So why not let them go for a period of time? They may well learn something that can be reused if/when they come back when the next project is ready to roll.
The other is that, as the gig economy model moves mainstream, this is likely to become the accepted norm for behavior, both for the individual and the employing company. Linnemann suggests:
We see it moving towards more flexible structures in general, more project based. And companies will have to be agile in the talent gap situation that we’re in. So it offers a lot of flexibility. This technology means they can solve that exact challenge that a project will almost never just consist of in-house staff that would probably have to learn new skills for a new project.
Wanna be on my team?
A longer-term advantage here is that both Worksome, and its client companies, can over time start to build up known teams that fit certain profiles of project. Team members can then be booked in advance, so individuals can build future work schedules and businesses can plan their projects around known teams. Ideally, both sides of the equation can end up with the advantages of both freelance and full time employment.
From the client perspective, Linnemann is also aware that this approach can have wider implications for any project. For example, it would be a mistake to assume that Worksome is targeting just skilled IT freelances and consultants, even though he acknowledges that this is the company’s start point and current primary focus. But he is well aware that every project will involve more individuals, and more teams, than just those skilled in the technologies needed for the development process.
The majority of projects are inevitably multi-faceted, there will be teams needed to design and develop a product or service idea, but there will also be teams needed to set out the marketing platform, the sales platform, the customer support services and the rest, and Linnemann sees the strong possibility that it can move to servicing the entire suite of project teams that any business might require, having each lined up and ready to move into place as a project moves forward.
He claims that Worksome can get the time taken to identify the right freelance down from a six week average to 24 hours, and operates on a 4% flat fee commission, whereas the industry standard is between 15% and 30% of first year income.
He is also aware that the gig economy is liable to be a world of ‘co-opetition’, so is already contemplating the potential of offering its services to the 9,000 or so registered recruitment agencies in the UK. There is a degree of pragmatism here, for some established companies work closely with agencies that also provide services such as personality testing and related staff assessment tasks:
Larger companies often outsource parts of the process that they don’t want to take care of themselves, and that can still happen in our platform. So we are not necessarily circumventing that type of relationship but we are letting the technology do the heavy lifting.
My take
The gig economy is here, that much we can be sure of. But it can be a world of great imbalance, where a few well-known and highly successful individuals are held up as shining examples of how effective the business can be, yet many thousands of others with similar or better skills but lacking the hard-nose and panache to carry it off can, and undoubtedly will, suffer the power imbalance of `individual against company’.
The emergence of Worksome – and there will certainly be others to come – offers a welcome potential of real balance, where individual skills can be objectively analysed out of relevant data and matched against the requirements of a company’s new project, and where the bad employers can be divined from the rest and effectively quarantine’. That, arguably, may prove to be one of the more useful applications of AI and Machine Learning in terms of the future of work.
Image credit - © gustavofrazao - fotoliaRead more on: Future of workHCM and the digital future of workMachine intelligence and AI 