
Until Sears came along last week to top it, one of the most biggest victims of digital disruption in the retail sector was Toys R’ Us. The collapse of that institution was destined to have a knock-on impact on others in its ecosystem of providers, such as the likes of Hasbro.
In the event, Hasbro in fact appears to have ridden out the initial slipstream, with CEO Brian Golder giving credit to his firm’s strategy “to drive a digital-first orientation around storytelling, innovation and growth” for having managed to recapture around a third of US and Canada revenues that would have come from Toys R’ US:
Just over one year ago, Toys R’ Us filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy and put into motion a process which ultimately resulted in the rapid closing of most of their stores, including all stores in the US, UK and Australia, and transitioning to new owners in select markets. In certain markets, this transition is ongoing. We continue to believe this is a near-term retail disruption that will last for the next few quarters.
Our established and differentiated Brand Blueprint strategy has enabled us to transform and we’ve invested in industry-leading brand building capabilities…We’re becoming a more agile, modern and digitally-driven play and entertainment company.
What that means is that while the collapse of the biggest toy shop chain in the world inevitably hurts, Hasbro is organizationally hard-wired to adapt. Golder argues:
We’ve been reinventing and reimagining our go-to-market approach. We’re constantly mining consumer insights, shopper insights, retailer insights. And our north star has always been the Brand Blueprint over the last decade. We on-boarded a lot of new capabilities across the company. Recognize that half of our employees to date are new to the company over just the last six years. And these new experts are increasingly leading across design and development, storytelling, marketing, data analytics, social listening, and other new areas like shoppable social content.
Online opportunity
Where the Toys R’ Us demise has been most severely felt is offline, with Point of Sale revenue coming from bricks-and-mortar channels down across the entire Hasbro range. But online is a different story, says Golder:
Looking at the US data more closely, where the consumer had direct access to the brands and products they were seeking, Hasbro’s online POS increased high single-digits in the third quarter and increased double-digits over the first nine months of the year. Hasbro has invested to establish a leading presence online. According to One Click Retail, through the first nine months of the year in North America, Hasbro is the market share leader on Amazon in the Toy & Game category.
He adds:
You’re really seeing a transformation of our business across every area, in design and development, the way we go about storytelling and ensuring that we have great stories on every screen, from short form and social media, all the way through bespoke content. The way we’re marketing, it used to be that digital marketing was one area of expertise that was in one part of one group in the company; now digital marketing is embedded across the company.
Data analytics and the way that we look at replenishment and working on online algorithms to ensure that our brands are available to people as they search for products for gifting; social listening and social scraping as not only ways to understand what people are doing and how to respond with great product, but also so that we understand immediate responses to marketing communications we’re putting out; and how do we amend those or change those communications to optimize that for the consumer.
We also really are forging new ground in content-to-commerce. This is where you’re able to watch and stream content and make decisions. Literally, just click on the content with a chance to purchase product. We’re seeing that really begin to work. We’ve built great capabilities there. This is literally shoppable social content. We think this is the next new area, where people will shop off their mobile phones. And then, of course, we’ve built the expertise for the teams because again [we need] a global online team that’s focused on the trends within online shopping, the channel teams that are focused on how do we expand our footprint with a product development strategy that allows us to get to different price points and different feature sets for products and different play patterns.
That said, Hasbro is looking for new offline opportunities, particularly as the all-important US holiday season looms large. Golder says:
Many retailers set their shelves later in the quarter to begin their holiday efforts. But retailers are stepping up to capture the Toys R’ Us market share. Hasbro’s channel strategy has enabled us to open a significant number of new doors at retail. But this also drives new requirements for our US supply chain.
We’re working with a greater variety of retailers that have differentiated shipping requirements. Our growing retail footprint adds retailers shipping smaller quantities per truck to take product closer to the holidays and require more carton volume than previously, including more cartons of high demand toys and games later in the quarter…By mid-2019 we’ll add a Midwest warehouse to better meet demand, shorten delivery time and reduce trucking mileage to our retailers’ distribution centers. We’re also working closely with our retailers in new innovative ways including sharing warehouse space to dramatically reduce delivery times.
Way to go
But there’s still a way to go to shake off the Toys R’ Us legacy, admits Golder:
Revenues from omni-channel and online retailers are growing but haven’t yet offset the decline from Toys“R”Us and other retailers. As our retail and consumer landscape evolves, we are building innovation across brands, price points and channels.
One market ripe for such innovation in action is the gaming sector, he suggests:
Gaming remains a meaningful differentiated growth opportunity for Hasbro. We’re leveraging our global portfolio of brands and expertise to target a broad and growing demographic of players across analog and digital platforms…We have a significant number of innovative brand offerings arriving for this holiday season across Franchise and Partner Brands as well as Gaming. In fact, you will see Hasbro’s strong representation as retailers unveil their holiday initiatives for consumers across converged retail, in stores, online and mobile and in all forms of marketing digitally, including content to commerce, shoppable social content, toy books and toy list.
And there are also ‘home-baked’ brands that Hasbro own that are open to digital innovation opportunities, says Golder, pointing to PlayDoh as a case in point:
It’s one of our most global brands at very consumable price points. And the brand has performed very well. [We are] really starting to build that momentum with a new array of product and new digital marketing orientation using social scraping and social listening. So, again, I think it’s our new trend in the way we approach our brands and approach innovation. It was up sizably in the US, but it was up all around the world. And so, as we expand our retail footprint, it’s one of the brands that goes not only online with a quite sizable growth, but also to a lot of new channels of retail as everyone can participate in PlayDoh’s innovation, creativity, fun, and growth of the brand.
Despite a turbulent wider retail environment and the shadow of Toys R’ Us’s fate still to disperse, Golder is in upbeat mood about Hasbro’s omni-channel strengths as the crucial Holidays season kicks-in:
Many retailers do merchandise toward the Holidays later than a toy specialist, who would have product on shelf beginning in July or August. We’re very excited about the expansion of retail space we’re seeing at our major partners and retailers. You’re going to see very exciting in-store experiences, expanded footprints, very exciting online efforts where we’re bringing a lot of digital marketing forward. And so, I think that you’re going to see, a linear footage for the toy industry that’s quite sizable and very comparable to a year ago once we get into these last eight weeks of the year. And it’s very exciting to see our brands come to life across our portfolio.
And as a final point, he states boldly:

We still believe over time that we’ll recapture the Toys R’ Us share. And in fact, there’s nothing per se about this year that changes our belief about that.

My take
Keep calm and carry on. Santa Claus is coming to town and there’s a lot of Toys R’ Us money out there that is up for grabs.
Image credit - Hasbro Read more on: Analytics planning and data analysisCollaboration sharing and digital productivityContent marketingCRM and customer experienceDigital and content marketingDigital enterprise in the real worldMobileSocialUser experience 