

Devin Wenig
We’re doing what we said we would do.
Calming words from eBay CEO Devin Wenig as the market watched out for the firm’s first financial report since its amicable divorce from the faster-growing PayPal in July.
In the event, it was pretty much ‘steady as we go’ for eBay for its first quarter as its own company. Revenues fell by 2.4% to $2.1 billion from $2.15 billion, while profit fell to $539 million from $673 million year-on-year. Wenig says:
Our performance one quarter following our spinoff of PayPal is steady and it’s in line with our expectations. I’m proud that the team was able to remain focused on executing our strategy while managing a complex separation. We still have a lot of work ahead of us in order to reposition our business and to deliver the level of performance that we aspire to achieve, but our Q3 results are a step in the right direction.
We said that we’d build a more robust commerce platform, enhance our engagement with the core buyers and sellers who create a vibrant marketplace, and create exceptional product and brand experiences. We also indicated that our efforts would take time as we traded off short-term growth and focused more on long-term investments while dealing with the impact of near-term headwinds.
With eBay celebrating its 20th birthday last month, Wenig doesn’t want to focus on nostalgia, but on what comes next, such as its structured data initiative. He explains:
We’re collecting product data from our sellers as they list their inventory on our site. On June 29, we started requiring product information from our sellers across 18 categories in the US, the UK, Germany, and Australia. We’ve seen positive reception and adoption in line with our expectations, with limited disruption to the listing process. The next phase will add coverage to more countries and categories, and our plan is to expand the requirement where relevant across all sites and categories by the end of 2016.
We use machine learning to process that data so that we can leverage it in our user experiences. Getting a product identifier is most useful to us after we associate that product information to similar products in our catalog and bring in additional data related to the product such as descriptions, pictures, and reviews. In the roughly 12 weeks since we launched this initiative, 27 million more listings have been successfully mapped to products, and five million new products have been identified and added to our catalog.
Finally, we’re leveraging that data to improve our product and marketing experiences. We’ve already started using this data in several areas of the user experience such as SEO, merchandising, deals, and our selling.
Mobile and search
There’s also a focus on mobile, with a September roll out of new customer experience across all mobile channels. Wenig says:
The launch of our new mobile product marks a shift towards a discovery-based experience for buyers that also enhances our simplified mobile selling experience. And it brings in key functionality from several of the vertical-based apps which we decommissioned in Q3. With this release, we’ve also unified the mobile experience across platforms which enables a consistent user interface and is already resulting in faster product iteration.
This is an important part of our long-term strategy. We believe that moving in this direction with our products will enable us to drive engagement and cross-category purchasing. It’s also a better expression of our brand which stands for discovery and the thrill of finding unique items and incredible deals. We believe this experience will ultimately help eBay become a more differentiated and a more personal commerce destination.
One area that still needs work is around Search Engine Optimization (SEO), admits Wenig:
This cycle of spin it up and then spin it down is not sustainable. So we’re building it on a much more sustainable foundation because ultimately both SEO, and frankly discoverability on eBay, are crying for persistence. They’re crying for us to understand that just because a listing comes and goes, we’re still selling thousands of iPhones or sweaters or shovels or whatever we’re selling. So that, at the end of the day, is why having a persistent view of the products we sell, I believe, is a traffic driver, and it’s a conversion driver because, ultimately, we have 800 million items for sale.
This is the world’s biggest store. It can be overwhelming, and we’re asking too much of search. Search is very important, but for search to be the only lever to pick through 800 million items is becoming not sustainable. And ultimately it causes a reduction in conversion. The ability for us to group items, to merge items, to understand what’s the best item out of a lot, to create trade-offs, say, between the very unique eBay categories like used, manufacturer refurbished, and new, and allow consumers to understand the value-based trade-offs of all of those choices, is to me endemic to what we’re doing in the structured data initiative.
There will also be focus on strengthening the eBay brand now that it’s out in the market on its own again. Wenig argues:
I think the eBay brand is unique. I think we don’t want to be like anyone else and we don’t think that our brand is like anyone else’s.
Historically, we’ve been very focused on digital channels and we’ve been very ROI-driven, and what that’s tended to do is drive our marketing spend down the funnel. In other words, we tend to market heavily when we make sales and that’s why we’ve heavily skewed towards things like paid search and other digital channels.
I do think that as some of the markets shift and as more channels are available to us, we need to pivot some of our marketing to the mid-funnel and to the upper funnel. Upper funnel is what we would call brand spend. It’s more about eBay than about buying any particular item.
This isn’t going to be easy, he adds:
We’ve been working really hard because we don’t like to waste money around here and we’re very metrics-focused. And as we move from the bottom of the funnel to the top, it gets harder. Frankly, the timeframes extend and it gets harder to measure whether a dollar was well-spent in brand. It’s easier to measure that if a dollar was well spent if you sold something or not. But I still believe that it’s necessary.
So we are already – particularly in the social channels – beginning to move from selling individual items to selling eBay as a brand. You’ll see more of that, not only through the Holidays, but through 2016.
I think it’s very important for us to say to the world who we are. Some of that is closing some of the misconceptions about our business. I think the brand is ubiquitous but not everyone knows what we do. But some of that is really the sort of emotional connection of the brand which is not a commodity, it’s not a utility. It’s about consumers finding unique items and incredible deals. And that’s really where we think north is for our brand.
My take
Still early days, but nothing there to scare the horses. Onwards!
Read more on: CRM and customer experienceDigital and content marketinge-commerceRetail e-commerce and the omni-channelSocial 