
Your life, post-GDPR via Phil Fersht’s LinkedIn feed
In an effort to lighten the load that is the tsunami of GDPR emails we’re all receiving, Twitter has your back. Starting with:

GDPR emails: MAKE THEM STOP
— The Frugality (@TheFrugality) May 22, 2018

…so screamed a million voices into the internet ether. But then I’m quite pleased in a way because like this person, I am learning about all the services I (inadvertently) signed up for when trying to get information:

Why yes, of course I still want to hear from the company where I bought one pair of shoes in 2005 #GDPR
— Holly Brockwell (@holly) May 22, 2018

Maggie Fox puts it more succinctly than I could ever do:

If nothing else, GDPR is reminding me of how many dumbass organizations I have given my email address to.
— Maggie Fox (@maggiefox) May 22, 2018

Need to work on your inner GDPR anger issues? This helps:

me deleting GDPR emails pic.twitter.com/UMyAluyAue
— jonno (@jonnohopkins) May 21, 2018

It sure feels good hitting the delete button. Right? And, as this person points out – there is upside to this crap:

GDPR is the cleanse my inbox needed and I was always too lazy to do myself
— Rachel ☕ (@nospaceformilk) May 22, 2018

Then there’s the emails we get from those we are in regular contact with and to whom we’ve given consent. You have to wonder what the legal brains are doing – other than bilking their clients for fees.
Advice – check this story out from The Guardian. Or check this one from Madeline Bennett which is currently going gangbusters according to our visitor data. Hint – Madeline’s story tells you what you need to do.
For those who are really are trying to take GDPR seriously and handle it in a manner that makes sense to everyone, this is your go to source – it’s been a life saver for me, even if I have had my own share of sleep deprivation:

Keep up to date with what’s new with the GDPR: https://t.co/NLS0jg3q5t #earlybiz pic.twitter.com/TooY6dEM63
— ICO (@ICOnews) May 22, 2018

Back to the Twitterati.
Wanna prize for a great GDPR email? How about this?

And the prize for the best #GDPR email subject line goes to @Harlands_NE. pic.twitter.com/ZHjT3G8yhV
— Gary Turner (@garyturner) May 22, 2018

And of course we all need more kitties:

There’s no need to opt-in to continue hearing updates from me ahead of #GDPR. When you run the place you can decide which rules to ignore, which for me as a cat is all of them pic.twitter.com/wQh1SfWqoD
— Palmerston the Cat (@PalmerstonFOCat) May 22, 2018

But then you can’t please everybody I guess:

Whoever thought GDPR was a good idea, go trying running your own business, you pen-pushing prat.
— Nick Lincoln (@HatTipNick) May 22, 2018

I’ve saved the best advice for last:

Welcome to the #GDPR countdown week. If you’re smart you take Friday off and bury yourself in a hole somewhere far away from the internet! 😤
— Daniel Freytag (@FRYTG) May 22, 2018

That would be me too…
For more GDPR awesomeness on Twitter, go here.
Image credit - via Phil Fersht's LinkedIn feedDisclosure - I have to do the compliance stuff on GDPR for diginomica. I won't pretend to be an expert but as an exercise in hair loss, this is up there with Y2K.Read more on: Data privacyIdentityRegulation 