
LinkedIn finally gave Wall Street something to be happier about late last week, after seeing its share price tumble 45% since the start of the year. But is it a sign that bets are paying off or just a stay of execution? 
The firm turned in a first quarter net loss of $46 million, against a loss of $43 million for the comparable quarter last year, on revenue of $861 million, up 35% year-on-year. 
The company broke out its revenue as follows:

Talent Solutions: $558 million, up 41% year-on-year–$502 million from Hiring, up 27%, and $55 million from Learning and Development.
Marketing Solutions: $154 million, up 29% year-on-year.
Premium Subscriptions:$149 million, up 22% year-on-year. 

Other stats of note:

Daily sharing increased nearly 40% and traffic to third-party publishers rose more than 150%.
Unique visiting members grew 9% to an average of 106 million members a month, and member page views grew 34%

For market watchers, there was a sense of ‘not dead yet then’. For example, analyst house Piper Jaffrey told clients:


LinkedIn got back on track with a 4% Q1 beat vs the Street and slightly higher Q2 guide. We believe the earnings report in-line with historical comps and a better-than-typical guide should give investors more confidence in LinkedIn’s guidance for the year and de-risk numbers for the near-term following the less optimistic commentary on the Talent Solutions segment from last quarter.

LinkedIn CEO Jeffrey Weiner cites the growth rates around the Talent Solutions offerings as particularly pleasing, says Weiner: 

The focus remains on our core Recruiter product and the focus remains on our enterprise customers, our larger enterprise customers. There’s still multiple billions of dollars of headroom there in terms of the immediate addressable. That will continue to be the focus, that will continue to be the core of our Talent Solutions efforts. 

In terms of deliverables, a next generation version of Recruiter is currently being rolled out: 

We wanted to simplify the process through which folks can get value from Recruiter, create greater efficiencies and effectiveness That will continue to roll out for the remainder of this year. We’ve added two additional SKUs that we’re excited about with regard to Connectifier, which was a recent acquisition, and Referrals, which we believe has really interesting potential.

Platform thinking
Looking further afield, there’s platform thinking underway at the heart of the roadmap, he explains: 

In terms of where we’re taking that road map going forward, we’d like to create a platform for our suite of Talent Solutions products. So each of those products, Recruiter, Connectifier, Referrals, our talent branding efforts, in a sense, you could think of those as individual applications. 
Where we’d ultimately like to take this part of the businesses is to add a platform foundation, and with that platform in place, we’re going to be able to accelerate the rate with which we can add new functionality, new applications, and potentially further down the road. Those wouldn’t necessarily need to be limited to applications that we develop. You could imagine a world where third parties could also be developing for that Talent Solutions environment.

There is something of a shift in focus underway, he adds: 

Historically, we really focused on the passive recruiter use case through our Recruiter product, to sell that product to recruiters. More recently, over the last 18 months or so, we started to expand that focus to also include active job seekers, people that were searching for a job, looking at job posts from our customers. 
That focus led to completely overhauling the desktop product, first launching and then enhancing the standalone mobile application, thinking about the right points of distribution from our Flagship mobile application into the Job Seeker app, which has really paid dividends for us. Then continuing to improve how we are surfacing the right job, the right member at the right
time. All of that has been built on top of a platform that has dramatically increased the liquidity of our jobs offering and jobs’ comprehensiveness. 
So a little bit more than a couple of years ago, we were at about 350,000 jobs available on LinkedIn. Today that number is well north of 6.5 million, approaching 7 million jobs. We’ve indexed materially more than that on a global basis and will be bringing those jobs online as well over time.

Weiner also sees progress being made around LinkedIn’s vision of an economic graph framework, which is how LinkedIn manifests its vision to create economic opportunity for every member of the global workforce: 

There are essentially six pillars. There’s our members, and those are members of the global workforce and the members of LinkedIn. There are companies, there are the jobs available at those companies, the skills required to obtain those jobs, higher educational organizations and vocational training facilities to facilitate the acquisition of skills to obtain those opportunities. Then lastly, a publishing platform that facilitates the sharing of professionally relevant knowledge by our members, customers, companies, universities etc. 
In terms of tracking progress against each of them, we have a very clear sense of what those addressables are. So by way of example, with regard to members, 788 million or so professionals and knowledge workers, students, pre-professionals in the world, three billion people in the global workforce. When it comes to the number of companies, somewhere on the order of 60 million to 70 million-plus companies in the world etc. 
So when we think about our longer-term roadmap, we’re thinking about how to build infrastructure, we’re thinking about how to build products, we’re thinking about how to build technology that enables us to grow from where we are today to where we ultimately want to be.

My take
A turnaround or a false dawn? A lot depends on macro-economic factors that are beyond LinkedIn’s control. More so than any other social media platform, the firm’s success is mapped onto the state of the professional jobs market. With 2016 as a US election year and Europe still facing the possibility of a Brexit, the global economy remains unstable. Weiner and his team are making all the right noises, but that’s no guarantee of long term turnaround. 
Image credit - Gustavo Frazao - FotoliaRead more on: HCM and the digital future of workMobileSocialTalent managementUX and application design 