
LinkedIn last week signed up EY as a major new client with both businesses using it for social selling as well as rolling the professional networking tool out across “thousands of EY people”.
It’s the kind of big ticket deal that’s enabled LinkedIn to deliver a 37% increase in revenues year-on-year. Jeff Weiner, LinkedIn’s CEO, says:
Our collaboration with EY will enable us to leverage EY’s extensive capabilities, footprint and global reach. Together, we’ll help companies develop deeper and more trusted customer relationships through social and data analytics. We believe this strategic relationship will lead to collaboration and co-creation of solutions, generating opportunities for both of our organizations.
The deal is, he adds:
the largest single deal in our history across any of our business lines or product lines. Sales Navigator will be foundational to this, but certainly won’t be exclusive to the deal on a going forward basis. And Sales Navigator will really be used as a platform, where EY and LinkedIn can partner together to leverage relationship assets, to leverage data, and truly connect not only partners within EY, but also EY with its alumni network. It’s got a huge alumni network that’s capable of generating value.
And then, of course, [there are] EY’s clients. EY can start to generate best demonstrated practices that can be shared with those clients. And part of the uniqueness to the deal for us, and one of the things that we’re most looking forward to is the way in which we can then leverage that unique perspective lens and those insights and feed those back into our platform for connecting the enterprise to opportunity.
As well as its revenue leap, LinkedIn last week turned in a significant heft in subscriber numbers, up 20% year-on-year to 396 million by the end of the third quarter. (That number has now topped the 400 million mark.) Other big numbers of note:

 4 million jobs listings on the site with a 75% year-on-year increase in applications to those jobs.
Monthly job page views were up over 90% year-on-year in September
Unique visiting members grew 11% to an average of 100 million per month, while member page views grew 33%.
Sales of its premium subscriptions rose 21%, to hit $138 million
Talent solutions services revenue is up nearly 50% to $502 million.
Mobile now represents 55% of all traffic to LinkedIn.

That last point is particularly significant, with LinkedIn set to roll out a new user interface for the mobile offering which is structured around five key pillars – The Feed; Profile; My Network; Messaging; and Search – and will launch next month.
Weiner explains:
This application was built mobile first as opposed to on a previous flagship application, which to some extent was porting over some of our desktop functionality. And over time, we kept adding more and more products and services, and you can kind of feel that in the application.
So we asked ourselves, how would we build this if we could build it from scratch? So, it’s mobile first. It’s going to be more responsive. It’s going to be smarter in terms of personalization. It’s certainly going to be faster in terms of performance. It’s more intuitive. It’s far more seamless. So you’re going to have a far more integrated application that does fewer things better.
And we’re excited about the five pillars of that application, starting with the home-page and the home-screen, which is going to be feed-oriented. That’s going to help our members to stay informed. Then there’s Me; there’s Messaging, our newly introduced messaging capability; My Network, which enables you to not only build your network, but also nurture those relationships over time; and our most intelligent, most responsive Search results and search engine to-date.
This will in fact have a short term impact on the firm’s page view numbers with more intuitive tabbed browsing replacing a dedicated navigation page, while emails and other transactional pages that generate lower value engagement to the site will also be removed. Weiner says:
Without that navigation screen in place, people won’t need to take that extra step. Those were generating page views. Those page views weren’t necessarily generating incremental value; they just kind of got in the way and just created friction within the application. So, we think we’ve created a better member experience, but you may see that show up in terms of the page views.
That member experience might be better served by cutting down the number of emails that subscribers get. Weiner appears sensitive to this criticism:
We’ve already kind of been introducing this; we reduced the number of emails we sent by 40% on a per member basis. And that was certainly very well-received, in terms of creating a better experience. We had been hearing from our members for some time that they wanted less email; they wanted higher-quality engagement in terms of our reaching out to them. We’re going to continue to focus on that.
Going forward, we’re going to continue to take an approach where we’re putting member value first. It’s not about any specific metric, so much as it’s about ensuring that we understand who we’re trying to reach, that target audience, with what specific value propositions, and then building the best possible product that we can. Uniques, page views, sessions, these are all going to continue to be some proxy of value, but we’re not going to get too focused on any one of those.
My take
I still get too many emails from LinkedIn.
Read more on: Analytics planning and data analysisCRM and customer experienceDigital and content marketingFuture of workHCM and the digital future of workSocialTalent management 