
Palin and Clinton SNL-style
Every fan of the wildly popular NBC comedy show Saturday Night Live (SNL) has their own favourite stars, characters and sketches, from Tina Fey and Amy Poehler’s impersonations of Sarah Palin and Hillary Clinton, right back to Dan Ackroyd’s mid-seventies Bass-o-matic skit.
In other words, over its 40-year history, SNL has become a national institute in the US, a much-loved format that isn’t broken and doesn’t require fixing. That, of course, makes it a risky business to use digital technologies to get already-loyal audiences even more engaged with the show. There’s so much, potentially, you could get wrong.
This was the challenge facing Eddie Lee, vice president of technology at NBC Digital Entertainment, when he and his team were asked to design and launch an app to mark SNL’s 40th anniversary in February 2015. He says:
We knew that what we’d deliver had to be really different, really special – an app that offered users something they hadn’t had before.
What they decided was to launch a mobile app that delivered the entire SNL back catalogue directly to the public – all 40 seasons of the show, almost 800 episodes and some 5,500 individual sketches. Says Lee:
That’s a pretty expansive library. There’s so much there that, even if you’ve been a regular SNL viewer for many years, there’s still a bunch of stuff you might not have seen, there’s lots to still discover. So what we wanted to do was make navigating this rich library as enjoyable and as purposeful as we could for users.
In terms of making the experience ‘enjoyable’, Lee quickly figured out that a strong recommendation engine, based on semantics, was the best way to ensure that individual users got to see the content most likely to appeal to them, based on previous viewing history and the scores they allocated to individual clips. The more a viewer interacts with the SNL app, the more this engine is likely to to serve up clips that the individual user will enjoy. They can also search for content based on their favourite season, cast member, episode and so on.
At the same time, Lee says he wanted the experience to be ‘purposeful’; what he means here is that the viewer should be able to move quickly and efficiently through clips, using a swiping motion. If they abandon a clip that they’re not enjoying, the next clip should already be lined up, ready to view.
Specific traits
SNL on iPad
It quickly became clear that the underpinning technology stack would need to have several traits. It would need to support diverse metadata types: cast member names, celebrity host names, character names, the themes of different sketches.
Semantics were required to provide context around the content and the nuts-and-bolts of security, data integrity and scalability vital to running a system capable of serving up dynamic online content on a potentially massive scale could hardly be ignored. And finally, the infrastructure needed to be able to deliver a customised, continuous streaming experience.
Lee had worked with the MarkLogic Enterprise NoSQL database in a previous job and saw that this technology might, once again, fit the bill. Using MarkLogic’s semantics and search capabilities, individual sketches can be bundled as ‘smart content’, along with a wide range of accompanying metadata. The more a sketch is watched, the more this smart content is enriched with information about user preferences and actions. Videos are automatically discovered, recommended and queued based on this data.
In addition, NBC created a dynamic, cloud-based information delivery platform on MarkLogic that is used to import new episodes from current seasons, just hours after the show goes out,  as well as remastered library sketches with improved picture quality.
The app has been a great success, according to Lee. It was launched for iPhone in time for the SNL 40th anniversary show on 15 February 2015 and has subsequently been rolled out to Android devices. In the first three months of its availability, Lee says, around 100 million clips were viewed.
We still have other product features we want to introduce – we’d like to enable more sharing, for example. There are other opportunities for grouping content in different ways. And there are opportunities outside of SNL, too. This has been a great learning experience in terms of an implementation that engages users and we think it can be applied to other shows in other areas.
Read more on: Analytics planning and data analysisCRM and customer experienceDigital and content marketingSocialUse cases 