
Digital transformation at the local government level is a tricky subject to work through. Mostly because when we talk about ‘local government’ we are grouping together hundreds of very different organisations, with different priorities, under one umbrella. And then talk about it like it’s a single entity, when really it’s a very diverse beast.
Over the past year or so we at diginomica have been trying to pick this apart with some examples of councils that are doing interesting things, as well as attending events that give us an idea of the challenges that are faced at a local level.
As I’ve said previously, some get that this ‘digital’ stuff isn’t going away and needs to be addressed head on, and quickly. Others don’t see digital as a robust enough solution compared to the procurement of more ‘solid IT’ in days gone by, which quite frankly, is laughable.
We have also previously identified some of the main blockers facing local government when it comes to unpicking their legacy systems and redesigning services – some of which include an over reliance on outsourcing, procurement resistance, a lack of leadership and poor data use.
However, it’s not all bad. Take a look at what the likes of Buckinghamshire County Council are doing with a small digital team, which is challenging the status quo for citizen facing services.
There is a lot to keep on top of and we can’t do it all, but we are trying to pick up on the important stuff.
Which is why when PwC’s ‘Local State We’re In’ report landed in my inbox today, I thought it might be worth sharing some of the key findings from the nearly 100 interviews with chief executives and local authority leaders.
A digital divide
The primary message from the report is that there is a digital divide between local authorities and the citizens that they serve.
Whilst we normally think of a ‘digital divide’ in terms of the gap between those that have access to the internet and those that don’t, in this case the report is simply talking about the gap between the local government’s confidence and the reality facing the citizen trying to use digital services.
The report states:
Digital has a key enabling role to play in brokering a new relationship between people, communities and local government, offering opportunities far beyond efficiency savings and demand management.
This year has seen a growing confidence from council Chief Executives and Leaders about their approach to digital, with 76% of Chief Executives and 74% of Leaders agreeing they are embracing the opportunities new technologies offer, up from 60% and 70% in 2015.
However, only 23% of the public agree that their council is taking a confident approach to digital, down from 28% in 2015.
Councils need to move at pace to bridge this growing digital divide if they are to stay relevant in a digital age.
From my experience, this a pretty accurate description of the experience on the ground. Citizens are faced with woeful services that are either bureaucratic, not digital at all, or are simply too difficult to make worthwhile.
Fragmented and painful experiences are all too common. Nonetheless leaders perceive their efforts to be going above and beyond – when in reality, they are probably not doing anything too differently compared to their efforts five years ago. Yes, that’s a bit of a sweeping statement, but it’s the truth about what I see a lot of the time.
Couple this with the fact that PwC found that citizen’s interactions with the council either in person or over the phone have dropped by 9% and 10% respectively over the past year, whilst only 35% of the public said they were satisfied with their local authority’s digital offering.
Other more traditional channels of interaction are slowing, and yet satisfaction with the digital services available is still low.
A data problem
PwC also rightly highlights the disconnect between local authority leaders’ confidence in their use of data versus what they’re actually doing with it. Data cleansing and reorganisation is key to the delivery of new digital services at a local level.
Not only can better use of data lead to greater efficiencies (better understanding of the local communities you serve), but it can also result in a more streamlined and personalised approach for citizens.
To be fair to local authorities, I’ve heard a lot are waiting on the ability to use central government’s Verify system, which (in theory) should allow for easier identity verification for citizens. But there are still complexities around how the service will be extended out to local areas (who is paying for it?).
The PwC report notes:
Engaging in new ways with the public is just one element of the potential of digital technology. Data is another key area that councils can tap into. While 91% of chief executives and leaders say they are confident of their capabilities in data analytics, it seems that a much lower proportion are actually using data analytics to inform decision-making and strategy. Just four in ten (41%) say their council uses data analytics.
Within this, 71% say they use data held in council controlled databases and systems, with only 33% tapping in to the potential of unstructured data to shape decision making and strategy. This suggests that, despite their confidence in their capability, there is still much councils could learn in terms of utilising data analytics, particularly working in partnership with other public sector organisations and business.
My take
Plenty to mull over and much to be concerned about. The gap between confidence and the reality of the situation is particularly worrying – it’s a lot easier to change when you recognise that things aren’t perfect and there is a problem.
Image credit - digital pixel EKG electrocardiogram blue background © ninog - Fotolia.com., Confusion. What The...? © BillionPhotos.com - Fotolia.comRead more on: Digital government and public servicesLocal

