
Liverpool
Liverpool and Salford City Councils in the UK are to collaborate in a move towards implementing digital-transformed operations and services that are both separated and shared. This looks like it could in the long term open up some new business opportunities for the supplier of the platform they will jointly use, SAP and S/4 HANA.
SAP already has a 10-year-plus track record of working with local authorities in the UK, and the platform the pair will use is to be based on Salford’s existing SAP resources. 
The difference here is that other authorities have worked to build their services with third party outsourcers and service companies, and are turning to them for help with any plans they have for digital transformation.
The Liverpool/Salford project is different in that it is based on a collaboration between them, with SAP playing the support role, rather than being project leader. In addition, there is scope for other authorities to join in the collaboration to gain richer services and lower operating costs.
SAP, for its part, could also gain something from its involvement. As the collaborative platform grows, so the company will have the opportunity to fill out its base platform with a richer set of applications that meet common needs across Local Government, certainly in the UK and possibly as a replicable model in other national markets.
The platform the collaborators are using is based on S/4HANA in an on premise implementation. In style and approach it has the feel of a potential SaaS opportunity, but according to Darren Hunt, SAP’s Director for Public Sector in the UK and Ireland, that is not the case for now:

It is not a SaaS model. It is an extension of the enterprise models they have been using but it is more collaborative. It is not a shared service or outsourced to an SAP partner. I’m not even sure what to call it, but it is certainly driving economies.

Liverpool and Salford may have kicked off this model, but Hunt see potential for other councils in the area to join in, as they all have the same broad mix of services to provide that are common to all of them:

It is a platform that allows them to share not only share resources but share processes. Is it a classic SaaS delivery? No, it’s not. Each will be working in its own area of the system, which is hosted by Salford. So there will be cost savings if other authorities come and join in using the platform. And some of those may have applications, such as CRM, that might benefit others on the collaboration platform.

SAP has many local authority customers in the UK, many having been customers for 12-15 years and still running the classic legacy back office system. Many of these are now looking for support as they look to start a transformation journey, but just as many of them are looking to work with third party partners of SAP. For example, Birmingham Council is currently working with Capita on just such a programme. 
The difference with the Liverpool and Salford deal is that SAP itself has become directly involved, giving customers another option on how to set about the digital transformation process, says Hunt: 

The majority of the legacy ERP systems have been implemented in collaboration with a partner and that will be the case moving forward. But the opportunity to get them collaborating between themselves is very early. Will more do that? I hope so, and I think it would make sense for them to do so. Others will prefer the partner-led approach and we will support both.

Growth opportunities
Hunt is well aware, if a tad circumspect in how he talks about it, that there are several large local authorities between Liverpool and Salford, while to the east there lies much of Greater Manchester, all of which are obvious targets for such a model. Indeed, taking the North of England as a whole, SAP has 10 local authority customers for which collaboration with Liverpool/Salford may create opportunities to improve services and reduce operating costs: 

It also provides us with the opportunity to go after those other local authorities that may be running other enterprise systems but really getting the value from them that they would seek at this point in time. I think the platform that is evolving now in Liverpool/Salford is a place for them to go and look.

SAP will be supporting the councils in the development of new services that run on S/4HANA as required, at least until their experience and expertise grows. He expects to see them becoming self-sufficient quite quickly. This does then present SAP with an opportunity to participate in the onward resale of those developments to other collaborators, both within the Liverpool/Salford project and other collaborations that follow on: 

Whether SAP actively sells what is in place in Liverpool/Salford, or whether those authorities go and on-board other public sector bodies themselves because they now have a platform that will allow them to is something that will evolve over time. Our strategy here is to grow our business so we will support all of that, whether it is through the partner channel or through collaborations.

There are no plans, however, for SAP to commit any extensive development resources to this support. Hunt made it clear that the company has no plans to start up an outsourcing services business and that support would not extend beyond the normal demarcation lines that apply to any customer. They will just get help in kick-starting developments on technologies that are new to them.
However, Hunt is aware that some of those developments could be sufficiently important and common requirements across most local authorities. That would make them attractive as core parts of a bigger `local authority’ platform that SAP could sell. He expects to see the platform growing on that basis in areas such as health and social care.
In that situation SAP gets a richer package of services to sell to a local authority down the line which includes applications developed by, say Liverpool/Salford or some other collaboration in the future. This begs the question of whether SAP becomes the sales agent with a responsibility to pay the developers commission, or a similar payment. This could prove to be an attractive by-product for the local authorities in that they could get an on-going pay-back for their development efforts:

That model is not in place commercially at this time, but clearly there will be a need for recognition of the development work involved. SAP would happily look at any commercial consideration. But does it make sense for the future? I believe it does.

Hunt also acknowledges that such a model could be beneficial in helping SAP acquire as customers those local authorities that are not currently in the SAP camp. This does not make up part of any conversations SAP is having with such authorities at the moment, especially those located near what one must presume will be an excellent `reference site’. He did however indicate that, maybe shortly, this might well change. 
My take
This looks like a classic example of the `greying’ of the traditional dividing lines between customer and supplier. The collaborative model means that SAP becomes a supplier partner, customer and agent for the Liverpool/Salford collaborators. That, in turn could grow the core local authority platform, which in its own turn could attract more collaborations………and so the cycle spins. And it is an approach that could be spun up for other markets.
Image credit - FreeImages.com Disclosure - At time of writing, SAP is a premier partner of diginomica. Read more on: Cloud platforms - infrastructure and architectureCollaboration sharing and digital productivityDigital government and public servicesLocal

