
We at diginomica have been quite harsh about the digital ambitions in local government across the UK. Whilst there has always been a recognition that ‘local government’ is a complicated, diverse behemoth, equally we have felt that there has been little desire to change the status quo.
And although there have been pockets of excellence and certain digital leaders are willing to collaborate, local authorities more often than not continue to work in isolation and have a view that they are ‘unique’.
Whilst of course there are going to be local needs, there is a huge chunk of public service that could be standardised across the country that local authorities are attempting to tackle on their own.
But it seems that we are finally starting to get some momentum for change – in the form of the Local Public Services CIO Council, which is an independent group, but is supported by Socitm (the most well known organisation representing IT in local government).
You can find out more about the Council here – but from its description and a document released this week, it appears that it is beginning to sound more and more like the Local Government Digital Service that has been demanded authorities for years.
Whitehall’s Government Digital Service (GDS) has always been open to collaboration with a local group, but it has typically said that being responsible for local government is outside of its remit (which is true). It looks to me like the Local Public Services CIO Council may be trying to fill this spot.
In a paper released this week the Council has put forward a “high level strategic approach and associated design principles for the application of digital technology and its role in helping to dramatically improve public service outcomes, orientated towards the unique strengths and needs of individual areas”.
In other words, this is its business plan for local government. And it has picked some key digital exemplars – as GDS did in the early days – as key services that could be redesigned with digital technologies.
Working differently
The Council report rightly highlights that historically public sector transformation has by and large focused on the wrong things e.g. transactions, not relationships; websites, not outcomes for the citizens; inward focus on service, as opposed to outward focus on outcome.
Plus all the stuff about culturally not being willing to prioritise the citizen and being reluctant to work with other organisations.
However, things are changing – or more to the point, they need to change. The report notes:
Public sector austerity, as well as exponential increases in demand, means that it is now important to “follow the money”, with a focus on redesign and innovation across the areas of significant expenditure and a focus on outcomes for places over traditional service delivery models.
It goes on to say that if local government as a whole is going to succeed in digital transformation, it needs to make investment decisions that are based around “simplifying, standardising and sharing”. All three of those things require thinking more broadly about local public services and about local digital government as a whole.
For example, common design principles should be used, open standards should be applied and data should be shared. All things that are a far cry away from how local government currently operates (but again, all sounds very similar to GDS).
The Council said:
An effective place-based approach requires common design principles to be adopted and applied across local public service organisations that operate in any one area. Local Government has the leadership role in terms of place-shaping and community well being, and is therefore well positioned to advocate and promote the use of such principles.
Ubiquitous digital technology now enables citizens to use consumer based technology to become better informed and more self-reliant, potentially reducing the need for traditional public service provision. Applied to public service organisations it can also help make public services more efficient and effective.
If successful, this could mean that there is proactive support for people to be more self-reliant and less dependent on public services, that there would be help for people to come out of public service provision as soon as is possible, and that local public service provision would be financially stable.
Key to all of this is connecting with others in the sector and joining up the parts that make sense; doing the hard work to make the services simple, which is no easy task; adopting a culture of iteration with your partners, so that it makes big failures far less likely; understanding context, remembering that you’re designing for people, not screens; and being consistent wherever possible.
The exemplars
The Local CIO Council has proposed the sponsorship of five projects to apply and prove that this approach works. The idea is to pull together a number of organisations representing places to work collaboratively on the following five projects:

Local Waste Services
 Blue Badge Applications with integration to DWP
Integrated Digital Care Record (across Health and Care)
 Secure DVLA API and service for parking permits, taxi driver licensing, fleet management, abandoned vehicles, parking fines, van permits, commercial waste, enforcement/debt collection and local congestion charges.
Verify – common citizen registration, identification and authentication service.

I know from conversations with some digital leaders in local government that local waste services is one of the most challenging services to get right – and has likely been chosen for that reason. If it can get this project up and running across a number of authorities, it would likely get the buy-in for further work.
Equally, the Local Council CIO highlights how poor the Blue Badge scheme currently is and the opportunity for redesign. It notes:
The Blue Badge scheme is a service provided by ‘tier one’ local authorities to allow a disabled person to park closer to a destination. There are approximately 3.1 million blue badges in circulation in the UK, which need to be renewed every 3 years with an application time of up to 8 weeks.
40% of all applications could be determined in one online session if the applicant was able to give consent for the council to access real-time data held by the Department for Work and Pensions (DWP) to determine if a qualifying benefit is present.
Health and social care is also a touchy subject for many local authorities (often many claim that it is impossible to improve the costly processes with digital tech) – so again, if this can be tackled, it would be a huge win for the Council.
My take
This is the sort of collaboration and coordination that we have been hoping to see from local government. It’s obviously very early days yet and it seems like organisations still need to be assigned to the projects listed above. However, it is progress in the right direction.
The key will be getting these authorities to work together and working together to the same beat. That’s going to be hard. There will inevitably also be sticking points around funding – if one builds it, does the other buy it? Lots to work out, but I’m very assured to see this work in progress.
Image credit - Businessman selecting from global people network © Romolo Tavani - Fotolia.comRead more on: Digital government and public servicesLocal

