
If you’re a global company, then you set up your marketing strategy to take into consideration local market nuances. Right?
In a report from Croud, International Marketing Report: Uncovering the power of local, 54% of respondents said they have no local market support for content in every market.
Thirty percent have no local market support for paid search, and 60% have no local market support for programs in every market.
Centralized marketing, with little local considerations
Most retail marketers manage international marketing from a central in-house team, and their biggest challenge is the lack of local market knowledge. They define the strategy and approach, create the messaging and brand, and then they implement across the world where their markets reside. Centralized management is not a bad approach; it does provide a level of control over brand and messaging that an organization needs. Setting up a distributed team, while beneficial in many ways, also comes with its own set of challenges. Is it worth the effort?
Maybe you think it’s not necessary to consider local market differences. Maybe you think Google translate is the only thing you need to translate your content and messaging for different markets and everything will work out fine. Maybe you know better than that, but you still do it this way anyway (in the Croud report, this was found to often be the case).
It does matter though. One example given in the report: Pampers used imagery for diapers of a stork carrying a baby – something people in the US and Canada understand well. But in Japan, a giant peach brings a new baby, not a stork – the imagery didn’t work at all and Pampers’ launch was unsuccessful.
Then, there is Coca-Cola’s combination of English and te reo Māori, the two main languages spoken in New Zealand. They ended up writing “hello death” on vending machines.
The biggest challenges marketers acknowledge is a lack of local market knowledge and the language barrier. One in four marketing teams use Google Translate and only 29% consider full localization. So instead of focusing on local audiences, or considering popular local platforms, many still run the same campaign across all markets. As per the Croud report:
To produce marketing content that resonates with a local market, localisation is required. That means local market experts who can accurately translate and localise based on market understanding, cultural nuances, beliefs, sensitivities and colloquialisms.
No such thing as a simple global marketing strategy
A study by IDG Research and Smartling (a translation software provider) listed a number of localization challenges; the top three:

Slow time to market (37%)
Process too manual (34%)
Localization impact difficult to measure (34%)

Localization is not only about translating content for each locale. It’s also about cultural nuances that might affect branding, keywords and phrases you use, imagery and geography.
It’s also about where you say things, not just how you say them. In the Croud study, marketing was not taking into consideration local distribution platforms either. For example, in China, you would advertise on Alibaba, whereas in the US, Amazon.com is the better platform. In Russia, you wouldn’t use Facebook but VKontakte for social media messaging.
One important tip when crafting marketing content that will be used globally is to keep localization top of mind from the beginning. From GALA:
Consistency and conciseness in the original mean faster localization, less cost, and greater potential for reuse.” So when you are defining your messaging, make clear notes where you will have adjust it for a key local market. Then have people fluent in that market help you understand how to share your message correctly.
Shayla Price suggests to:
Hire people who understand your consumers’ language, culture, and behaviors. Local experts will know how to effectively sell to your customers.” You don’t need to keep these people available all the time but figure out where in your planning you need to involve them in the process. It’s after you’ve defined your messaging and content, or at least outlined it getting their expertise in how you may need to change it for a certain market. It’s also during launch so they can help monitor performance and quickly adjust things if it’s not working as expected. It could also be in the initial planning phases when you are strategizing and need to understand what will be involved in working with different markets.
Measuring the impact of your localization efforts is important because you need to know if the changes you make for each local market is working as expected. Although some marketers feel it’s hard to measure localization impact, it is possible. The figure below, from a Smartling report on localization, provides several ways companies can measure the impact of content localization:

My take
Any organization that wants to achieve success globally can’t afford to not take localization into consideration. It’s proper translation of content, but it’s much more than that. Do that successfully you need to have people who know those markets well and can help you adjust your marketing content and messaging to meet the needs of each market.
A central team works well for many organizations, but what the best global companies also have are people in each local market – whether a full team or consultant resources to help them.
The cost and effort of this approach to global market is worth it if you can avoid this, per Geoffrey James:
Frank Perdue’s tag line, “It takes a tough man to make a tender chicken,” got translated into Spanish as “It takes a sexually stimulated man to make a chicken affectionate.”
Image credit - Feature image - Two women thinking one has a question another solution with light bulb - by @pathdoc, from Shutterstock.com. Smartling localization image credited above.Read more on: Analytics planning and data analysisDigital and content marketing 