
It’s no surprise that colleagues and businesses are keen to know what it means to have actionable insights. Much of what we see are data that proves a predetermined position. We call that a ‘forgone conclusion.’ It’s often bunk. So when some interesting data emerges, the last thing we want to see is someone coming to ‘odd’ conclusions based upon a misunderstanding of how to use the facts. That’s exactly what’s going on at Venture Beat where Alex Salkever, head of marketing for data publishing platform Silk.co (now defunct) opines on Stack Overflow data. He starts:
If you had to name the best place in the world to find top programmer talent, you’d probably say California, right? But we recently found some compelling data that shows that’s not the case. In fact, not only does California not rank as the top U.S. state for programming talent, but the U.S. doesn’t even rank as the top country.
That’s interesting given the ongoing and highly competitive nature of hiring in Silicon Valley. According to Stack Overflow’s criteria, London has the most highly ranked coders. That’s OK as far as it goes, but this is where Salkever starts wandering into fantasy land:
Still, San Francisco has only one-tenth the population of London and New York, so on a per capita basis, the City by the Bay does come out ahead. London, though, is well ahead of New York even though the two megacities have roughly the same number of inhabitants. The upshot? If you want to find a coding unicorn among the masses of programmers, SF remains a good bet, followed by London. (Caveat: Stack Overflow users self-declare their location, so we’re relying on their word here).
Wow! Who’da thunk?
I find this kind of interpretation extremely misleading.
Simply applying city population as the denominator to form an alternative conclusion is daft. It’s a bit like my walking into Powell Street BART in San Francisco, seeing 30-40 homeless people and concluding that it has become a homeless shelter.
Salkever has not only ignored data mentioned but also other recorded data which says the US as a whole ranks 15th in the world for highest average user reputation and 13th in top users per capita of the whole population. You might well expect that latter result given the fact the US has a very large population with a widely diverse economic landscape but it does trigger more questions.
Other important data?
For example:

What are the sharing habits in each (or any) location?
To what extent is it possible to game Stack Overflow?
To what extent is Stack Overflow representative of the coding population at large?
What margin for error should be applied to the data?
What kinds of application are developers working on in any location?
What are the incentives that drive developers to a specific location?
What kinds of work are represented by Stack Overflow contributors?
What about the quality of questions asked on Stack Overflow?

When you start to take those considerations into account then it is highly likely that you can draw very different inferences, depending upon what you wish to discover.
We know for example that Silicon Valley is the world’s primary source of venture capital flowing into high technology startups. Those same VCs prefer to invest locally. New York is where those funds are mostly realized through IPOs. It’s important to note that the Silicon Valley is not the only funding location, although you’d be hard pressed to believe that from all the Valley promoted broo-ha-ha. Is it therefore a surprise that a San Francisco based executive would draw those conclusions?
As a side note, there is good psychological theory to back this up from Daniel Kahneman, who is widely credited with early work on behavioral economics. He states that our thinking system work through a positive test strategy. That means a deliberate search for confirming evidence. In other words: people seek data that are likely to be compatible with the beliefs they currently hold. That of course is not the same as an objective fact. 
Simply because money pours into an area does not mean the best in the programming world are going to show up. Customers I know operate a multi-country talent strategy, searching for talent based upon skills requirements and availability in particular locales. A number of companies I know are actively looking to shift operations outside of Silicon Valley because talent costs there are at uneconomic levels.


Data from stackoverflow.silk.co

A glaring error
Salkever’s analysis contains one glaring, fatal flaw. Reputation as measured by Stack Overflow is just that. It is not an objective measure of coding ability but a measure of a person’s ability to answer questions in a way that others like as voted on that platform. That may be an indicator of capability but it is only one measure. I don’t know any company that would make any hiring decision on that basis alone.
If anything, I would be more inclined to consider some of the country wide scores as a starting point. I have for example been told that you get top quality code out of Bulgaria. Provided you are prepared to wait for it. Bulgaria appears at the top of the list of countries for average reputation of top Stack Overflow users. Go figure.
My take

We see many organizations struggling to understand data of all kinds, both structured and unstructured. These same organizations want strategy around managing and interpreting data.
It is becoming increasingly difficult to tell which data is the most important or where attention should be focused. It’s not just there is too much data, some organizations are struggling to ask the right questions.
Organizations are often being forced into making fast, tactical decisions based upon perceived execution needs. The type of boneheaded analysis seen above is symptomatic of that imperative.
Simplistic measures hold appeal but extrapolating a single reputational data point as equating to ‘the best’ or ‘top talent’ is dangerous.

Image credit: © Mark Carrel – Fotolia.com

Image credit - fotoliaRead more on: Analytics planning and data analysis 