
Dr. Roland Schütz
Thinking cloud, but talking business. That’s how Dr. Roland Schütz, Chief Information Officer, Lufthansa, describes his role.
Beneath that mile-high mission statement Schütz is conscious that he and his team have a critical role to play in an industry that’s constantly evolving. He states:
All mission-critical processes for an airline are heavily dependent on IT, especially customer touchpoints, booking, checking-in, being entertained on the flight. But even on the flight deck it’s impossible to do the business without state of the art IT solutions. It’s been the same since the 1950s.
Airlines have always been early adopters of new technologies. As early as the 1950s, the need for an available seat inventory led to the development of the first seat reservation systems at American Airlines.
Schütz makes the case that the airline industry was the first to take a global view of the customer experience:
The growth of global distribution systems like Sabre and Amadeus and Galileo emerged and were basically the first commercial systems in any industry to serve customers on a global basis. Customers soon gained the power to select via their travel agency between different offers.
The internet gave airlines more power, he argues:
With the internet have airlines recovered some of the power to distribute on their own rules by using the web to sell tickets, but this also opened the way for new players like the low cost airlines. Mainly driven by the need to cut costs, web channels pushed to allow, for example, self service check-in or flight information.
Direct sales via the internet have themselves continued to evolve:
In recent years, these services have gone quickly mobile. Today you don’t get to the airport without having checked in at home or with your mobile. The door has been pushed open to completely new way in which the customer can be serviced and to focus on the true customer needs, which in honesty was not the true driver in the past.
Constant change
This theme of constant change is one that the airline industry has become accustomed to, adds Schütz, and that remains true today as the ’traditional’ carriers face increased competition from low-cost rivals:
Airlines are redefining their operating models to be full network players, like Lufthansa, or as point-to-point players like Ryanair. Traditional airlines like Lufthansa are forced to act in a sandwich position between the low cost players and the carriers on intercontinental routes. With market yields declining, all airlines are looking for new revenue streams around ancillary services like extra baggage or lounge access.
But while cost containment is crucial, it can’t become the main focus, he cautions. That has to be the customer:
Differentiation requires a more customer centric approach. If you are only driven by the lowest price then you can’t get across this experience and be sustained in this market. The trend to shift from product centricity to customer centricity will drive airlines to transform and to build new capabilities.
With customer centricity, the focus shifts from the core flight and the airport experience to a more comprehensive view of the travel chain, also known as the customer journey.
Customers are actually in a constant circle, from planning the journey through the outbound journey including the trip to the airport to the destination airport to staying at the destination hotel and then the inbound flight.
The expectations customers have are often driven by experiences in other areas of life and are transferred to travel. These liquid expectations are setting the benchmark for the travel company and missed expectations will drive customers to look for alternatives quickly.
Flying high
This brings him back to the search for new sources of revenue:
This customer journey consists of a lot of intersections and consumes a lot of time. Consumers spend a lot of money and in this the airfare is only a subset. I compare it to a gas station. Selling fuel doesn’t provide the margin, but the attached supermarket brings the money in. This provides opportunities to think beyond the boundaries and be the first player to act as a borderless enterprise, namely to deploy cloud technology.
The customer journey with all its steps provides the chance for players to position themselves as service aggregators along the customer needs. [Services] such as connectivity in flight provides still-undiscovered selling and merchandising opportunities.
But airlines can’t do all this on their own. There is now a need for a more sophisticated ecosystem of partners to deliver the new services that are so essential to creating new revenue opportunities. This is what Schütz calls the borderless enterprise:
Airlines will not be able to provide all the relevant services on their own. Their current product scope will not be enough. Successful airlines will be able to integrate services beyond the boundaries of their products, building on their own assets.
The borderless enterprise in airline terms builds on understanding the customer needs and expectations and integrates seamlessly the service providers such as content providers, telcos, connectivity providers and other partners in the travel chain. This will link the customer to the airline and provide additional revenue streams.
The enablement of people across the borderless enterprise is therefore a key success factor and differentiator. Enablement is needed to exchange information across different organisational units, to provide access to specific customer-relevant data, to give a unique travel experience across devices, especially mobile devices and to integrate social media.
Beyond that, there’s a need for carriers to keep pushing the envelope and drilling down on experimentation and innovation. Lufthansa has done this via an innovation hub in Berlin which funds start-ups and works on new third party business models.
All of this is where the think cloud, talk business mantra kicks in, he concludes:
We hope to leverage on our core assets and generating new revenue streams based on modern and cloud-based business models.

Read more on: Collaboration sharing and digital productivityCRM and customer experiencee-commerceFrictionless enterpriseInfrastructure 