
As a frequent visitor to the US, I’d like to use Lyft. They have a friendly, caring image, unlike the ride sharing service I normally use. But Lyft don’t want me to ride with them — because I’m foreign, apparently.
Lyft are very happy to send me discount codes that I can’t use. They even ping my payment card every so often to check that it’s still valid. But they won’t let me enter my payment card address because I have a UK postcode — even though it’s a US dollar payment card. So I can’t pay with my card, or benefit from their discounts.
The weird thing about all of this is that Lyft still wants me to stay signed up to its service, even though I can’t use it. “We’re happy to have you as part of the community,” they’ve told me. But they don’t want to help solve my problem. I actually asked them if they would, and they told me to … well, let me give you the whole story and share with you exactly what they did say.
[Updated to add, in fairness to Lyft, they have since enabled non-US addresses for payment cards in their app – so the story now has a happy ending – see below].
A message for Lyft customer support
A year after I first signed up with Lyft, I decided to get to the bottom of this once and for all. I posted a message to their customer support team with a simple question:
Is there any way for me to access and update my profile with a UK address and then be able to use Lyft while visiting the US? If not then please just delete my account.
The reply that came back did claim to be “glad to address your concerns today” but in fact didn’t actually answer my question. Nevertheless, Lyft seemed very keen for me to keep my account open:
Since you mentioned that you wish to delete your account, as a heads up, it may be easier to keep your account open if you ever need it in the future.
It seemed Lyft did care about me after all, so I thought, why not keep the account open? And I asked my question again:
In order to authorise my payment card I will need to be able to enter a UK postcode so it would be helpful if you can confirm the app does now accept non-US postcode formats when entering cardholder details. Otherwise I shall be stuck using alternative ridesharing services.
A definitive answer at last
Now I was making progress. The reply from Lyft brought a definitive answer to my original question:
To confirm your concern, the app only does accepts US postcode formats when entering cardholder details.
But since I was still a Lyft member, I thought I’d make a helpful suggestion. Maybe I overstepped the mark a little, I don’t know. Here’s what I wrote:
Please can you add ‘accept non-US postcode formats’ to the development wishlist and prioritize it please as this is preventing all foreign resident visitors from using Lyft. I’m in the US 4-6 weeks a year and reliant on ride services for getting around when I’m there. I’m sure there are many others like me.
The response was the most caring put-down I’ve ever received. The hipster equivalent of what the older generation might call a grinf**k (but without the asterisks):
We truly appreciate you reaching out to us about this and we’re happy to have you as part of the community. You kept faith in us when a lot of persons did not. We’re a family that sticks together and will continue taking your feedback as this is the most important tool in reaching our ultimate goal.

My take
I think a ‘no’ would have been more honest.
[Updated November 27th – just received this new message from customer support at 2:25pm San Francisco time:
The attached screenshot below should give you insight on how to update the payment method country. When entering the information for your card, tap the country flag and select the UK option.
Thanks Lyft for enabling this option. Seems you are listening after all, kind of.]
Image credit - iPhone 6+ showing Lyft ridesharing app © BestStockFoto - ShutterstockRead more on: CRM and customer experienceCustomer service management 