
L’Oréal has been a strong champion of digital transformation for many years, with CEO Jean-Paul Agon seeing the firm’s future as being:
a digitally augmented beauty company.
To that end, the firm has dabbled in a number of customer-facing initiatives over the years, such as trialling interactive kiosks in New York back in 2013 or rolling out a virtual app in 2015. But earlier this year, the firm upped the stakes with the acquisition of Modiface, an Augmented Reality (AR) and Artificial Intelligence (AI) firm out of Canada.
This was a savvy move. Prior to the purchase, Modiface worked on AR experiences for 84 different brands, including some of L’Oréal’s biggest competitors. Now that ModiFace has been rolled into L’Oreal’s Digital Services Factory, a division dedicated to designing and developing digital services, the tech involved is now at L’Oreal’s disposal.
The first fruits of that competitive differentiator are about to be seen as L’Oréalpartners with Facebook to offer a ‘try before you buy’ experience for customers. In the traditional beauty retail space, the most common way for customers to experiment with new make-up is to visit a bricks-and-mortar store and try samples. While for many that might be an enjoyable Saturday afternoon pastime, for others it’s a time-consuming exercise that leads to them sticking to what they know works for them. That in turn limits the potential for firms like L’Oréalto roll out new products.
On the other hand, if customers can use Facebook camera functions to ‘try on’ new looks and styles without the fuss of having to sit in a make-up chair in-store, then there’s more incentive to experiment with new offerings. This in turn should lead to an uptick in conversion to sales.
The collaboration will initially be tested on L’Oréal’s NYX Professional Makeup brand at the end of this month, before being rolled out to L’Oréal’s best-known brands, including Maybelline, L’OréalParis, Lancôme, Giorgio Armani, Yves Saint Laurent, Urban Decay, and Shu Uemura.
Lubomira Rochet, L’Oréal’s Chief Digital Officer, reckons that the time is ripe for such technology to make an impact on existing operational models, as well as presenting the L’Oréal brands to Facebook’s two billion strong audience:
Facebook and L’Oréal share the vision that AR is becoming key for product and brand discovery and purchase. We are at that magical moment when technologies have matured enough and consumer appetite for using them is growing everywhere. One fascinating aspect of this partnership is that it keeps us innovating the beauty user experience. After having adapted our creatives and contents to a mobile-first world it will be very interesting to see how AR is going to change the creative playbook of our industry.
Darwinian
CEO Agon hailed the ModiFace acquisition as a “major milestone” on L’Oreal’s digital transformation makeover in a market that is increasingly seeing uptick in online channel transactions – and one that’s only going to become more competitive:
E-commerce is even more Darwinian in term of brands and only the brands that have strong top-of-mind presence with consumers will prevail. We have seen that, for example, in China, this year and last year, that in fact the big brands on e-commerce are becoming bigger brands. Our market shares online are usually bigger, a lot stronger than offline, because of the process is very Darwinian. So we think that it’s very critical now to strengthen our brands.
L’Oreal’s not alone on this digital focus of course. Olay, part of the Procter & Gamble portfolio, spent two years developing proprietary AI tech to deliver its Skin Advisor service which allows customers to get advice on skin problems without having to talk to in-store advisors. Instead users take a no-makeup selfie and then fill in an online questionnaire about their current skincare routine. Algorithms have been developed around common pain points, such as greasy skin, acne or crows feet. The AI tech uses these to make recommendations on what products customers should be using.
Others in the beauty industry are also upping their digital efforts. At Revlon, recently-appointed CEO Debra Perelman identifies digital investment as a priority:
We have iconic brands in our portfolio and talented and passionate people who are committed to innovation and delivering the best products to consumers. I’m confident in our digital transformation strategy across all of our brands and platforms and know that it will propel us to capture leadership positions where we should be winning.
Our strategy focuses on strengthening our brands and enhancing the avenues through which we communicate and connect with our consumers. We are focused on ensuring total availability of our products where the consumer shops, both in the brick-and-mortar world, and online. In doing this we are building strategic capabilities and partnerships to position the company to win over the long-term.
That means investing in skills as well as tech, she adds:
We are transforming the company with many initiatives working in parallel. We have upgraded executive talent to build leadership in areas that are going to be critical in the journey ahead including e-commerce, digital marketing, as well as data and analytics. We recognize the dynamics that play in our industry and across the market with the increase of e-commerce and the migration of media consumption to the digital mobile space. We are moving quickly and implementing our comprehensive digital transformation where we have assembled the technology, processes and the right level of talent and bandwidth to build capabilities that are of critical importance now and in the future.
Perelman is a firm believer in the importance of strong tech platforms although Revlon has had some issues recently in the firm of problems with an SAP implementation that impacted badly on inventory management and supply-chain. That hurt performance earlier in the year, although the CEO believes that the problems have been addressed and the end result will be a stronger supply-chain:
With most of the SAP disruption behind us, we are focused on realizing the opportunities in our business and building for the future, including growing our brands, better serving our customers and our obsession with our consumer.
My take
While I’m clearly not the target demographic for this, it’s a good use case trial for AR with a very obvious practical application. The ‘try before you buy’ philosophy is going to become a competitive differentiator for online retail in sectors such as fashion and beauty.

Image credit - L’Oréal Disclosure - At time of writing, SAP is a premier partner of diginomica. Read more on: Digital enterprise in the real worlde-commerceRetail e-commerce and the omni-channelUse cases 