
Recently appointed CEO Steve Rowe has revealed further details about his turnaround plan for flagship British retailer M&S, as the company announced a sharp fall in pre-tax profits.
Rowe said that the impact of online and changing customer expectations has meant that M&S needs to rethink its estate, and announced a number of store closures for its fledgling clothing division.
The company also announced a number of international store closures, amounting to more than a quarter of its overseas footprint.
Pre-tax profits fell 88% to £25.1 million, down from £216 million in the same period last year. Investors had a mixed reaction to the news, with M&S’s share price jumping and then falling again in the hours after the results were released.
Rowe was brought in to replace Marc Bolland earlier this year, in an attempt to turnaround stalling parts of the M&S business – most notably the clothing division, which has stagnated in recent years.
The company has also been making strong investments in its digital arm in recent quarters – with the M&S.com platform seeing growth – and Rowe has also recently announced plans to make greater use of customer data to improve personalisation and customer service.
This will be done via the recently launched M&S loyalty programme, Sparks, which should help the company to better understand its buyers’ behaviour. However, it’s worth noting that M&S is trailing years behind the likes of Sainsbury’s and Tesco, which have long-standing loyalty cards for their customers.
Announcing the results today, Rowe said:
In May, we laid out a number of questions which we would answer as part of our strategic review. We committed to creating a simpler business with customers at its heart, and taking action to start to recover our Clothing & Home business and continue to grow in Food.
We have now completed a forensic review of our estate both in the UK and in our International markets. Over the next five years we will transform our UK estate with c.60 fewer Clothing & Home stores, whilst continuing to increase the number of our Simply Food stores. In the future, we will have more inspiring stores in places where customers want to shop that complement our growing digital offer.
Internationally, we propose to cease trading in ten loss making owned markets, but intend to continue to develop our presence through our strong franchise partners.
These are tough decisions, but vital to building a future M&S that is simpler, more relevant,
multi-channel and focused on delivering sustainable returns.
Rethinking the estate
Rowe said that now that M&S has concluded the review that it started in April, it has a more complete picture of the actions needed to return M&S to sustainable growth. The aim is to reduce the focus on Clothing & Home and ramp up investments in the successful Simply Food business – all complemented by online.
M&S plans to open over 200 new Simply Food stores by the end of 2018/19, whilst reducing the number of Clothing & Home stores.
Rowe said that M&S will close 30 ‘full line’ stores (which sell both clothing and food), and downsize or replace 45 full line stores to Simply Food stores. M&S will also relocate some of the stores and open some new full line stores in “underserved areas”.
The costs associated with this programme will be £50 million per annum for the next three years, rising to £100 million in years four and five. Opening a new store typically takes approximately three years.
As customer shopping patterns change and customers migrate online, we need to manage our estate proactively to ensure that our Clothing & Home space is relevant for our customers and profitable for our shareholders.
We have developed a five year programme to improve our store estate to better meet our customers’ needs. The result will be fewer, more inspirational Clothing & Home stores that offer customers better range authority in more convenient locations with higher space productivity.
Our programme will touch more than 100 stores, accounting for 25% of our space. This will result in a net reduction of c.10% of Clothing & Home space with 60 fewer full line stores.
My take
M&S did well to invest early in an in-house digital team that focused on creating an agile digital platform. M&S.com hasn’t been without its troubles, but as a company, M&S has always been wise to the need to invest in digital.
That being said, compared to other supermarkets and retailers, it’s offering is distinctly lacking. For example, ordering food online is possible – but still requires an in-store pick-up. The delay with the loyalty programme is also a distinct oversight.
It’s also interesting to note that other retailers have also assessed their property portfolio as online takes the lead for customers – but instead of just closures, some are using the existing footprint to incorporate online logistics. For example, take a look at how Argos is using store space as ‘mini warehouses’ for easier and quicker delivery to customers.
Not to say that the same would apply to M&S, but it’s interesting to see that the approach it has gone for is a reduction in footprint, rather than a rethink of that footprint’s use.
Image credit - Young man shopping with his mobile phone © sdecoret - Fotolia.comRead more on: e-commerceRetail e-commerce and the omni-channel 