
UK high street institution Marks & Spencer (M&S) wants to become a digital first retailer and to that end it’s currently embarked on transitioning to what it calls a new Technology Operating Model.
This, according to M&S CEO Steve Rowe when he announced TCS as the firm’s principal technology partner in January:
embraces the agile mind-set to transform business and IT strategy, aligned with rapid technology innovation to meet fast changing business priorities…our business will be faster, simpler and more focused on achieving a seamless customer experience.
So that’s the plan. Delivery on that lies on the to do list of Matt Horwood, M&S Group Head of Technology Solutions, who argues that businesses today live in what he dubs an Age of Abundance when it comes to tech. That’s an upside, but one with the downside that the pace of change has ramped up at the same time:
As a retailer, we are seeing this even quicker than in other segments, consumer technology has made a massive impact on our business technology approach. We are adopting changes ever faster. This whole Age of Abundance is driving a huge challenge for our business in how we react to this. How do we innovate at a pace that allows us to compete with those that are also achieving that rapid pace of change we strive for?
That is not to say that M&S does not innovate. M&S has a proud history of innovating. Whether you look at the food that we manufacture, bringing in new tastes and new people. It’s clothing, fabric technology that enables us to sell washable suits. Innovation in our products has been well known. Our new challenge is around how we make the best of technology.
Catch up
And it’s a big challenge without doubt. M&S has had its fair share of trials in the retail sector in recent years and Horwood admits that the firm is “not where it used to be in terms of our performance”. Hence the need for change:
Our business has started a five-year transformation plan, turning our business around with an objective to become a digital first business. This plan and desire to become a digital first business that can exploit technology to its fullest is going to be underpinned by a number of key changes.
These changes aren’t just going be at the front end, but behind the scenes where they can allow the business to operate differently. That’s essential, argues Horwood:
When we talk about innovation, a lot of the time we talk about digital innovation in particular, we talk about the customer website, the customer app. They are important areas. They are touch points that everyone recollects as being the thing that you innovated for. I have got my new app that tells me my cash card balance. I can order online at home.
But successful digital transformation means getting into the guts of the organisation, he adds:
You need to go below the surface and tackle some of the part of the business you never used to tackle. Those excuses [that] the backend supply change, it is complex. Those office systems that people have got used to being constraint and a restriction. With the Age of Abundance [and] technology skills, that excuse does not exist anymore. When we look at how and where we transform the business, we are now saying there are no rules, no constraints. If that means ripping up and replacing investments that now hold the business back, those investments that are stopping us, mean we will have to tackle the underlying problems.
As a case in point, he cites a three year programme to improve M&S mainframe operations:
One of the biggest constraints to making changes to our business models was innovating basic things like, ‘Can we change the feet on a sofa that we sell to different types of wood or metal?’. A very simple business problem, but blocked by a mainframe system that no one wanted to touch because it was too old and restrictive and clunky.
Return on Colleagues
It’s about cutting through the complexity of the retail environment, not least around the physical stores:
A lot of small units of interaction that need to be managed. In the store environment, we have a range of different environment and applications that our colleagues were using over the years. Colleagues spent a lot of time between tasks going to the back of the store to find one device that handled that one task of making a price adjustment, or finding a PC that helped them worry about the bakery plan of the week, or go on stock accountancy to tag devices. It was always envisioned as a technical problem to solve, this one task, and how do I manage that? It was not about helping colleagues or worrying about the colleague experience and what their role in determining the experience they want.
That’s a crucial premise in M&S’s transformational thinking – focus on customers, of course, but also focus on colleagues within the business. Horwood explains:
We want to optimise the Return on the Customer, but why are we not focused on the Return of a Colleague? When we look at how we can optimise our devices, we introduced the Honeywell mobile device. We have to be focused on user experience. We worked straight away on user experience and the colleague experience in particular, determining what it would feel like. We took in store managers and ensured they were part of the design process. The problems we thought about were not the ones they cared about.
We also focused on automation, machine first. Do not build a replica that does not need to be there. Find a way for the devices you have got. We have rolled out an Android platform. We know where it is in the store from triangulation, we know where it is active and what task it is doing.
There’s also been a major cultural conversion to the cloud, getting away from processes that meant lots of arguments around infrastructure and then six months over security before anyone got round to building anything. That’s changing in a big way, says Horwood:
We built a platform that was built within six months. That is unheard-of for Marks & Spencer’s. We are not up to 8 weeks of building a financial institute, but a major step for a business that will deploy amongst a large number of stores. We had a focus amongst APIs and data. How do you monetise and make the information in your business more useful? How do we extract the data and optimise the way we manage the tasks, the thousands that have to be conducted in the store?
This has been a real success for us. It enabled us to roll out a solution that also built on a platform for a series of APIs that we can leverage and now swap handhelds for voice recognition. We have built the platform and focused on the platform, not the solution. As we go forward, we will be able to add to this. We have moved from having three apps to 16. That has made a huge difference to our colleagues, in particular the time they spend with our customers.
It’s critical as well to retain a focus on unlocking core capabilities, advises Horwood:
Our digital core is about unlocking APIs, the constraints of the previous world. This is how we tackled the mainframe problem, removing old systems and unlocking data locked away in applications that people did not want to trouble with. It is about building a big data platform.
This is still a journey, and we have changed the digital core focus every year. We will change it again after today. We might put more emphasis on cyber security. It is very important, but our challenge is to accelerate even faster. [With] our API strategy, the one thing I am pleased about [with] our strategy is we are having much more productive arguments with our Head of Digital Products about where the next API is coming from. The demand is there, kicking and screaming, and will help us on the journey of how we accelerate.
My take
Return on Colleague is something that is so often overlooked. Too many digital transformation programmes are about the flashy front end and the cool user experience. Those are important, absolutely, but so is fixing the stuff in the engine room! It’s fine to focus on the jacuzzi, but if the plumbing doesn’t work then you’re not going to get any bubbles! M&S has a lot of catch-up to do technology-wise, but the five year plan looks sound. One to watch for the next few years at any rate.
Image credit - M&SDisclosure - Matt Horwood was speaking at the TCS Innovation Forum in London. Read more on: Cloud platforms - infrastructure and architectureDigital enterprise in the real worldRetail e-commerce and the omni-channel 