
It’s approaching that time of year again when Miracle on 34th Street gets its annual airing on a TV near to us all, so that means it’s also time for Macy’s CEO Jeff Gannette to declare:
We are fully prepared for the critical Holiday season ahead.
In previous years this might have read as festive optimism, but Macy’s has done a lot to clean up its omni-channel act, resulting in a turnaround in its fiscal fortunes – $62 million profit for the third quarter – as Gennette boasts:
Our e-commerce business is humming and the dot-com penetration naturally increases in the fourth quarter..our stores are in good shape for the holiday and have momentum.
The pieces are all in place, he insists:
Macy’s recipe for success is e-commerce, healthy stores and a great mobile experience that ties it all together…Our e-commerce business just completed another consecutive quarter of double-digit growth, driven by continued improvement to our online offering and experience. We invested early in mobile and our mobile app just keeps getting better. We view the Macy’s app as our customer’s indispensable shopping companion and increasingly it’s becoming a channel for transactions as well. This year we will hit $1 billion in mobile sales.
But the big story around Macy’s in recent quarters has been the ‘fire sale’ of its real estate portfolio as the retailer sought to offload unwanted and uneconomic store fronts. As noted so many times before, striking the offline/online balance is the trick that so many ‘legacy’ retailers struggle with.
Gennette now argues that Macy’s has pulled that off:
The growth of our digital business goes hand-in-hand with the growth of our brick-and-mortar business. We have seen the trend improvement in our stores beginning a year ago and we have seen steady quarter-to-quarter progress throughout the year. This is important, because a healthy brick-and-mortar business is part of our strategy to build lifetime value with our existing customers and to bring new customers into the brand.
Stores are places where customers spend more money, he adds, with over 50% of Platinum and Gold customers who shop online also shop in two or more Macy’s stores:
Knowing this, it is very important for us to better understand their behavior – when and why did she choose one Macy’s store over the other, what are her expectations and different types of Macy’s stores, and within the specific malls?
Asking such questions has led to a “segmentation strategy” for stores – flagships, magnet stores and neighborhood stores. More detail on this will emerge in 2019 as the theoretical divides are mapped onto investment plans. But it will be a balanced approach, insists Gennette:
We know we can’t do one without the other. So investing in digital and mobile is very important, but equally investing in stores.
Success stories
Successes in turnaround activities include Macy’s loyalty program which was overhauled a year ago. This is delivering results, says Gennette:
Our Platinum customers, who are our best customers, are spending more with us and shopping more frequently. They like the simplicity and value of the new program. We have had a great response to the exclusive experiences that we have been able to offer the Platinum card holders…While the first priority of our loyalty program is to take care of our existing best customers, we have now expanded the program with a new tender neutral tier, which we launched earlier this year. We call this the Bronze Program and the Bronze Program is showing strong early results and we have added nearly 2 million new members to the loyalty program.
Another strong story is coming out of the Vendor Direct initiative, which is built around the concept of customer curation, explains Gennette:
In our stores, we curate for our customer through a highly-edited assortment that is localized to a specific market. Using our enhanced data and analytics, we are able to efficiently influence assortment down to the store level. But online the customer curates for herself using search and personalization tools.
Vendor Direct allows us to offer our customer a vastly wider assortment online and the self-curation tools direct to her products where she’s shown the most interest. We have more than doubled our SKUs [Stock Keeping Units] online since the launch of Vendor Direct in April. This includes an expanded assortment of great national brands that we already carry, as well as the addition of new brands and categories that we know our customer will love.
But it’s BOPS and BOSS to which Gennette points with most enthusiasm:
As a refresher with BOPS or Buy Online Pickup in Store a customer orders online choosing from the merchandise available in the specific store where they can then pick it up within two hours or less. With BOSS – or Buy Online Ship to Store – customers have access to merchandise anywhere in the Macy’s system, including Vendor Direct, which is then shipped to their neighborhood store for pickup. BOSS is very popular with our customers and we are seeing greater than anticipated use. Our customers love having access to the full Macy’s assortment. Couple that with the security and convenience of pickup at their neighborhood store and BOSS has been a hit.
BOSS and BOPS also tie back to the store segmentation strategy, he adds:
What you are seeing with BOSS and BOPS is those neighborhood stores, those smaller neighborhood stores they have a much higher penetration of their overall traffic being generated by fulfilment options, which I guess makes some sense, because when you look at what we curate in individual stores assortment, you don’t have the same breadth of assortment in a smaller door as you do in a magnet or a flagship.
So as a result of that now you have got customers who are not either comfortable in shipping something directly to their home, because they are not there they are working or they want to feel they want to touch it by coming into a building. They are taking full advantage of BOSS.
Such has been the success here, that Macy’s has now rolled out At Your Service functionality to every store. Gennette explains:
At Your Service centers are located in the high traffic door for quick and convenient pickups. At Your Service also handles returns, self checkout assistance and a variety of customer service activities. The success of BOPS and BOSS is a great example of how e-commerce, our e-commerce business and our stores business grow together.
So it’s on to the all-important Holiday season. Once that’s past, 2019 will bring further enhancements, says Gennette:
We are really focused now on experience as it relates to table stakes experience about removing the friction from the customer journey, but then also what if we add that Macy’s can uniquely do.
My take
Credit where it’s due. While Macy’s may not be entirely out of the woods yet, it doesn’t look like the retail basket case that it was a couple of years ago. Wall Street wasn’t spooked by the latest numbers, although vagueness around the new store segmentation strategy may have rattled some.
Image credit - Macy'sRead more on: CRM and customer experienceDigital and content marketingDigital enterprise in the real worldRetail e-commerce and the omni-channel 