
Satya Nadella
What a difference a year makes. This time last year Microsoft had turned in a $3.2 billion loss for the quarter to end of June, a figure driven by the cost of writing down the value of Nokia assets.
Flash forward to 2016 and the firm’s turned in a $3.1 billion profit for the comparable period, buoyed by substantial cloud services growth, with commercial cloud revenues now accounting for 15% of overall turnover of $22.6 billion for the quarter, while Azure-related revenues were up 100% year-on-year.
And while last year the focus was on the damage left over from a dodgy acquisition, this year it’s turned to the potential opportunities stemming from another, the purchase of LinkedIn.
It was then a positive and upbeat CEO Satya Nadella who spoke with analysts after the results announcement. Of the firm’s cloud growth, he says:
Overall, the Microsoft Cloud is winning significant customer support. With more than $12 billion in commercial cloud annualized revenue run rate, we are on track to achieve our goal of $20 billion in fiscal year 2018. Also, nearly 60% of the Fortune 500 companies have at least three of our cloud offerings.
Nadella argues that there are three primary drivers for Microsoft cloud adoption:

Ability to meet enterprise-grade needs.
Higher level services to enable digital transformation.
A cloud open to developers.

On the enterprise pitch, he says:
Multi-nationals choose us because we are the only hybrid and hyper-scale cloud spanning multiple jurisdictions. We cover more countries and regions than any other cloud provider, from North America to Asia to Europe to Latin America. Our cloud respects data sovereignty and makes it possible for an enterprise application to work across these regions and jurisdictions.
To back this up, he cites the stat that more than 80% of the world’s largest banks are Azure customers due to the firm’s credentials when it comes to regulatory requirements, advanced security, and commitment to privacy.
This ability to meet international data sovereignty needs is something that is only likely to become more important over time:
The position that we have taken is that we want to serve customers where they are and not assume very simplistically that the digital sovereignty needs of customers can be met out of a fewer data centers approach. Because right now, given the secular trend to move to the cloud across all of the regulated industries across the globe, we think it’s wiser for us and our investors long term to be able to meet them where they are. And that’s what you see us. We are the only cloud that operates in China under Chinese law, the only cloud that operates in Germany under German law. And these are very critical competitive advantages to us.
On the digital transformation theme, Nadella cites the example of Boeing as a case in point:
Boeing will use Azure, our IoT suite, and Cortana Intelligence to drive digital transformation in commercial aviation, with connected airline systems optimization, predictive maintenance, and much more. This builds on great momentum in IoT, including our work with Rolls-Royce, Schneider Electric, and others.
This is great progress, but our ambitions are set even higher. Our Intelligent Cloud also enables cognitive services. Cortana Intelligence Suite offers machine learning capabilities and advanced predictive analytics. Customers like Jabil Circuit, Fruit of the Loom, Land O’Lakes, Liber already realize the benefits of these new capabilities.
Finally, on the developer front, he says:
Central to our Intelligent Cloud ambition is providing developers with the tools and capabilities they need to build apps and services for the platforms and devices of their choice. The new Azure Container service as well as .NET Core 1.0 for open source and our ongoing work with companies such as Red Hat, Docker, and Mesosphere reflects significant progress on this front. We continue to see traction from open source, with nearly a third of customer virtual machines on Azure running Linux.
Windows
Away from the cloud business, Windows still plays a major part, adds Nadella, with 96% of “enterprise customers” now piloting Windows 10. But there’s clearly work to be done here, as he lays out a particular ambition:
We continue to pursue our goal of moving people from needing Windows to choosing Windows to loving Windows.
That’s a challenge that he hopes can be met with some upcoming offerings:
In two weeks, we will launch Windows 10 Anniversary Update, which takes a significant step forward in security. We are also extending Windows Hello to support apps and websites and delivering a range of new features like Windows Ink and updates to Microsoft Edge. We expect these advances will drive increased adoption of Windows 10, particularly in the enterprise, in the coming year.
As for LinkedIn, the plans there remain elusively intangible so far, but Nadella does say:
I look at what we are doing with Office 365, Dynamics 365, AppSource, LinkedIn as all being part of one strategy. So the move to the cloud for our customers and for us is not just about a new way of delivering the same value just as a SaaS service. It’s really the transformation from having applications that are silos to becoming more services in the cloud where you can reason about the activity and the data underneath these services to benefit the customers who are using these services.
He goes on to talk in terms of a Professional Cloud:
Whether it’s in Office 365 or whether you’re a salesperson using any application related to sales, you want your professional network there. Of course, it’s relevant in recruiting, it’s relevant in training, it’s relevant in marketing. So that’s really our strategy with LinkedIn as the professional network meeting the professional cloud.
As to further detail of how that works in practice, that will have to wait until the deal closes, although Kelsey Mason of analyst house Technology Business Research provides an interesting assessment of the potential gains here:
Microsoft is far behind its competitors in ERP and CRM in functionality; however, the announced LinkedIn acquisition will provide a unique set of data that can serve as a differentiator for these suites. Microsoft can use the data volunteered by members and captured by LinkedIn to add value across its productivity, search, advertising and business applications portfolios, but the company will need to build out the complementary HCM and analytics technology to monetize its new data sources and IP most effectively.
LinkedIn’s acquisition of Lynda.com in April 2015 will add in-house learning management functionality to Dynamics. Though learning management is only a sliver of the HR market, it is an area in which companies are increasingly investing as employees’ expectations of training shifts from in-person to online. LinkedIn also provides Microsoft the data and IP needed to catch up to Salesforce in the CRM market. LinkedIn has natural implications around lead generation and target marketing, as the data generated by LinkedIn can help sales teams create a more personal and comprehensive view of their customers.
Overall, while the quarterly numbers kept Wall Street happy, there are challenges ahead and making the LinkedIn acquisition work is going to be the biggest of these. But there are other downsides – phone sales declined with the Windows Phone still not gaining traction, while Xbox One sales let down the gaming arm. All eyes will now be on the release of the Xbox One S next month.
For his part, Nadella sees clear opportunity ahead:
Simply put, businesses will not just use digital technologies, but they will become digital companies. This generates enormous opportunity for Microsoft and our partners. We are the ones who can empower digital transformation across all industries, companies, and geographies with our technology and platforms.
My take
Microsoft has a target of having Windows 10 running on more than a billion devices by 2018. Given that the current count is around 350 million, that’s indicative of the scale of some of the challenges facing the firm.
So while the cloud growth is indeed good news, it’s important not to forget that like so many other establishment technology players, Microsoft is in its own digital transformation phase and that there are plenty of bumps in the road to negotiate yet.
On a personal note, as a dyed-in-the-wool Apple guy, with no Windows devices at all, I found myself yesterday trying to work with a Windows laptop. My only question – how does anyone manage to get anything done? Nadella would have a very, very long way to go to get me anywhere near using, never mind loving, Windows.
Image credit - Microsoft Read more on: Cloud ERP financials and supply chainCloud platforms - infrastructure and architectureCollaboration sharing and digital productivityCRM and customer experienceDevOps NoSQL and the open source stackDigital enterprise in the real worldFinancial services and fintechGoverning identity privacy and securityIoT robotics and AIUX and application design 