
Marissa Mayer
Marissa Mayer took to the stage in front of beleagured Yahoo! shareholders yesterday, still insisting that the firm’s heavy losses, massive job cuts and a search for a buyer are clear signs of the success of her transformation plan. 
Mayer was in full reputation-saving mode as she told investors:


On a personal note, I will say that I’ve been very heartened by the level of interest in Yahoo! It validates our business progress, as well as our achievements to-date.

She went on to list the company’s achievements as she sees them:


We launched and modernized many of our products for consumers and advertisers last year. In total, we had more than 30 major launches of new products to acquire new users and more than 400 repeaters to deepening engagement on Yahoo!’s products, which resulted in solid revenue impact in 2015. We delivered nearly $5 billion in GAAP revenue, up 8% year-over-year. 
And we grew mobile monthly users more than 600 million, which is up roughly three times since the shift to our mobile strategy in 2012. We built on Mavens –  mobile, video, native and social – to $1.6 billion in revenue, showing 45% growth year-over-year in 2015. We continue to be a top player in the digital advertising space. And as you can see, we built a solid business.

But that wasn’t good enough for some in the audience, with questions being asked about the  “anaemic” growth of Yahoo! in recent years. How had Yahoo! gotten itself into a state of decline? Mayer responded: 

We are in a very competitive space. So, we’ve invested in our products to make sure that we attract a maximum number of users and then maximum out of their time and energy each day. We really want to make sure that we’re filling their needs well. And we’ll probably be achieving that we’ve had overall in products. As you know, we monetize most of our products through digital advertising and our digital advertising efforts have been in businesses that are now in decline. So, while the industry remains a growth industry, some of the areas have certainly declined, for example banner advertising etc.
So, what this management team is endeavored to do this as those banner advertisements decline, as some of our desktop revenues decline, starting new sources of revenue, focusing on mobile, building compelling products there, and compelling mobile advertising offerings there. We find that mobile is best monetized. We made advertising not for banners. 
We’ve invested a lot in Yahoo! Gemini with really good advertising offerings for mobile to our advertisers. We’re also looking at new formats like video, which are replacing banners by and large part to make sure that we have a strong share of digital advertising revenue. So these are some of the elements of the strategic plan that we’re executing to try and track for the lack of growth.

Other questioners wanted to know what Mayer saw as the growth potential for Yahoo! given that Facebook has 1.6 billion users compared to her firm’s 1 billion. Mayer said:


We’re really proud of our user base; we have one of the largest user bases in the world. There is only three companies that have declared they have billion users on their properties in a single month, Facebook, Google and Yahoo!. So, we have a very strong user base. We think that we see almost everyone is online or at least probably 75% to 80% of them each month. 
So for us, a lot of our growth really comes from taking those users and having them do more with us, spending more email hours, do more research, read more articles, watch more videos etc. So, a lot of this is what we call engagement, how do we make our products more engaging, so people spend more time on the site? And that’s really where the immediate growth potential is. 
Obviously there is a large growth potential between the 1.6 billion people or so who are online to be 7 billion overall. And so, as more of the world comes online, it’s obviously great growth potential there.

Which is a pitch perfect non-answer. 
My take
Mayer cut straight to the chase when she stood up to talk: 

We have no announcements today. 

That’s a shame because really that’s all the shareholders wanted to hear about. 
What they got was another set of platitudes about how great everything is despite appearances to the contrary. All that was missing was more of the recent ‘nasty media’ complaints. 
This was Mayer in defensive, legacy preservation mode – and kidding no-one. 
Image credit - Sourced from YouTubeRead more on: Digital and content marketing 