
Marissa Mayer
Stick a fork in her – she’s done!
That’s the prevailing ‘wisdom’ in Silicon Valley about the future for Marissa Mayer as CEO of Yahoo! as scuttlebutt declares that her reign there is at an end.
Now, I’m no fan of Mayer’s tenure at Yahoo!‘ which appears permanently based around shifting sands and ‘jam tomorrow’, although I do think that the task she took on was essentially one that would have beaten anyone. But let’s be clear about two things:

This is – for now at least – all scuttlebutt. There’s no proven basis for the sudden outbreak of speculation that the board is about to oust her or to sell off the core Yahoo! business.  So the ‘done deal’ interpretation here is almost certainly premature, optimistic or pessimistic – delete as applicable depending on your personal opinion.
Mayer – and Yahoo! – has a major messaging problem here. The ripple of rumors that got started have been allowed to grow into a veritable tsunami of gossip and tittle-tattle that, on the face of it, might be assumed to have damaged Mayer’s standing. Of course, they’ve also bumped up the share price as Wall Street anticipates a coup d’etat, so every cloud etc etc. But there’s no two ways about it – Yahoo!’s not managed this situation well at all.

Some of this could have been killed off pretty easily. The over-excitable interpretation of the recent meeting of the Yahoo! board was that this was a summit to determine the entire future of the firm, considering all the armageddon options at their disposal as the crisis developed around them. Except it was in fact just the usual December board meeting that had been in the diary for a long time.
What’s emerging since that meeting closed is a regular, if not strident, drum beat that Mayer retains the confidence of the board, even if not some of the more activist investors, such as Starboard Value, which is pushing for Yahoo! to dump its planned Alibaba spin-off and flog off the core internet assets of the company.
If the likes of Starboard – which it should be noted was all in favour of the Alibaba spin-off until it twigged that this might result in a very large tax bill from the Internal Revenue Service – have their way, then Mayer’s position does look frankly untenable.
The dangers ahead
But what seems to be happening behind closed doors is that what is up for debate is the question of whether the spin-off is going to be worth the cost and the effort. Plans for that are well down the track. There’s a CEO chosen and a name picked – Aabaco Holdings. It would be a major reversal of strategy if the brakes were slammed on now. But as Yahoo! failed to secure pre-approval on tax-free status for the move, it could be landed with a bill for up to $12 billion or more if goes ahead with the spin-off.
If the core Internet business, valued at basically nothing these days, were to be sold off, Yahoo! would end up with another bill to pay – Mayer’s change-in-control severance package. If she is canned without cause due to a change of control of the company, then she’s looking at a north-of-$158 million payday. Yahoo!’s paying her $42 million a year as CEO; the price of her not being CEO would be that much greater.
The real danger to Mayer now is if Starboard presses its claims and instigates a proxy battle for control of the Yahoo! board. The embattled CEO would be unlikely to survive if Starboard were to succeed in such an action. Last month Starboard CEO Jeffrey Smith wrote to the Yahoo! board, stating bluntly :
The market has a dim view of the company’s current strategy. Selling the core business now is the best outcome for Yahoo shareholders. We urge you to change direction and do the right thing for shareholders.
If a decision is made to sell off the core business, market commentators have cited Verizon’s takeover of AOL as a model. The biggest asset that Yahoo! could offer is its content. Just because Mayer and her team have struggled to monetize it, doesn’t mean that others would, potentially as part of a wider portfolio of offerings. For example, Disney and Comcast both have existing relationships with Yahoo! on the content front, which might result in interest in an acquisition.
As for Mayer, if her time at Yahoo! is in fact in its dying days, where next for her? That’s a question that only she could answer of course.
She has her admirers in Silicon Valley. Salesforce CEO Marc Benioff is a huge fan, calling her “thorough and incredible” and “amazing and magical” in an interview with Bloomberg Go last week. Could there be a place for one of the US tech industry’s most high-profile women at a firm with a prominent equality mission statement these days? Benioff did indeed say that he’d hire her “in a second”. So….
Then again, equally she has her detractors. It’s difficult to come up with any alternative interpretation of the past three years at Yahoo! as anything other than one of unrealised potential and lack of delivery. Could Mayer extricate herself with her reputation untainted? That’s hard to imagine. She’s into her fourth year of ‘turnaround’ for Yahoo! and there’s precious little sign that the firm has improved its prospects to any material extent. For that, as captain of the ship, Mayer has to take responsibility.
My take
Not as clear cut as the holiday season scuttlebutt would suggest, but we’re obviously heading into some form of end game – and not before time. Whatever the outcome of all this, Yahoo! needs to make some clear public decisions as soon as possible and own this situation. The Mark Twain-like rumors of death may be exaggerated, but as a patient, Yahoo!’s a sickly creature. Rumor management needs to be a top priority.
Read more on: CRM and customer experiencee-commerceSocial 