
If you want to know about the high cost of digital transformation in retail, look no further than the UK high street institution that is Marks & Spencer (M&S). Or perhaps that should read, the high cost of doing digital transformation (a) too late and (b) too slowly once you do get started. With a 64% drop in profits announced yesterday, on largely flat revenues, the clothing and food retailer is paying a big price as it tries to restructure around a rapidly changing retail market, but with little evidence of digital urgency.
CEO Steve Rowe acknowledges the headwinds that the company is encountering as customer behaviors change:
Whilst consumers are continuing to spend on experiences such as holidays and leisure activities, they are increasingly short term in their behavior and this is leading to greater volatility particularly in the Clothing market. The Food market returned to modest growth, but this was mostly driven by inflation. And we all know that inflation ahead of rises in household income isn’t good for consumers. At the same time as these pressures build, we continue to see our customers become more multi-channel and more digital in their habits.
But the problem facing M&S is that it’s only just starting to play catch-up in a market space that has shot ahead and left it behind. There has been IT investment, such as upgrades to in-store WiFi and the expanded use of handheld devices in the offline shops. But every statement from Rowe about omni-channel is couched with caution and ‘softly, softly’:
We have clear plans to make our story stay more relevant for our customer in a changing multi-channel world and of course, we’ve started to execute it…this is just the beginning. As the pace of change in retailing accelerates, we will continue to adapt and deliver robust foundations for the future.
But while it may be the beginning for M&S, it isn’t for competitor businesses and that’s the heart of the issue.
Customer data
That said, Rowe can point to some semblance of digital thinking, beginning with a focus on customer-centricity enabled by analytics. The Sparks loyalty card is at the heart of this and is delivering a clearer picture of who the M&S customer is in 2017, he says:
This time last year, we said we’d put the customer at the heart of everything we do, basing our decisions on customer insights, data and facts. We said that we’d leverage our Sparks card membership to engage with customers in a different way and we’ve continued to talk to customers and analyze market data at a microlevel. This gives us a very clear understanding of what’s important to our customers, their detailed behaviors and our teams are now using this data in the creation and curation of ranges….We know more about our customers than we’ve ever known before and we’re clear about what our customers expect from M&S, too. And we’re clear what we stand for. Every decision we make in the business now starts with the customer.
That more detailed profiling is shaping strategic direction, argues Rowe:
Customers tell us we need to make it easier for them to find what they want online. So upgrades to our website will focus on site speed and improved search and product pages. And to increase convenience, we’re trialing extended pick-up locations…The key thing here is the customer will decide. The customer will choose. And as a reminder, 67% of everything bought online is collected in the store. That sort of anytime, anyplace, anywhere mentality is one which we’ve got to have and adopt and we’ve just got to make it easier.
Earlier this year, there was a flurry of excitement in Middle England at stories that M&S would finally be moving into the online grocery delivery business. It’s a perfect case in point about the overly-cautious nature of the firm’s digital thinking that Rowe is more interested in dampening down this speculation than in making what to most customers would be a compelling proposition.
But the CEO is adamant that it’s a case of maybe, sometime, but not just yet – and anything it does do for the moment will be “very, very, very” small:
We’re carefully reviewing food online. Not being in the market so far has cost us nothing, but we need to be ready for the future. Therefore, we’re conducting a very, very, very, I can’t use that word very enough, small trial to assess customers’ response. On the very, very, very small trial that we’re doing, at this stage, we’re going to use store pick and that’s really for economics if nothing else.
This is a limited store trial. We want to assess things like size of basket, things like customer requirements for delivery time and the easiest way to trial that is in store pick…There are many forms the food online business might take and we have a team looking at this now with a review to undertaking a small, very small test in the autumn.
My take
Got that? Very, very, very small – which rather sums up M&S’s digital credentials at present.
An issue that M&S does have is that its food customers tend to do shopping for meals on an almost daily basis, often at its Simply Food smaller outlets, rather than completing the weekly shop at M&S. Rowe admits:
It’s a shopping mission which is for tonight or for today and a smaller basket than the supermarkets.
This clearly would influence the economics of a delivery business and is what contributes to M&S absence from a sector that’s been dominated by Ocado. But while Rowe insists that not having an online grocery business hasn’t hurt M&S, it’s hard to look at the financial results and agree with him.
Retail analysts concur. John Ibbotson of Retail Vision is brutal in his assessment of the latest financial results:
They are simply terrible, not even a ray of hope from their food line…M&S has run out of excuses. No amount of stammering about the mild winter or the weak Pound can mask the fact that these results are nothing less than awful.
He’s equally scathing about the turnaround strategy:
It’s not working fast enough.Trialling an online food delivery service later this year is welcome but it’s too little too late, and it won’t improve profits. Fundamental problems still remain. M&S has too many High Street stores in the wrong locations and too much competition in both fashion and food, on the net and in store.
Image credit - M&SRead more on: Retail e-commerce and the omni-channel 