
There was a piece on Vinnie Mirchandani’s assessment of the Oracle v Rimini Street that tipped me over the edge of writing something that’s been on my mind the last week. SaaS price hikes. He says:
…the day I attended court it was jarring to hear Oracle attorneys talk about contract terms and IT practices from two decades ago. Oracle marketing should be associated with today’s language of  multi-tenancy, availability zones and global delivery.
Yeah – but at what price points?
Recently I’ve heard rumblings among SaaS buyers that price hikes of anywhere between 15 and 20 percent are being demanded by different vendors. And by the way, this is not limited to the big boys who have client control or large clout in the market place.
In one case, the person I was speaking with admitted ‘severe buyer’s remorse.’ What happened and why does it matter? After all, the operational economics of SaaS are well understood — right? Wrong.
In this particular case, the person concerned had previously contacted me in the summer of last year saying the company had to make a quick decision. At the time, the salesperson for the near chosen solution was yelling down the phone that they simply had to do the deal.
I was unhappy with the circumstances as described to me and said the best thing to do was pause and work through the various issues. Unfortunately, the company had backed itself into a corner, convinced it had to get a deal of some sort done so that it could replace a worn out system. At this point, I seriously questioned what was going on because, among other things, a month either way is almost never going to make so much difference as to be catastrophic.
I also had experience of the vendor of choice and was aware of the tactics employed. There is no way that any vendor should pressure a potential customer into making a decision but then good sales people are good guilt trippers. Contrary to advice, the company capitulated at which point I could only say: ‘Good luck.’
A year and a bit on and once again, this case comes into view only this time it comes with: “Err, we’ve been hit with a price hike of 20% what do we do?” This is difficult because apart from anything else, I’ve not seen the exact wording of the final contract. If I had, one of the things I would have checked is the wording around annual price increases.
All vendors want price increases, whether justified or not, but in the case of SaaS companies, anything much above industry inflation is taking the customer for a ride. Data center costs are falling as are compute costs, so there is little justification for more than a few percentage points. Vendors will argue labor cost increases but then I always argue back about labor arbitrage choices and especially for software components that should largely be under break-fix maintenance. In the alternative, I track R&D costs as a percentage of revenue so that when this argument comes up, I can point to falling numbers — usually.
The person had not checked any of these issues and had no clue how to respond. I gave some pointers but I suspect they may be caught by terms that were more onerous in standard form than could have otherwise been negotiated. So what’s next?
My guess is the customer is between a rock and a hard place with little room for maneuver. It is likely possible to shave some points, and, depending upon what’s in use, possibly retire SaaS shelf ware, although I hold out little hope of that. Even so, the lessons should be clear.

Never be pressured into making the wrong decision.
Never let a vendor push you into a corner.
Always understand the long term implications of what you’re signing up for and especially with multi-year deals.
Look out for those clauses that give vendors price increase (and possibly other price related) rights, such as storage and event based overages.

In SaaS just as much as any other technology decision, that old saw ‘marry in haste and repent at your leisure’ is as true today as it ever was. But then don’t sleep walk into a shotgun wedding either.
You have been warned!!
As a side note, I was pleased to learn that in parts of IBM, the 400 page contract is being replaced by the four page contract. Much simpler, much clearer, for everyone.
Read more on: Cloud platforms - infrastructure and architecture 