
Mars, a global brand that is best known for its confectionary goods, is part way through a global cloud rollout of Salesforce Service Cloud and SuccessFactors in an attempt to transform the way that the company supports its 77,000 employees.
Speaking at Dreamforce in San Francisco last week, senior manager Jonathan Meyers explained how Mars was setting up shared service centres in each of the company’s main regions – starting with China, followed by North America and Europe – in a bid to fix broken HR processes that are failing staff.
Meyers said that one of Mars’ ambitions is to provide its people with a modern, world class technology experience in the HR space. But that currently Mars is “stuck” in the administrative world of HR, where there is a lack of standardisation across the globe and a system that relies on broken processes.
Meyers said:
We had technology that was all over the place. Think Lotus Notes databases, Lotus Notes portals, Sharepoint sites, filing cabinets, hard drives. Information for HR was everywhere. It was very fragmented.
It was also very difficult to find information. You didn’t always know where to go. Our associates were not empowered. We had employees and line managers that really had very limited ability to service themselves and we wanted to change that. Scalability and flexibility were also key.
We cringed at the thought of acquiring another business. What would we do with processes that were not optimized nor standardized? What would we do with the technology platform that sometimes looked like it was created before the internet? We knew it was time to act.
Meyers said that Mars didn’t have any way to measure and manage the work that the HR function was doing, and no way to capture intake for all the questions about policies. He said that Mars took the decision to “blow up HR”, given that every day that passed meant that the business was wasting time, energy and money. He said:
We were missing opportunities to better support our vision and grow our business. Our vision that we came up with on the business was all about transforming HR for growth that we’re proud of. It’s very much a business transformation. That’s how we talk about it internally. It’s not just an HR project. It’s transforming our business so that HR will work differently with everyone at Mars.
Self serving
Meyers explained that this vision was focused on providing technology that enable associates to do more of what they wanted to be doing – growing careers and developing themselves. Mars didn’t want employees to worry about who to talk to if they had a question. Instead they should be able to simply ask a HR portal that delivers results that are personalised.
The transformation plan was originally set at five years, but the business is trying to reduce this to three, given the competitive pressures faced in the consumer goods market – Mars sees the HR transformation as critical to growing the business going forward.
Mars is integrating its existing SAP on-premise system with a variety of cloud platforms, including Salesforce Service Cloud, SuccessFactors, and Avaya for telecommunications – to help promote self service within the company. This is being created in the form of an in-region shared service centre, which has currently gone live in China. North America will go live in November. Meyer said:
As you might with changing and transforming HR there’s some big shifts that we would be making. Having all sorts of different technologies and different processes that were not standardized, that’s changing. We have more associates self-service and line managers self-service then we’ve ever had using the Salesforce Employee Community and our new HR portal.
From a HR mandatory gatekeeper standpoint, in the old world, it always felt like I had to go talk to someone from HR to get anything done. If I wanted to hire somebody, if I had a question on policy, inevitably I was speaking with someone from HR. I couldn’t service myself. I wasn’t empowered to do things on my time the way that I wanted to do it. I wasn’t able to do anything on a mobile device. That’s all changed with our shift to Salesforce.
It was hard to find the right person internally in the old world. You’re probably dealing with an HR generalist who was shoving fifteen different things and if I wanted to hire somebody, it wasn’t always the easiest process. In the new world, I’m dealing with someone who specializes in the recruiting. This is what part of or new shared service organization does. It’s gotten a lot easier, a lot simpler.
Talent acquisition has also been transformed, according to Meyers, who said that he can now put this request through the Service Cloud, which is then routed to the right team where a dedicated team gets to work on finding the best talent available. He said:
There’s a ratio that many of you probably have heard, right? The number of employees working in HR verses the number of people in your organization. We recognize by working with Salesforce and working with our consulting partners that we were on the wrong side of that ratio. We needed to change. We needed to line up our HR function with how our business was growing. This transformation has allowed us to do that.
Along with talent acquisition, the HR shared service centre has also made huge improvements to performance management, associate relations, as well as standardised processes across the organisation.
One of the big improvements has been single sign-on and the ability to deliver content that is personalised to the person asking the question. Meyers explained:
You no longer have to have fifteen usernames and passwords. You have a very easy way to jump from the Salesforce portal into Success Factors, into SAP which happens to be the one thing that’s stayed. We introduced SalesForce, we introduced Success Factors, SAP’s been there as our core HR master data system. We decided not to change it as part of this transformation. What we decided to do was integrate to Salesforce. We’ve also integrated it to Success Factors. With that single sign-on, the whole process of navigating from one environment to another is really simple, it’s really easy.
If we just play out sort of a day-in-the-life situation right, Mary’s an expectant mother. Mary’s based in Chicago. She works in the Wrigley business. She goes to the self service portal. She’s in the office on her laptop and she has a question about maternity benefits. She types in maternity in the search bar. What’s really powerful in the results that are returned to Mary and something we really have not had before at Mars, the system knows who she is. It knows that she’s married.
It knows that she’s based in Chicago. She works in Wrigley. She’s going to see results that are relevant to maternity policies for her country, for her business unit.
Part two of this case study will be published tomorrow morning on diginomica, where Meyers explains his lessons learned and shares advice for other companies undergoing a HR transformation.
Image credit - People use ladders to work in cloud graphic © jesussanz - Fotolia.comDisclosure - Salesforce and SAP are diginomica premier partners at time of writing.Read more on: Future of workTalent managementUse cases 