
Yesterday we published the first part of our Mars case study, which examined how the consumer packaged goods company is standardising its HR processes and creating a wide variety of expertise and self-service tools in the cloud with Salesforce and SuccessFactors.
Senior manager Jonathan Meyers explained at Dreamforce last week in San Francisco how the company was “blowing up” HR in attempt to make HR business processes more efficient and to provide Mars’ 77,000 employees with the modern technology they demand.
The newly created shared service centres will be based out of China (already live) and North America (going live in November).
In this second part, we will outline the lessons learned that Meyers shared with delegates during his session.
European Works Council  – The purpose of a European Works Council (EWC) is to bring together employee representatives from the different European countries in which a multinational company has operations. During EWC meetings, these representatives are informed and consulted by central management on transnational issues of concern to the company’s employees.
Meyers warned that the process would have taken longer than anticipated. He said:
First and foremost, European Works Council, data privacy – things that we underestimated. An example of that is when we did our design we thought we would be loading all our associates on a global level from SAP, our core HR master data system, into Salesforce. We underestimated the time it takes to move things through the Works Council in Europe. At the end of this, we ran out of time and we were only able to move our China associates into Salesforce. The lesson here is just plan several months for that because it takes a long time. It’s a lot of lifting.
Don’t underestimate local demands – Meyers explained that Mars had worked hard at a global level to think through the design process, but underestimated the huge local requirements for each individual region. He said:
Earlier I mentioned a discovery phase. We did it for North America, we’re doing it for Europe, we did not do it for China. A huge lesson learned. The lesson learned here was that we thought we were really clever. We flew in people from all over the world, we did all these global design workshops that went really well. We built a global template.
Then we fly over to China. We sit down with the business. We take a deep dive into how they operate in the HR space. We came to realize that the volume of the HR questions, the existing intake, had to do with local processes that were not part of our global template. The majority of the volume was local stuff that we weren’t addressing. That forced us to go back to the drawing board and we think quite a few things.
The discovery phase in North America has made a difference. It’s reduced that pain. It’s unearthed a lot of things that we probably would have not have found out until we did design. We’ll be doing the same thing for China.
Don’t ignore certain users – Sounds obvious, but this is a point often ignored during business transformation projects. The assumption being that those doing the implementation ‘know’ the users – when in reality, they likely need to carry out significant research. Meyers said:
Know your user base. We are very much a manufacturing company. We did focus groups, right. You’re supposed to do focus groups. We did that. We did it with our project team. We did it with folks from all over the HR function. Folks from the business. Folks that were office workers.
The lesson learned was that we should have paid more attention to the people out in the factories. Again, the majority of our associate base. We launched something that’s successful but I would imagine that some of the enhancement requests that we’re now receiving we wouldn’t be receiving had we broadened the reach of our focus groups during our design phase. Really a key lesson learned for us.
Bringing everyone together – Meyers also rightly warns against companies underestimating their data silos, and what it requires to pull them together in one workable place. To get around this Mars created a project management office (PMO) that brought various areas of the business together to help understand the requirements. He said:
Finding a way to unify the silos, was another lesson learned. With a program of this size we have all these different teams right? I’m from the technology team, we’ve got a business team, we’ve got people from finance looking at the business case, training, change management, so forth and so on.
Working with our consulting partner, Deloitte, we established a really strong PMO. That PMO brought all these different silos together. At first I wasn’t really in favour of it. Why do they have so many people on the PMO? We’ve learned and seen the value of what they’ve brought to this program. I don’t think we could’ve kept it together without a really strong and unified PMO.
Integration – Moving to the cloud has its obvious appeal. But when you’re integrating your public cloud systems with an on-premise system, be warned about the challenges ahead. Meyers said:
Enterprise architecture integration of cloud and on-premise – we weren’t really good at that at Mars. We had not done a lot of cloud to on premise integration. It was new to us. The lesson here was that it took a lot of time. When we went down the path of landing on Salesforce and kick-starting this program a couple of years ago, it was a different world for security. Security’s much more involved now and working with our security organization internally. Working with enterprise architecture, it took a lot of time. We did not always plan for that time.
However, Meyers adds that if there are any challenges, you shouldn’t be afraid to ask your partners for guidance and advice. He added:
Always push your consulting partners and your vendors for better insights. I’ve got no shame in going to Salesforce or going to our consulting partners and asking, “How do we do this? We’ve never integrated Share point and Salesforce, what do we do? There must be somebody in your organization that I can talk to.”
Phone systems and Service Cloud, we hadn’t done that before. Network performance of China. What do we do? How do we optimize it? Salesforce played a really big role as did Deloitte our consulting partner in bringing insights and better practices. I encourage you to use them and abuse them.
Think about what success means – Finally, any large technology implementation is obviously going to have a business case closely linked to it, in order to secure buy in and investment. However, Meyers suggests that the technology team should think beyond the numbers in order to get true business approval of the new systems. He said:
Measuring success beyond the business case. We’re really good at spreadsheets, we’re really good at numbers, we have a great business case. As of recently, we’ve been working with Salesforce, what else can we do? If we’re going to tell the story of how we’ve been successful beyond the business case, beyond the numbers, what else can we be doing to show this has resulted in a wildly better experience for our employees?
What are the ways that we can demonstrate that if I run into an executive in an elevator and I’m asked the question, “How’d it go? How are you guys doing? How are you measuring that you guys are successful?” We continue to work on that and we’re getting better at that.
Image credit - Businessman behind touch interface cloud people network © maxsim - Fotolia.comDisclosure - Salesforce and SAP are diginomica premier partners at time of writing. Read more on: Future of workHCM and the digital future of workTalent managementUse cases 