
For everything else, there’s Mastercard, says the marketing campaign – and that includes data services for business as well as credit cards.
While most of us as consumers will be most familiar with the firm for its credit cards, there’s a enterprise B2B play on offer as well courtesy of Mastercard Advisors, the professional services arm of Mastercard. The firm pitches this as providing:
near real-time transaction data and proprietary analysis, data-driven consulting, and marketing services solutions to help clients optimize, streamline, and grow their businesses.
What that means in practical terms is a number of divisions, the three most notable being

Data & Analytics based on real-time transaction data and proprietary analysis only available from Mastercard.
Loyalty Solutions & Marketing Campaigns.
Consulting Services, focused around payments expertise.

These have been chosen for commercial reasons, says Dimitrios Dosis, President, Mastercard Advisors:
Mastercard is in services for three key reasons. The first reason is to win and retain new business. The second one is to drive a better performance of the Mastercard  portfolio and the third one is to diversify the business.
There’s clear objective for clients, he adds:
If you think about service lines, what Mastercardhas in service lines, there is a clear focus. The focus is to help our customers engage, retain and get new clients. So you see there is a very strong B2B2C focus all the way down to the C, which is the scale element of our business.
A good way to think about our services is an end-to-end spectrum. Think about it from insights which we derive through our proprietary data and analytics, down to recommendation which are based on those insights, down to, ‘let me check them before I do anything else with them if they are as good as we believe they are’.
Actionable
The overall goal is actionable insights, derived from analysis of more than 65 billion transactions globally. Data is aggregated and anonymised for security and privacy. But Dosis argues that insight is about more than just that data:
We need to understand analytics, technologies and platforms. These are the things which drive value. Pure analytics and just more data is not enough. So we need to have good analytics, good technology and good platform and we also came to realize that innovation is critical…we have been able really to innovate ourselves and for our customers and our insights are very actionable. They help you understand market share, market size. They help you understand opportunities that you have as a business. They help you understand how you can optimize the operations, how you can keep your customers secure.
He cites the example of work carried out with Bank of America as a case in point:
The way we are working on innovation there is we started with what we call a launch pad. It’s a very intense one week joint engagement with the customer and us, which ends with the innovation supported by a prototype…execution in the sense that we don’t leave the customer with a prototype, but we move on. We said, ‘you know what, we’re going to help you together develop a minimum available product, have you develop then the pilot and help you then in the co-creation of the extra solution in very agile ways’. This is execution. This is what we are doing.
Other examples of the sort of insights-centric activities on offer include retail location services. Dosis explains:
Think about this as a heat map. You can drill down to a city level. You can drill down to even a city block level and understand the traffic which is happening there. Sales as the proxy for traffic. You can understand the ticket size. You can understand the growth volume. All aggregated and anonymized, but this is very insightful.
Imagine you need to build up a new store somewhere in New York, this insight can give you a very good guidance where to do it. Imagine you need to optimize the branch network. This insight gives you a really good insight where to do it, okay. So this is very actionable.
It’s also real-time, he adds:
What our customers have told us over and over again is that they have problems with asking a question and getting a response. Sometime data queries can take up to two weeks and this is not good. Imagine you need to take a decision today, you need an insight and it takes you two weeks to get it, it’s useless…we provide with our Insights platform a real time and self service access. We are able to very powerfully if you want, bring things together like what is my customer segmentation. What are the fraud levels, what are the authorization levels and drill it down to city block level and understand the reasons behind this.
Test-and-learn
Being to take an agile ‘test-and-learn’ approach to execution is also critical, says Dodis. Mastercard’s test-and-learn’ capabilties are built on its $600 million acquisition of Applied Predictive Technologies in 2015. Customers need to be able to test strategies in limited form before scaling up, says Dosis:
Test-and-learn is a form of rapid experimentation, which helps in the decision taking of marketing, of merchandising, of how do I organize operations, how do I make the best capital investments. Think for example, Thanksgiving in the U.S., does it make sense to stay open longer? Will I get more traffic in my shop? We can test these things. Does it make sense to revamp my stock from it?
What happens over time is that a culture of rapid experimentation becomes embedded in day-to-day workflows and this drives genuine ROI. Dosis cites the example of TD Bank:
A few years back they were wondering, does it make sense to stay open for long hours on week days and on the weekend? So they were struggling with this and they said, ‘well, let us use APT test-and-learn to check it’. So they used a few options and tested them in a subset of branches. They didn’t do it immediately everywhere.
Now this had two effects. First of all they could first of all optimize their investment spend in the testing without rolling it out. But the other thing is they could also eliminate statistical bias… we take out statistical bias, meaning that because we use the data, we can say, ‘oh in this location where we tested at this particular time, there was a special local event which had an impact on traffic in this branch’. You need to be able to eliminate the statistical noise, which APT does.
Hamburger chain McDonald’s is another use case:
They want to test does it make sense to extend my breakfast over time. Does it make sense to have an all-day breakfast? So what they did is they tested this, again in a subset of branches, and actually it worked out very well. They even saw that the ticket size became better because the longer you serve the breakfast, they keep adding up items on their buy list. So it was very beneficial for them to test it and then roll out the optimal set of programs.
On the consulting services front, Dosis points to the German Savings Bank Association, the second biggest retail bank in Germany:
The German Savings Bank, we have [worked with] them for over five years and [have] ongoing engagement together. We have six people sitting on the ground with them helping them in the actual doing, increasing usage of their card business, but we also help them on how they transform the whole organization in the digital age and we also help them think through regulations like PSD2 to open banking.
As for loyalty solutions, American Airlines is picked out as a use case:
They are an active user of our loyalty platform and they are actually using it to have much more data engagement with the customer. This is not so much a deeper engagement only on Mastercard cardholders that they’re driving with it, but by using our platform, they are also able to reach customers who are buying airline tickets. So it’s about increasing engagement with Mastercard card holders, but also fulfilling a service for the core business, which is selling more tickets.
In today’s climate, post-Facebook scandals and the introduction of GDPR, data privacy and protection are inevitably top priorities on any corporate agenda. Dosis argues that Mastercard has a long-standing track record on data protection and welcomes new regulation like GDPR:
What GDPR does is effectively harmonize the regulation across Europe and it provides a level playing field for all players. We also agree with the tenets of the regulations that it makes sense to give the customer the right to know what’s happening with their data and also giving them control of what is happening with it.
That’s not to say there haven’t been some teething troubles:
I live in Frankfurt and as a consumer on 25 of May, I got bombarded on my private email with 70 emails asking me for private consent. I mean it’s… a complete nightmare. I think the way however that we at Mastercard have addressed this regulation proactively,
My take
An interesting insight – pardon the pun – into another side of Mastercard, a business built on data and analytics and one with which I was unfamiliar. In the current climate, managing and exploiting data is potentially a hot potato, but the use cases cited by Dosis impress and appear to deliver ROI.
 
Image credit - MastercardDisclosure - Dosis was speaking at the RBC 2018 Financial Technology Investor Day ConferenceRead more on: Analytics planning and data analysisCloud platforms - infrastructure and architectureData privacyDigital enterprise in the real worldFinancial services and fintechRegulation 