
When it comes to procurement, and more specifically automating the procure-to-pay (P2P) process, a company can go to great lengths and cost to implement a software platform to handle the task – but if its own suppliers refuse to play ball and stubbornly continue to submit their invoices on paper, that company is unlikely to see the full benefits of the software.
Until last year, this was the situation at Maxim Healthcare Services, a Columbia, Maryland-based organization that provides nursing care for patients in their own homes; supplies nurses to hospitals and long-term care facilities on an as-needed basis; and delivers immunization and other wellness services to employees working for corporate clients.
Paperwork is a huge burden in most sectors – but it’s a particular issue in healthcare, according to Maxim Healthcare IT Director Mike Formica. It’s widely recognized at the company, he says, that a big focus in its digital transformation journey needs to be the early wins that might be achieved by replacing paper-based processes with digital ones. The procurement of medical equipment and supplies is a big part of that picture.
But an earlier attempt to automate P2P ended in frustration for the company. Formica is too discreet to name the procurement platform that the company was using for seven years prior to its recent implementation of rival Ivalua, but he notes that this previous vendor charged Maxim’s suppliers to use the platform and says that these costs were a big factor in hampering supplier adoption. (A quick search on Google, meanwhile, reveals that Maxim Healthcare signed a deal with Ariba in 2010, prior to that vendor’s acquisition by SAP two years later.)
What this meant was that, even after the implementation, suppliers continued to submit their invoices on paper, rather than pay to join the platform and submit electronically, and Maxim Healthcare continued to foot the bill for processing paperwork, which in the interests of efficiency, it had to outsource to a third party.
Sustainable P2P
By 2017, it was clear that the situation wasn’t sustainable. Accounts payable had had enough and the contract with the previous vendor was coming up for renewal. The pressure was on, says Formica:
We were bumping up against a timeline – we had the choice to renew with our existing vendor or to choose a new system, but if we took that route, we’d only have around eight weeks to get it up and running.
Working closely with Maxim’s Accounts Payable team, Formica and his IT team got to work, issuing an RFP in June 2017 and meeting with shortlisted vendors in July. SaaS-based spend management specialist Ivalua was selected in August and went live on 2 October 2017. Special credit, according to Formica, should go to consultants at Maxim’s implementation partner Optis Consulting, without whom the exacting deadline might not have been met.
Ivalua was founded in Orsay, France and now has dual headquarters there and in Redwood City, California. According to a recent evaluation of its software by analysts at Forrester Research:
Many enterprises have chosen Ivalua’s SRPM [supplier risk and performance management] product not only for its highly configurable functionality but also because they can later extend it to address all their purchasing processes. It is particularly strong for master data management, so it can be the central source of supplier truth for multiple ERP instances.
That ability to extend the product could certainly pay off at Maxim Healthcare. While the company is only using the platform now for the procurement of products, Formica says it would be useful to build a services catalogue, to support work that Maxim needs done by third parties, including document shredding, document storage and IT services, for example.
That’s on our list. And there’s also capabilities for contract management and budgeting in Ivalua that look interesting to us. It’s probably too early to say right now that we’ll implement them, but these are certainly things we will look at at some point in the future.
Priority Number One
For now, however, the number one priority is encouraging and supporting supplier adoption of the new platform. In the eight months since Maxim Healthcare went live on Ivalua, the number of suppliers who file invoices electronically has tripled from 15 on the previous platform, to 45. That’s still a relatively small proportion of the overall supplier base – around 20% at a rough guess, Formica reckons:
But we’re at the point now where it’s just so much easier to have conversations with our suppliers, to get them to agree to deal with us electronically and to onboard them, because it’s an easy-to-use system for suppliers and there’s no cost to them.
Today, whenever we get a paper invoice, we’re asking that supplier to move to submitting electronically – but in the future, it’s not going to be an ask. It’s going to be, ‘Hey, if you want to do business with us, you’re going to have to sign up.’ We’re not at that point yet. In fact, I think we might not even need to do that, because the response we’ve had so far from suppliers has been so good and we expect that it will continue to be pretty positive.
Image credit - Maxim HealthcareRead more on: Digital enterprise in the real worldSpend managementUse cases 