
Chris Young, McAfee
McAfee, preparing for its second coming as an independent security vendor, is wrapping up its brief tenure as a division of Intel by releasing a slew of new products and fresh branding. After less than six years within the chip giant, McAfee will become one of the 10 largest pure-play cyber security companies with about $2.1 billion in revenues and 7,500 employees.
At its FOCUS 16 event last week, McAfee reassured customers, business partners and analysts that little will change after the split, with senior management remaining intact, Intel still controlling almost half of the company and product roadmaps in place. There’s bound to be some hiccups as the company simultaneously undergoes financial reorganization while executing on an ambitious, multifaceted strategy unveiled last year. Nevertheless, in keynotes and technical sessions, McAfee demonstrated tangible progress.
McAfee is building an integrated set of products to implement a layered security strategy that extends from PCs to cloud services and which addresses what it sees as the three phases of the cyber threat life cycle: protect (proactive defense), detect (continuous monitoring) and correct (rapid incident response).
Like most security experts, McAfee espouses layered defenses with control points and countermeasures placed at many levels of the IT ecosystem: the days of a traditional moat-and-castle security design reliant on client anti-virus and network firewalls are ancient history. However, McAfee understands that operating layered defenses in isolation is futile — the equivalent of having security guards without walkie-talkies that can’t talk to one another. Indeed, McAfee’s emphasis on collaboration explains one of the event’s oft-repeated slogans: ‘Together is power’.
In what is a recurring theme among major IT vendors these days, McAfee is espousing openness. It is realizing that it can’t go it alone in the battle with cyber malcontents, and that solving complex, dynamic and increasingly aggressive security problems requires cooperation among all stakeholders — security companies, researchers and customers. As McAfee’s future CEO and current head Chris Young puts it,
I know not everyone is with us on this point – at least, not yet. But I also know working together is the future of cybersecurity. Every day, more are realizing that the only way to address more of today’s threats, faster, and with fewer resources, is to integrate and collaborate. It’s the way forward.
The key to making such a security collective work is enabling products to programmatically share information, while making it easy for developers to build automated workflows that integrate data and provide control across multiple security products. That requires a shared communication foundation and APIs.
A security data bus
The backbone of any distributed system is a standardized protocol and service bus, and in McAfee’s world of collaborative security, these are its data exchange layer (DXL). Introduced at last year’s FOCUS, DXL is already used by several McAfee partners like HP-Aruba and Rapid7 to gather security alerts from McAfee endpoints, detection systems and its reputation database. These are used to trigger product-specific tasks like changing mobile network security policy or analyzing data to isolate threat behavior.
Until now, DXL was defined and controlled by McAfee and only available to licensed partners; however last week McAfee released it as an open source project, subject to standard Apache licensing, with sample code available on Github. Although it’s too early to assess industry, partner and developer interest in DXL, the protocol is the sort of plumbing that could unleash a wave of connected, layered, automated security systems that rapidly adapt to changing conditions.
By exploiting network effects, cooperative security becomes more valuable as more systems use it — since the first device to see and identify a threat can instantaneously notify millions of others that can respond as appropriate, whether by adjusting network security policy, fingerprinting an attack signature and updating a threat database, or sandboxing malware code for forensic analysis.
McAfee CTO Steve Grobman describes the motivation and design guidelines for DXL this way:
To build technologies that link threat intelligence, investigative methods, and orchestrated response capabilities together, we need a high degree of scalability from an infrastructure perspective, and the right underpinnings in the fabric upon which these capabilities rely.
Intel Security built McAfee Data Exchange Layer (DXL) with these requirements in mind…From a connectivity perspective, DXL allows us to communicate about events with clients even when they are in complex network situations, and get information to or from them with ease. The protocol also favors efficiency, making sure that enterprises can move data across their networks once, and have one-to-many or many-to-one sorts of data transfers. Moreover, DXL enables a security model that allows integrity and attestation, such that data goes only where it should go.
A barrage of product updates
McAfee also used FOCUS as the launching pad for ten new or updated products, which Young claims are “are the result of hundreds of millions of dollars in R&D investments over the past twelve months.” McAfee groups these into four product categories: Dynamic Endpoint; Pervasive Data Protection; Data Center and Cloud Defense; and Intelligent Security Operations.

Endpoint announcements include better protection against zero-day, previously unseen threats, the use of machine learning to identify advanced persistent threats (APTs), updates to McAfee’s PC client and Web gateway software and a cloud-based threat analysis service to reduce incident response times.
New data loss prevention (DLP) features include new mobile client software, a cloud gateway service that extends DLP into popular SaaS products like file sync and share services, and the beta release of a management console allowing security teams to identify and isolate unsafe or non-compliant devices on their networks.
In the data center, McAfee introduced software to automatically discover and monitor VMs and associated virtual storage and networks on both private and public cloud infrastructure. It also enabled threat sharing between protected endpoints and data center systems that allows VMs to automatically update their security policies once any client in the organization sees a new threat.
McAfee also updated its central management console (ePO) with a greatly-improved HTML5 UI.

My take
McAfee’s strategy and product roadmap looks great on paper and in canned demos, but unless and until DXL becomes broadly adopted, it requires buying into an extensive, complex and expensive set of software. Providing the sort of end-to-end, multi-device, multi-cloud protection highlighted during FOCUS seems feasible only for the largest enterprises or managed security services and then, only with executive sponsorship for a sustained implementation effort with a sizeable budget. Thus, I’m dubious that McAfee can upsell its primary customer base using endpoint A/V to the entire suite, particularly when many have already made significant investments in other network and data center security products.
Although recent IoT attacks (see my coverage here, here and here) received ample mention at FOCUS, it was primarily to scare people about an ominous new threat. No substantive solutions were offered and one could be excused for coming away thinking that the IoT security situation is hopeless.
Another missed opportunity was the lack of detailed plans for protecting public cloud infrastructure. Although McAfee introduced some management enhancements for cloud-based VMs, it still seems to treat services like AWS, Azure and Google as logical extensions of internal data centers. I would have liked to see some cloud-native services that integrate with the leading IaaS providers and exploit virtual networks like AWS VPC to provide granular, application-level control over security policy and data flows.
McAfee also seems stuck on conventional methods of client protection using kernel mode hooks into the underlying PC OS; however these are so often bypassed as to be almost useless. McAfee made no mention of more promising alternatives for client protection using virtual sandboxes like Bromium micro-VMs or the native sandboxing built into mobile operating systems.
Still, you can only do so much in one year and McAfee is executing on an ambitious plan. If it can enlist support for DXL with integrations from major equipment and security companies next year and show some innovation in solving IoT and endpoint protection problems, there will be plenty to look forward to at FOCUS 17.
Image credit - Chris Young CEO McAfee speaks at Focus 16 - by @krmarkoDisclosure - Intel contributed to the author's travel costs to attend the McAfee eventRead more on: Collaboration sharing and digital productivityInfrastructureSecurity 