
Marketing automation provider Sailthru released its second annual Retail Personalization Index.
It surveyed the personalization preferences of 13,000 consumers and score the top 250 brands on their personalization capabilities trying to understand what makes consumers buy. The top 100 made it to the index.
Den Howlett has already evaluated the survey in The impact of personalization – real or imagined? A critique of Sailthru 2018 Retail Personalization Index. To get more context, I talked with Sailthru CEO, Neil Lustig on the results and what they mean.
What matters in personalization
What is meaningful personalization? That is what Sailthru wanted to understand from consumers. To figure it out, they did two things. First, they assigned a team of experts to do a study of the top 250 brands focusing on personalization capabilities for the website, mobile, email and other (which including things like loyalty programs, in-store experience, social). They looked at every way personalization could be done and if that brand was doing it. Some examples:

Site: Are there product recommendations? Can you create a profile? Is there a preferences manager? A chat option? A personal shopper?
Email: Is there a welcome email? Is email personalized using information collected by the brand? A birthday email? Abandoned cart email? Does behavior trigger email?
Mobile: Is there a mobile-enabled website? A mobile app? For a mobile app – is the profile synced with the website profile? Is the cart shared? Is personalized with products and offers? Offer in-app messaging and notifications?
Other: Does the web/mobile profile used to personalize the in-store experience? Is there a referral program? Does the brand send personalized direct mail? Is brand on social? Does it retarget through advertising?

The Sailthru team ranked the brands on a scale of 1-100 and kept detailed notes on notable examples.
The consumer survey focused on rating recent experiences with the brand as well as how well they felt the experience was personalized and if they would recommend the brand. Consumers were also asked if they would purchase from the brand again in the near future.
You can read about the methodology for yourself and how Sailthru created the rubric. It’s the results we want to get at now.
Who does it better – the top 10
The top ten retailers included:

Sephora (for the second year in a row)
The Body Shop
Urban Outfitters
Walmart
eBay
American Eagle
Net-a-Porter
JustFab
Nordstrom
Adidas

Sephora scored a 79 in 2017 and a 92 in 2018. Staying at the top of the list didn’t happen by accident. The report states Sephora’s seamless integration across all channels, including in-store, its mobile app, and Beauty Insider program for why it’s number one.
Sitting at number ten, Adidas jumped from a score of 49 in 2017 (sitting at #33) to a score of 73 in 2018. It had a perfect mobile score as well as strong web and email scores. Where it lacked was in the Other category. However, it’s important to consider that Adidas does not have retail stores, it sells its products through other retailers, which could explain lower scores in the Other category.
I asked Lustig what they found mattered most for personalization. He said mobile is important, but mobile web is the most important, not necessarily having a personalized mobile app. What he didn’t see was a lot of brands using what’s unique about mobile – like its localization capabilities.
Lustig said what is needed most is a multi-channel plan across website, mobile web, mobile app, and email. With 25% of the score including in-store, social and referral/loyalty programs, many retailers were under executing in some important areas.
Where is Amazon in this list? Hint: It isn’t at the top
Where is Amazon on this list? It sits at number 50, the same place it was last year. Where does it lack personalization? Email. Amazon scored 0 out of 30 for email personalization. Lustig pointed out that Amazon does provide recommendations using collaborative filtering, but it doesn’t offer deeper personalization on a customer’s purchasing behavior.
Other retailers, like Sephora, looked at historic purchases and worked on longer-term engagement strategies.
Why are brands still struggling to get it right
It’s not a tech problem but a strategy discussion, Lustig said that strategy is challenging retailers to get personalization right. He said retailers need to have a plan, one that has the customer as their core focus. They need to show the customer they get them. Loyalty programs, product recommendations, modifying images on the website, email based on purchasing behavior – these things show customers you know who they are and what they like.
It goes beyond simple recommendations, and it’s something fashion and apparel do well.
Lustig and I came back to the strategy discussion because it’s important to understand. Marketing technology advances continually, and there are plenty of tools and technologies available to help personalize web, mobile and email experiences – technology that can support omnichannel personalization.
What is missing are the skills required to do it right. Lustig said there is a shortage of good digital strategy people; those that can take a brand from aspiring to executing.
Think about the number of VC-funded martech companies. Lustig said there are over 3,000 adtech/martech startups. But how many places can you go to learn how to be a good digital strategist? Most of the time people are learning on the job, and once they build their skills, they move on to the next big opportunity for them.
My take
If you are in the B2C space, take a read through this Personalization Index. Look at brands in your category and dig into what they are they doing right. Go to their website or mobile app and sign up like you are a new customer – see how they personalize your experience and think about what is important to you as a consumer.
We can learn a lot by what others do well, and what others do not do so well. But it’s only the start. Put your strategy before your technology and build the right personalization plan; be ready to adapt as you learn what works and doesn’t for your customers.
Image credit - Feature image - girl with multicolored balloons and bag © Masson - Fotolia.comRead more on: Analytics planning and data analysisDigital and content marketingRetail e-commerce and the omni-channel 