

A Wonderbag in action
I believe the world of business and economic development are intrinsically linked. The only way to see real shifts out of poverty and a removal of the status quo for women living in inaccessible, rural areas is if we can get the right data to support innovation that is culturally relevant to these marginalised communities.

This is the view of Sarah Collins, who set up South African company, Natural Balance, in 2008 to sell a product called the Wonderbag. Despite looking like 1970s beanbags, they are actually non-electric portable slow cookers that are being sold into 40 countries, both developed and developing, around the world. 
The bags comprise an insulated container, which is covered with fabric in bright African designs and holds two poly-cotton bags filled with repurposed foam. This means that all users have to do is heat up their dish in a metal pan and then simply stow it in the Wonderbag, which will retain the heat for several hours, cooking the pan’s contents in the process.
Despite, or possibly because of its simplicity, the offering benefits underserved communities in several ways. Firstly, over half of the world cooks over fires, but as the population increases, this is leading to a problematic shortage of wood in some areas. Collins, who attended the Dell Women’s Entrepreneurship Network Summit in Cape Town, South Africa, last week, explains the knock-on effects in countries such as Ghana:

There’s a bean in Ghana that takes a long time to cook. It’s very nutritious, but there’s not enough firewood. So the farmers don’t grow it any more as it takes too long to cook, but it’s leading to malnutrition. So if I can prove that the Wonderbag can cook this bean, it means that farmers will plant it again due to consumer demand, which means that people will get a good nutritional product. But to prove there’s demand, I need data to do it. So that’s my end game.

A second issue is that household air pollution from cooking kills more than four million people each year. So simply using less firewood means that the air quality in homes improves dramatically. This situation not only benefits the women cooking but also their children – the biggest single health reason that kids in the developing world fail to attend school is because of pneumonia and lung disease.
A third consideration is that rather than have to dedicate several hours a day to cooking, women end up with more spare time in which to generate income and improve the lot of their families. As Collins says:

A huge percentage of these women are entrepreneurs, so this frees up their time for that, or to do farming. It makes them more economically lucrative and they need to spend less money on fuel so they’re able to do things like get the children back into school.

Sustainable business models
But Collins’ ultimate ambition is actually much broader. Because of the apparent failure of the aid sector to make a real difference to many people’s quality of life beyond emergency interventions, her goal is to prove to big businesses that it makes economic sense for them to move into the developing world with “brands of purpose”, which could affect lasting change. She explains:

We know there’s a direct correlation between a reduction in diarrhoea and people washing their hands so if they have the right soap to kill bacteria, they’ll be better off. Today people are buying inferior soap, but it would be better if they could buy proper anti-bacterial soap at the same price. So if we can prove the business model, we can encourage the right brands of purpose to be sold to these communities. 

But a key issue is that, despite the endless slogans and corporate social responsibility fanfare, companies still have to report to shareholders and demonstrate that their activities are financially viable. But again this is where data comes in. Collins says:

Most of the world is made up of people who eat off fires. So there’s interest in getting data from people who are data-less – 63% of the world is unbanked and no one has data on them. So if we can quantify them and show how much money is tied up in that world, the data becomes very relevant and very important.

As a result, she continues:

My goal is that data will prove, and is proving, that there are sustainable business models and opportunities in the developing world, right in these rural areas. People think these areas are poverty-stricken, but they’re economically functioning communities – they just need different solutions. So lots of companies want to go there, but they don’t know how.

Because Collins, with her background of working for non-governmental organisations, particularly in refugee camps, does know how though, her aim is to use the data she has already collected on 600,000 people over the last 18 months as a force for good. She explains:

If I can get access to people living in these areas and turn them into data, if I can get hard, rich factual data for big corporations and governments to help them make informed decisions about how to invest money and create simple innovative solutions for these marginalised communities, then it could make a real difference to their lives.

Data potential
Her interest in the power of data was first activated in 2011 when Natural Balance was sponsored by Microsoft to develop a carbon data capture system. The research found, among other things, that every Wonderbag used three times a week saves 1-1.5 tons in terms of carbon emissions. But when the carbon market collapsed, Collins turned her attention to understanding “the economic power of last mile women” using the methodology she had already developed for the carbon data project.
As a result, information is captured in three key ways. Firstly, Wonderbag purchasers who would like a guarantee, to access recipes and the like simply register their bag’s unique identification code and other personal data using their mobile phone, which links to a USSD-based data capture platform. For people with internet access, it is also possible to log onto the firm’s portal.
But the third and most successful approach in rural areas is to collect data manually. To this end, large numbers of people from marginalised communities are invited to so-called “Wonderfeasts”, where they are provided with demonstrations and can purchase their own Wonderbag at a subsidised price.
Information, which includes where buyers live, how many children they have, what fuel they use and what access they have to medical facilities, is then recorded and processed by a large US data analytics company. Purchasers likewise have the option to open an account with a local banking partner also present at the event in order to pay for their purchase over time. 
Another important piece of the puzzle, meanwhile, is appointing “Wonderwomen” who collect and continue to collect data on an ongoing basis in order to understand how the bags are used, what impact they have on individual’s circumstances and the like.
But the next key step for Collins will be to work out just how best to exploit all of this information to best effect. As a result, in August she plans to hold a “Coalition of the Good” meeting in New York. The event will host a mix of experts from government and big business to help her understand the most effective business models for creating a win-win situation for everyone concerned.
My take
No-one else has access to this level of data on people in the developing world, but the commercial potential of such information is obvious. Collins’ shrewd joining of the dots and broad range of contacts, which include mentor, Paul Polman, chief executive of multinational Unilever, will undoubtedly make for an interesting session in August on how to exploit this potential to best advantage. We await the outcome with interest.
Image credit - WonderbagRead more on: Third sector and non-profits

