
I’ve known MindTouch and its CEO Aaron Fulkerson since the company’s early days of open source vintage. It seems like forever that MindTouch was this wee company making software that creates wikis and learning materials for high tech companies.
The solution was always difficult to understand conceptually and really for technologists rather than something the end user needed to get their head around. all that changes with what MindTouch does today and so for the first time, it is worth talking to them from a business solutions standpoint.
During our conversation, Fulkerson explained that the strictures of compliance, which pre-date the Internet, mean companies have vast repositories of PDFs that are not searchable and which are rarely tied to customer service systems.
MindTouch takes PDFs and other documents and converts them to searchable, discoverable pieces of web friendly content. It sounds obvious today but has been difficult for companies to envisage how this works in the real world. As Fulkerson says in the video (below), service organizations have tended to respond with shadow IT initiatives that help them get on the same page as the customer but nothing really changed.
One by-product of the MindTouch approach is that customers can use the revamped content in sales, service, community and marketing clouds – think Salesforce – for different purposes while maintaining the integrity of the original documents. He quotes one case where web traffic tripled and which gave the company opportunities to upsell and cross sell.

There’s a lot to like about the MindTouch approach and especially given they are solving an old problem that ends up delivering real value to both their customers and the end user.
Switching gears, we recorded an audio conversation about what MindTouch is doing at Dreamforce 2015 and what Fulkerson anticipates will be the big things to look for on this outing. While there’s nothing especially new to know here, our conversation around Salesforce UI is interesting when considering the impact on customers.
This is the point where SMaC comes into focus. The acronym stands for Speed, Mastery and Control. You’ll need to listen to the discussion in order to get a sense of what this means but think also Samurai and origami. No – I didn’t get it at first but it all makes sense after a while.
Finally, we talk more generally about the party nature of Dreamforce and how Salesforce has become the masters of celebrating success. All in all a fun discussion that we will revisit once Dreamforce is over. Enjoy.

Disclosure: MindTouch is not a partner but recently helped us find new content resource.
Read more on: Analytics planning and data analysisCustomer service managementDigital and content marketing 