
ASOS has been touted as a great British e-commerce success story – with good reason – but now it’s aiming for global recognition, with the eye on the prize of cracking the US market.
At present ASOS accounts for around 7.5% of the UK online apparel retail market, but only 1.6% of the wider European Union market and a mere 0.5% of the US sector. That’s going to change, according to a buoyant CEO Nick Beighton, citing “continued online channel shift” for the next five years on a global playing field:
On a territory level, the UK, which currently has the highest penetration of online sales in clothing, is predicted to trend towards 32%, whilst the EU and US are increasing their penetration to 25% and 29%, accordingly.
The target audience for 20-somethings, or our total addressable market, is huge. It’s at least 1.2 billion globally. So what does this mean for us? Well, it gives us huge confidence in our future. We’re positioned in the right growth channel and we’re investing for the future with this large addressable market as our prize.
The US has particular allure it seems as Beighton looks to an accelerated focus there:
The current strategy we follow in the US has effectively been treating the US as one country, partly due to our tech and logistics limitations. Yet, there are four time zones in the US, 9 climatic regions, 50 states, with dramatically different cultures, interests, expectations and fashion tastes.
Our future strategy will be like this: we know there’s currently a limited number of ZIP codes that drive our sales…we’re developing a local web experience for each of the relevant US ZIP codes or clusters based on time zone, climatic conditions, making sure that we’re showing them the most relevant fashion product most appropriate to their climate and the right delivery options.
ASOS has now opened a warehouse facility in Atlanta and this is a jumping off point for expansion in the wider US:
From a new product perspective, Atlanta opens up opportunities for us, and we’ll capitalize on these opportunities to work with the U.S. brands. Nike and New Balance already signed up, and we’ll continue to discover and onboard any new brands, both American and international, that we think are appropriate for our fashion-loving US customer.
Price tag
While Beighton positions all this as a multi-year “test and learn by zone” approach, it’s a definite scaling up of intent. But grand plans carry a grand price tag. ASOS ploughed £242 million in its 2017-18 financial year, mainly on warehouses and IT; that’s going to rise to up to £250 million a year over “the medium term” with some specific plans already in place:
On warehousing, we’re scaling up massively here. We’ve added capacity for an additional 25 million units of stock this year and we’ll focus on driving efficiency through our warehouses and further improving their capacity and, while lowering the cost to serve.
In the UK, we added a further 2 million stockholding capacity through a mezzanine in our Barnsley warehouse. We also brought on-stream a multi-use facility at Doncaster, with a further 3 million unit capacity to give a bit more flexibility over peak.
In Germany, we will be doubling the capacity to 20 million units, which is a similar size to Barnsley, and the automation will be going live and starting to contribute during H2. This will significantly improve our operating efficiency.
He adds:
We’ve continued to invest hard within data science and analytics, and this has driven some real improvements in our recommendations algorithms and enabled an improvement in our conversation interfaces that I’ll show more of it in a second. In digital products, we launched the Enki this time last year. It has gone down brilliantly with customers, and they’re telling us how much better the product recommendations are and we’ll only make it better from here on in…we’ve recently launched Google Assistant product search last week, a first move into voice search.
The data science spend is helping to understand the ASOS customer better, says Beighton:
There’s two areas where we’ve got our data scientists drilling into customer behavior. One’s in returns and one’s in delivery costs, because they’re both huge costs for the organization…the data scientists [are] looking at whether you can cross-stream, cross-merge some of those deliveries, to actually reduce the number of events to the same postcode and achieve a lower cost and a better customer satisfaction. So that’s an area that the data scientists are drilling in for us. Then if we can find a AI solution to help take some efficiency in there and also improve customer experience, that’s a win-win for us.
All good – but can it all be paid for? Yesterday the firm turned in full year sales of £2.5 billion, up from revenues of £1.9 billion last year, and pre-tax profits up 28% to £102 million, numbers that made investors happy. But there will be bumps in the road ahead, cautions Beighton as a result of the firm’s growth ambitions:
The massive investment program that we’re undertaking inevitably comes with some disruption and transition costs.
That said, ASOS is able to adapt quickly and effectively to disruption and change, argues Beighton, citing mobile commerce as a case in point:
The continued acceleration to the mobile channel for our global 20-something customer is dramatic. ASOS wasn’t born a mobile native, but you can see we’ve really pivoted to capture the consumer’s shifting behavior. On conversion, the improvement in conversion also stands out, particularly noting the shift in mobile traffic.
That’s in part down to upgrade work on the mobile app itself. Beighton notes:
We made a number of design and navigation improvements throughout this year, and the stats show just how much customers love engaging with it. We have nearly 50 million active installs. Customers visiting almost seven times a month and spending 9.5 minutes on our app on average…What we know is around 35% of our app customers have somewhere between 50 and 500 saved items any one time. So what we’ve done is we’ve made it more simple and easier for them to navigate.
The big ambitions are achievable, insists Beighton:
Agility and velocity are key features of the ASOS mindset and the ASOS model. It’s the approach that drives our relentless innovation and we have continued to develop this mindset and we’re engineering more agility and more velocity into our model. This time last year, I referred to laying the foundations for £4 billion net sales capacity.
All that work and investment is underway, and we’ve nearly landed all of this work or we will have done by the end of the year. The short-term focus is clearly to land these changes well, and once we’ve passed that, we’ll be setting our sights on a significantly bigger prize than £4 billion annual sales.
My take
You can’t fault the ambition. And the track record to date is one of savvy tech investment to drive growth. Of course playing in a much wider market opens up new challenges – ASOS is taking the fight to Amazon, as it were – but also new opportunities. The British are coming!
Image credit - ASOSRead more on: Cloud platforms - infrastructure and architectureCRM and customer experienceDigital enterprise in the real worldInfrastructureIoT robotics and AIMachine intelligence and AIMobileRetail e-commerce and the omni-channelUser experienceUX and application design 