
The digital revolution is rewriting the rules of business, forcing a redesign of organizational structures and talent strategy and the role of HR.
That’s the message from Deloitte’s fifth Global Human Capital Trends report: Rewriting the rules for the digital age, which outlines the 10 rules for successful modern organizations.
While these 10 trends themselves are perhaps familiar territory for those in HR, what’s changed, according to Josh Bersin, principal and founder, Bersin by Deloitte, is the urgency of action required:
We’ve reached what you might call ‘escape velocity’, where if you don’t do some of these things now, you’re going to fall far behind.
Despite this clarion call for action, only 11% of the 10,000 global business and HR leaders surveyed by the market analysts felt fully prepared to create this future-proof organization.
Across the board there is a considerable gap between where businesses need to be and they are actually doing. So, for example, the gap between the importance of talent acquisition and companies’ ability to meet that need has widened by 14 percentage points over last year.
Similarly, 41% of respondents reported having fully implemented or having made significant progress in adopting cognitive and AI technologies within their workforce. Yet, only 15% of global executives feel ready to manage a workforce with people, robots, and AI working side by side.
While digitization of business is clearly having a profound influence on changing work practices, it is not working alone.
The pressures on employee are changing. Employees are on call 24 hours a day, and employees are working between four to 10 extra data a year extra, either by taking fewer days off or working from home. It’s surely no coincidence that declining employee engagement is another key concern for companies.
There are also demographic influences at play. Bucking the trend of the 20th century, millennials believe they will earn less than their parents and be less happy. Bersin adds:
CEOs are saying that they don’t have the right leaders to drive the organization forward and even from an economic standpoint we have relatively slow economic growth and we have low productivity. And then there’s nationalization going on in countries as a reaction of that.
Future shape
Given these different social, economic, political and technology influences, it’s no surprise that the biggest area of concern in the survey was identified as the need to create the organization of the future – because it needs to look rather different.
While organizational charts will typically show a hierarchy of managers and workers cascading down from the CEO at the top, this doesn’t reflect what really goes on in companies. What actually happens in companies is that we work in a network of teams. Bersin expands:
People do work based on projects not jobs. So, in a typical organization you have a job with a job description and you have a department that’s part of a bigger department and that’s part of some functional area.
While those artefacts haven’t gone away, the actual process of working is much more one of joining a team, working on a project with a group of people who might be in your department, some of whom might not be, and your value to that team is your skills not your job or your level.
So all of the rewards and recruiting and the way we developed people and promoted people based on a job description are becoming much less important because of the agile nature of work. So companies are working out how to undo some of the corporate hierarchies that they have.
One of the companies highlighted in the report is General Motors, which set out to discover the key element in the teams behind some of their most successful new product launches of the last decade. Only one key difference emerged: the successful teams were the ones where team members had the most number of relationships with people working in other parts of General Motors.
This ability to connect across the company is vital under the new business rules, according to Bersin:
You have to build a network of relationships within the company; to build, in a sense, followers and peers that respect your work and your skills, not just your job title.
A new category of team software is entering the market to help companies begin to analyse their teams. Organizational network analysis (ONA), for example, looks for patterns in email and text messages and other areas to determine who you spend most time connecting with, who you trust and who you respond to fastest.
While this can be used to help detect fraud, it can also be used for monitoring performance or even sales training. Meanwhile, monitoring team working is also making its way into traditional performance management tools.
In part two of this report, Janine Milne looks at HR’s role in encouraging the rise of the Digital Leader.
diginomica supports

Image credit - Deloitte/Freeimages Read more on: HCM and the digital future of work 