
Metro Bank has created a Chief Information Officer (CIO) role and is promoting its Director of Digital and Change, Martyn Atkinson, into the position. He will take up the post from the 4th September of this year and will join the challenger bank’s executive leadership team.
Following the onset of the financial crisis in 2008, Metro Bank launched having identified a gap in the market for a bank that sat at the centre of the community, with both a high-street presence and an online experience that put the customer’s convenience first.
The bank prides itself on its customer-centric approach and its speed of service – offering services that include the ability to set up a bank account, with online services, within an hour in a branch.
I recently interviewed Atkinson, who has previously held roles as at Nationwide Building Society, Friends Life, Lloyds Banking Group and Accenture, where he explained that the culture of the organisation is to put the customer first. At the time, he said:
I think one of the things that has made Metro Bank incredibly successful is the customer-centric and customer service ethos, and it bleeds throughout the organisation. The whole culture of the organization is that people genuinely want to do the right thing by customers. And I know that sounds slightly cliched, but having worked in a number of financial service organisations and it’s the first time in an organization I can genuinely say it’s not rhetoric. It’s not culture written on their poster on the wall.
During the interview, Atkinson explained how Metro Bank is investing in back-office automation and how it has been building up its in-house digital capability. Atkinson joined Metro Bank in January 2016.
As CIO he will be accountable for IT strategy and architecture, IT development, support and operations, operational resilience and risk management. He will also continue to be responsible for the bank’s change and transformation division. The Metro Bank release said that he “will be instrumental in making sure the bank continues to provide a superior customer experience, across all channels, with fully integrated front and back office technology”.
Commenting on the appointment, Craig Donaldson, CEO, said:
At Metro Bank, we are constantly improving how we anticipate and meet the needs of our FANS. An essential component is how we deploy and use technology whenever our customers interact with us – online, on the go, instore or over the phone. As CIO, Martyn will be tasked with delivering a stand-out customer journey, and I can’t wait to see what he brings to the role.
Martyn Atkinson, CIO, added:
It’s an absolute honour to be appointed as CIO at Metro Bank, which is undoubtedly the best place to be in British banking today. We are growing every day, have world-class agile technology, and are committed to servicing the needs of our customers through the channel of their choice, I can honestly say there isn’t a more exciting CIO position out there.
Image credit - Images free for commercial use Read more on: Financial services and fintech 