
Microsoft hit the headlines this week when it promised to link executive bonuses to workforce diversity goals after seeing the number of women it employs fall for a second consecutive year.
The percentage of females working at the software vendor dropped to 25.8% of its total labour force from 26.8% as of 30 September, mainly as a result of selling its Nokia handset factories, which employed large numbers of women.
On a more positive note though, Gwen Houston, the vendor’s chief diversity and inclusion officer, also told the Bloomberg newswire that females accounted for 27.7% of its total new hires this year, and 21.1% of its recruits for technical roles. 
Like many employers in the industry who are keen to win the war for tech talent, chief executive (CEO) Satya Nadella has made diversity a key priority for the company – albeit it after a rocky start. A couple of years ago at the Grace Hopper Celebration of Women in Computing  event, he advised females uncomfortable about asking for a pay rise to have “faith that the system will actually give you the right raises as you go along”.
Moreover, Nadella added, not asking for a pay increase would, in fact, be “good karma” that would help bosses see that they could be trusted and should be given more responsibility.
The comments  unsurprisingly, provoked a Twitter-storm, which led Nadella to email all of his employees saying that he had “answered the question completely wrong”. Instead he believed that “men and women should get equal pay for equal work” and that “if you think you deserve a raise, you should just ask”. 
But the tech gender pay gap issue still continues to rumble on, no matter which side of the Atlantic you happen to be based. According to a study by global HR consultancy Mercer, at 25%, the pay gap in the UK’s high tech sector is significantly higher than the national average of 18%.
The tech gender pay gap
After analysing the situation of 66,000 employees in 153 companies, the company found that the problem was worst among small firms, where the difference in median wages between male and female employees stood at 30%, and the gap between mean base salaries was 26%. The differential does lessen the larger a company becomes, however.
Interestingly, the highest pay gap based on roles was found among women professionals, who are paid 19% less than their male counterparts. Support staff receive about the same though, with females earning only around 2% less than males. There is also little variation in the average pay gap across departments – apart from sales and marketing, where the differential stands at a huge 32%.
But on the discretionary pay side of the equation, which includes bonuses, women obtain a significant 20% less than men – even though roughly the same percentage of both genders are rated as top performers. Chris Charman, Mercer’s reward expert, says:

To narrow the gap, it is not enough for companies to be equal pay-compliant. They also need to develop and support a healthy pipeline of women being promoted up through the organisation. Many high-tech companies are working hard to ensure women are given equal career opportunities. However, the pay gap is perpetuated by the lack of female candidates available for professional industry roles. This is a reflection of an imbalance in the wider society, where only 16% of technology and science students are female, and 14.4% of the UK STEM [Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics] workforce is female.

But another non-tech-specific study also threw up a number of noteworthy findings too. The 2016 UK Board Index, published by executive search and leadership consulting firm Spencer Stuart, revealed that organisations with a woman CEO or chairman employed an average of 26% more female directors than would otherwise be the case. Executive committees in firms with female CEOs also comprised about 35.4% women. 
But across the UK’s top 150 public companies as a whole, females made up on average only 30% of non-executive directors compared with a mere 8% of executive ones – a situation that would appear to indicate that appointing women to boards has to date made little impact on gender imbalances at the senior management level.
So it is perhaps unsurprising that as few as 22% of UK firms are female-owned compared with about a third in the US. According to a survey of 1,919 of the Federation of Small Businesses’ (FSB) female members, the situation is not necessarily through lack of desire to set their own company up though. 
Untapped female potential
The organisation’s report entitled Women in Enterprise – the Untapped Potential  indicates that there are about 2.7 million women in the UK who would like to establish their own business, but are being held back due to a range of barriers including a perceived lack of skills. But the research also found that helping to overcome such issues could create as many as 340,000 jobs and add a huge £10.1 billion to the domestic economy.
Other issues that women face, meanwhile, is that they rarely set up their businesses in industries with potential for high growth such as tech. Instead, they tend to focus on service sectors such as health or social work, of which they have more experience. 
But many women also find it more difficult to balance home and work life due to issues such as childcare and usually have more limited access to funding than their male counterparts. Helen Walbey, the FSB’s national policy chair for health and diversity, told the audience at the recent WeConnect International Europe conference on supplier diversity:

Women generally start with about a third less capital than men, which impacts on their ability to grow and invest in equipment so they lag behind. Women are also more risk-averse as they often have to manage not only the work but the home finances too. They usually have well-thought out business plans though, so much so that Barclays Bank told us they consider women as less of a risk. But women also tend to use single sources of finance and their awareness of alternatives like angel funding and crowdsourcing is low.

Another thing that also does not help matters, however, is the nationwide lack of gender-disaggregated business ownership data. Walbey explained:

It’s a problem. We’re going on estimates as to what the barriers are and what targeted policy interventions we think the government should make. But there could be an opportunity to collect this kind of data perhaps via VAT returns or via reports to Companies House. This would mean we could measure things more effectively, which would make them easier to act on.

My take
Despite all the work that is being undertaken by so many tech companies around increasing gender diversity, there still seem to be mountains to climb. But given the old adage that people tend to hire in their own image, the more women who can be encouraged to set up tech/digital companies, the more females they are likely to employ. These women should, in turn, act as positive role models for the next generation coming through, hopefully serving to create a virtuous circle. 
Image credit - Freeimages.com Read more on: DiversityHCM and the digital future of work 