
LinkedIn now has over half a billion members in 200 countries around the world, representing 15% growth year-on-year and an “important and exciting milestone” in the company’s own words:
This community represents 10+ million active jobs, access to 9+ million companies, and with more than 100,000 articles posted every week, it’s helping you stay informed on the news and views impacting your professional world. A professional community of this size has never existed until now.
And that’s all part of the reason of course why Microsoft was ready to offer up $26.2 billion to buy the company late last year, after which it began work immediately to integrate LinkedIn with its other products and services.
That caused a major stir of course when Salesforce, Microsoft’s former BFF, weighed in with warnings to both US and European Union regulators that access to LinkedIn data would give Microsoft an unfair competitive advantage in the CRM marketplace. Salesforce had itself wanted to buy LinkedIn, but found itself dropped from the bidding process. In the event, the deal won the necessary regulatary approvals on both sides of the Pond.
Yesterday Microsoft pitched the first fruits of integrating LinkedIn capabilities with its own Dynamics 365 sales cloud offerings, emphasising the reason why Salesforce was so nervy about this. In a blog posting, Scott Guthrie, Microsoft’s VP, Cloud and Enterprise Group – whose comments about LinkedIn’s potential sparked the Salesforce objections in the first place – explained:
We’re announcing with LinkedIn new integration that will help salespeople deliver better outcomes using insights from LinkedIn Sales Navigator and LinkedIn’s 500 million professionals. Sales Navigator with Dynamics 365 will dramatically increase the effectiveness of salespeople by tapping into their professional networks and relationships, giving them the ability to improve their pipeline.
Guthrie cited three key capabilities enabled by the LinkedIn integration:
Leveraging signals across email, CRM and LinkedIn to get contextual recommendations for the next best action within Dynamics 365 for Sales, facilitating introductions directly through the company’s network, and sending InMail, messages and customized connection requests.]
Engaging buyers with tailored content throughout the account lifecycle, and getting account and lead updates including news mentions and job changes
Building strong relationships with existing contacts through access to LinkedIn profile details including photos, current roles and work history.
Just to rattle the cage doors a little more, Microsoft’s opted for a good old fashioned price war, offering a single LinkedIn Sales Navigator and Dynamics 365 for Sales price which it claims is “about half the cost of competitive solutions in the market”. No prizes for guessing who that’s aimed at…

Away from sales, a new application for HR people is Dynamics 365 for Talent, which, according to Guthrie, allows organizations to:
Access the best talent, more quickly, with LinkedIn Recruiter integrations that enable dynamic candidate profiles to give managers and interviewers the most up-to-date information.
Deliver personalized onboarding experiences that accelerate employees’ ability to deliver impact with targeted activities and learning resources, along with access to relevant contacts
Maintain an up-to-date view of employee experiences through a consolidated HR profile spanning Office 365, Dynamics 365 and LinkedIn profile information.
Drive operational excellence, measure business impact and improve program effectiveness with integrated intelligence that lets you maximize your human resources.
It also ups Microsoft’s game against Oracle and SAP.
My take
They spent $26 billion on LinkedIn, so Microsoft was always going to be quick to exploit its capabilities. CEO Satya Nadella needs to prove that the price tag was worth it and be able to demonstrate a good ROI.
There was a lot colourful talk in sections of the media yesterday about “Salesforce’s worst nightmare” coming true. Let’s be realistic about this. In the short term, Microsoft is playing a long game of catch-up in the sales software space. The LinkedIn acquisition may yet help to close the gap, but that’s all to come. If it’s a nightmare, it’s one that’s in its very early stages.
That said, while Salesforce has maintained a sensible silence on the latest announcements, it’s hard to escape the conclusion that yesterday was certainly the start of what the company had been so concerned about. BFFs no more.
Image credit - LinkedInDisclosure - At time of writing Salesforce is a premier partner of diginomica. Read more on: CRM and customer experienceHCM and the digital future of workMachine intelligence and AITalent management 