
There is a new battleground starting to open up in the world of CRM applications and services, at least for now, though it is bound to find much broader fields on which to spread very soon. As the vendors start to move beyond just the technology – especially in a sector where whatever one does today, the competition can do tomorrow – vendors are starting to aspire to lead in the next level of abstraction.
That is being summed up by vendors as the move towards human-centricity in their offerings, though in practice the real target is business-centricity or the chance to create the launch pads needed by businesses to build the applications they need quickly and efficiently. The trick here is, wherever possible, to move the applications development process towards the business management skills rather than the technologists.
The underlying technology is, of course, important, but the battleground is now about which vendors can come up with the tools that business users can identify with and make best use of. This is where Microsoft’s Dynamics division certainly feels that it is now the only vendor addressing this market need. Indeed this is what Chris Capossela, the company’s Executive Vice President and Chief Marketing Officer, not just claims but states as a fact.
Speaking at the company’s EMEA version of its Convergence conference in Barcelona, he outlined how Microsoft has re-adjusted its focus away from a pure technology bias and on to three areas aimed, in their individual ways, at spreading the application of CRM tools and making it easier to build the applications needed.
For example, he sets out the triple-headed mission the company is setting itself aimed at making this happen.
The first mission is to create far more personal computing than we have today, which is about having, more, and more appropriate, end user devices and tools for users to work with. This maps onto Capossela’s view that now is the time to be creating new tools that will make sense to – and be more useful for – millennials as they start to move into the workforce.
The second is to build out the what he claims would be the most intelligent, pervasive cloud, one that would be more comprehensive and functionally rich than any other vendor’s.
And last, but by no means least from his point of view, is the idea of reinventing productivity:
This means making every employee far more productive than they are today. This means improving the way unstructured processes work and marrying that to structured systems of record. There is a need to reinvent the way work is done to exploit what millennials do, the way they will work in the future, so this is about building for teams and networks out into the future. We also know that more and more workers are feeling stressed and overworked, with more of them feeling the have to work outside normal hours to get their work done. So we need to be able to give them new insights into the way they are working.
As part of this, he said that Microsoft is also now working on the development of new adaptive systems that will be incorporated into CRM. These will allow users to create new applications with more predictive capabilities and would make more use of machine learning. The predictive capabilities and machine learning technologies are now being inserted across the board in the Dynamics product suite.
Meetings
When it comes to the building of teams and networks, Microsoft is particularly targeting the big personal investments made by staff in attending meetings and voice. He claimed that Microsoft is investing more in this are than any other business pointing at Skype for Business as an obvious example, which he sees as the natural evolution of Lync.
One new development in Skype that may attract interest from established enterprises actually looks backwards at legacy telecom technology, with the aim of connecting it to the 21st century. This is the support of PSTN telephones in a conferencing environment. This means it can support real, physical phone lines, which are still likely to be an infrastructural mainstay of many established enterprises.
It also has enhanced shared working and collaboration capabilities, allowing multiple people to work on the same document at the same time, with all changes ID’d to the individual making them. So that is a bit like multi-level real-time Track Changes. The Meeting Broadcast capabilities can now allow users to broadcast meetings to several thousand simultaneous users, which could attract the interest of enterprises looking to make important company-wide announcements, or perhaps reach business partners or selected groups of customers.
Users just need to be on Office 365, but can be using most types of client device. It was, for example, demonstrated using both an iPhone and an 84 inch, hi-spec 4K touch-screen display running Ink as the information provider.
Meeting Broadcast will only be available in the USA for now, though it is expected to be available globally by next year. It will aloo provide multiple phone numbers for businesses, which will then give employees a dial tone that is their personal telephone number.
Part of what Capossela sees as the wider target is that the trend now is not just in modernising the hardware and software, but also changing the mindset guiding how the applications are used, can be used and should be used:
Digital workers need to become more savvy on the use of the technologies, even simple things like where the camera is placed, or what the sound quality is like. Your personal brand as well as that of your company, is now out there in public.
That is most certainly true with Skype, but it is also something of a double-edged sword in new personal pressures. For anyone who has happily conducted business telephone conversations their dressing gown, being ‘on show’ in such a way could have some downsides for both staff having to even think about image issues at all, and for employers suddenly facing expenses claims from staff for new clothing and hairstylists bills!
There are also new Office Productivity tools, including what he called ‘detonation chambers’ – sand boxes where dubious emails etc can be opened in safe environment first, before being exposed to the live production environment. It will also be possible to pull together all relevant information from a variety of files and sources when answering an email, based on Azure’s machine learning capabilities.
Finally, there is a new tool, Microsoft PowerApps, which is aimed at being a tool that can create customer facing `power apps’ very easily. The idea is that power users can quickly develop apps that can then be shared via the cloud, so everyone can end up using power apps. But it also comes with a set of templates to help start apps development. With these, it does not then even need a real power user to build the apps, which can then be run on any device.
My take
When it comes to CRM and ERP, Microsoft has done OK, but not been brilliant. This could mark the start of a fight back by being faster off the mark at pulling together apps and tools into services more suited to kicking off business solution creation
Read more on: Analytics planning and data analysisCollaboration sharing and digital productivityCRM and customer experienceSocial 