
Weiner and Nadella – saving the world
Microsoft says that it now has regulatory approval from the European Commission to enable its $26 billion acquisition of LinkedIn to go ahead, but it has had to make some concessions in order to do so.
The firm has had to commit that for the next five years it will:

Continue to make the Office Add-in program available to third-party professional social networking services. The Office Add-in program enables developers to integrate their services into Microsoft Outlook, Word, PowerPoint and Excel, providing users an enhanced experience using Office.
Ensure that IT administrators and users can choose whether to display in the Office user interface the LinkedIn profile and activity information that may be integrated in the future.
Not pre-install a LinkedIn application or tile that would favor LinkedIn on an exclusive basis on PCs in the European Economic Area.
Not use Windows itself to prompt users to install a possible LinkedIn application, although it can remain available in the Windows Store and be promoted in other ways.
Provide users with a way to unbundle any LinkedIn application for Windows PCs that PC manufacturers elect to install on their machines.

It’s a blow for Salesforce, which lost out to Microsoft in the bidding war for LinkedIn and which complained to the European Commission that its former BFF looked set to abuse its ownership of LinkedIn data.
Particular concerns were that organizations buying LinkedIn’s sales intelligence solutions would also have to purchase Microsoft’s CRM and that rival CRM vendors wouldn’t have access to the full LinkedIn database, thus preventing them from developing advanced functionality, such as machine learning.
But in its findings, the Commission states:
While the customer base of the two products does overlap, LinkedIn’s product is one of several on the market and does not appear to be a “must have” solution. On the second concern, the Commission also found that access to the full LinkedIn database is not essential to compete on the market.
Salesforce’s market leadership in the CRM space didn’t help its case either, with the Commission dubbing Microsoft “a relatively small player” compared to Oracle, SAP and Salesforce. Therefore it concluded that it was unlikely that Microsoft could use LinkedIn to eliminate competition.
While its argument has not passed muster in Brussels, Salesforce’s Chief Legal Officer Burke Norton says that regulators need to keep Microsoft under scrutiny:
Given Microsoft’s history and existing monopolies, it will be necessary for antitrust enforcement agencies to be vigilant to ensure that Microsoft operates in a manner that promotes competition, rather than stifles it. As AI, machine learning and other technologies continue to advance, questions around access to critical datasets will only become more important and Salesforce will continue to share its views with regulators and policymakers around the world about the ways in which access to data is emerging as a key issue in competition policy.
The Commission emphasised that its decision is conditional on full compliance with the commitments required and that this would be monitored by a trustee. But Commissioner Margrethe Vestager, in charge of competition policy, said:
A growing number of Europeans subscribe to professional social networks. These networks are important for professionals to connect and interact and to find new career opportunities. Today’s decision ensures that Europeans will continue to enjoy a freedom of choice between professional social networks.
Saving the world
Meanwhile in a somewhat OTT blog post, Microsoft’s Chief Legal Officer Brad Smith paints the now guaranteed acquisition as for the greater good of the entire world in a post-Brexit, post-Trump age:
In June, Satya Nadella and Jeff Weiner, the CEOs of Microsoft and LinkedIn, announced their shared vision for bringing together the world’s leading professional cloud with the world’s leading professional network. Just ten days after they announced this combination, voters in the United Kingdom voted to leave the European Union. And roughly five months after that, a tumultuous presidential election campaign in the United States came to a close. On both sides of the Atlantic, it has become increasingly apparent that many people feel left out and unable to participate in the economic growth and opportunities created by the rising digital economy.
While technology tools are not a panacea for current economic challenges, we believe they can make an important contribution. Microsoft and LinkedIn together have a bigger opportunity to help people online to develop and earn credentials for new skills, identify and pursue new jobs, and become more creative and productive as they work with their colleagues. Working together we can do more to serve not only those with college degrees, but the many people pursuing new experiences, skills and credentials related to vocational training and so-called middle skills. Our ambition is to do our part to create more opportunity for people who haven’t shared in recent economic growth.
And the role that Microsoft/LinkedIn will play in all this? Simple, says Smith:
Through Microsoft Philanthropies, we’ll invest more than any other company to bring digital skills to schools. Through our Affordable Access initiative and new wireless broadband “TV White Spaces” technologies, we’ll help bring broadband access to more rural communities. And with the LinkedIn Economic Graph, with its data on local job growth and skills needs, there is an expanded opportunity to help governments use better data and analytical capabilities to pursue economic development strategies to help connect people with new opportunities.
But there’s at least a final stab at self-effacement to conclude:
We readily recognize that no single company can come close to solving the many economic challenges that confront the world today. Perhaps more than anything else, governments will need to continue to innovate across a wide array of education, training and labor policies. And across the private and public sectors, we all will need to come together and act with a sense of shared responsibility.
My take
Leaving aside Smith’s florid ‘save the world’ proclamations, this was always the most likely outcome, even taking into account the instinctive anti-trust zealotry of Vestager and the European Commission’s previous antipathy towards Microsoft. The commitments that have been put in place will need to be adhered to and any attempt to water them down tackled, but Microsoft has won its battle on this occasion and gained itself a major asset.
Image credit - Microsoft Disclosure - At time of writing, Oracle, Salesforce and SAP are premier partners of diginomica. Read more on: Cloud platforms - infrastructure and architectureCollaboration sharing and digital productivityCRM and customer experienceData privacyRegulation 