
Nadella in action
Back in the dark days of 1943, the then president of IBM, Thomas Watson, made a prediction that has since become one of the most laughed at under-estimates of technological futures ever made. `I think there is a world market for maybe five computers’.
Yes, yes, laughable: except that a turn of phrase emerged from Microsoft CEO, Satya Nadella, at the company’s now annual Future Decoded bash at London’s ExCel Centre this week that added a new `rightness’ to Watson’s prediction:
We are building out Azure as the world’s computer system.
If you stretch what is meant by the word `computer’ a bit – scale it up really, that is all – then maybe Watson was not so wrong after all. Microsoft’s Azure cloud service, when put together with Amazon’s AWS, Google’s cloud services and Alibaba now with table stakes in the game, it could be said that there are now four `world computer systems’ heavily in play already.
To support his claim, Nadella pointed to the 4,500 peering locations and 130 data centre sites in its 54-region worldwide environment. It has even started dumping packaged-up data centres in the sea (off Scotland) and suggested that this might be a future deployment model for many locations around the world.
One theme of the conference was the combination and integration of the ‘Intelligent Cloud’  and the ‘Intelligent Edge’, and Nadella claimed that the company now had a consistent hybrid compute infrastructure that can used by businesses to build out and deploy the other theme of the event – Artificial Intelligence.
That combination – cloud + edge + AI – is hardly an original theme across the tech conference season this year, though most other companies have ended up focussing attention on their contribution to a larger entity. Microsoft, however, does seem to have sufficient clout across an environment that embraces cloud resources, management environments and applications services, intelligent edge services and (to a lesser extent) edge clients and devices as well.
It also has the two extremes of AI tools and legacy applications integration pretty much covered off, and whatever one might think of Microsoft, its legacy influence still runs far and deep across much of global business. So Nadella saysL
We are providing the ability to take AI to wherever you need it. That is the game now. This is about improving the productivity not just of knowledge workers but also all other frontline workers.
On the AI front Nadella observed that some of its available tools had started to reach human parity in terms of their overall performance, such as comparable rates of accuracy on speech to text transcriptions. And the impact of AI is likely to be profound. For example, a recent survey by the company indicated that over 50% of business leader respondents feel that current business models will not exit in five year’s time. Perhaps more worrying, just under 50% stated that they have no current plans addressing what to do about it.
The only way is ethics
He also referenced a mantra that was quoted often by speakers at the conference – that AI must not become about what CAN be done, but what SHOULD be done, with the possible outfalls from the Law of Unintended Consequences very firmly in mind. One of the main tracks of the conference proper did revolve around the ethics that should underpin AI.
The conference put on a major session on the Ethical Approach to AI, with a panel was largely made up of professional thinkers. It was interesting that, apart from Chris Bishop, the Director of Microsoft’s Cambridge Laboratory, was the only AI ‘do-er’, rather than -think-about-er’ and ‘talk-about-er’.
That being said, there were some gems to be had in what they said, especially in terms of some generalised advice about where to start with AI and why. The fundamental here is that the time is coming for businesses to make a start.
Roger Taylor, chair of the Centre for Data Ethics, told the audience that one of the big requirements is for business to be aware that, with the use of AI, there is a need to ensure that public trust is grown, maintained and always kept as an objective:
They have to be aware that they need to enhance fairness, though using AI makes it just as easy to impede fairness.
Indeed, one of the sub-plots for the early stages of ANY AI implementation is that it can easily trigger the law of unintended consequences. This is particularly likely in the early stages of AI design, development, implementation and deployment.
Liberal/Democrat digital economy spokesperson, Lord Clement-Jones, observed the UK’s position in AI. On the one hand it is widely held to be extremely good at the R&D of AI, and the creation and fostering of start-ups in the area. It is also seen as playing a leading role in developing and defining the ethics of AI.
On the other hand, however, the UK is clearly poor at growing any sort of business these days, especially hi-tech ones like AI.
He suggested that there is a need for an over-arching framework to help change this failing, though such frameworks have a history of hindering at least as much as they help. There is that old phrase about camels being horses designed by committees. But there is a place for suggesting to the UK’s big investors that they look at the long-term money the likes of Apple, Microsoft and Facebook have generated for those in for the long haul rather than the first opportunity to sell.
Sadly, as he observed, the UK’s successful tech developments tend to get put up for a trade sale as soon as it makes financial sense, and the buyers are most often from overseas.
He also stressed that all AI projects should have an ethical component and be beneficial, especially as many AI applications are likely to be substitutional at least to some extent. This raises the vexed subject of AI and job losses.
Viscount Ridley, journalist, writer and ex-chairman of Northern Rock Bank sees AI currently being wrapped up in the cycles of hype, particularly in the way that people over-estimate the possible early on and then under-estimate the reality later on.
He also observed that the UK has a history of accepting new technologies – of seeing the benefits – better than many other nations where cultural obstructions can get in the way:
UK people are good at spotting a vested interest and going along with it. But that does mean we need a level of understanding, and some areas of AI such as deep learning are difficult to explain.
Can it do ‘no harm?’
The panel was thrown the suggestion that AI practitioners should take the equivalent of the Hippocratic Oath sworn by doctors: something along the lines of `do no harm’. No clear answer emerged and one of the problems here is that it is probably impossible to achieve. The best that might be possible is a `qualified no harm’ wording that accommodates the already classic vehicle-driving question of whether a vehicle about to have an accident should run down a child and its mother or plough into the queue waiting at a bus stop.
Chris Bishop, director of Microsoft Research Lab in Cambridge, said that currently this isn’t really about AI and we are still just learning the power of data, how it can be used, and what can be derived from it. It s also about the ethics of context, he argued:.
For example, an action in one context can be beneficial, while in another context the same action can be very harmful. The UK is currently the best place in the world for learning about that.
The panel also came up with a list of `low-hanging fruit’ use cases that make the best targets for early AI implementations. The obvious one, with many projects already underway, is healthcare. This is still one of the biggest cost areas for many countries and in many ways it still uses quite primitive processes. One area here already being exploited is the real-time use of up to date anonymised data in health screening.
Agriculture is also a favourite target, as is education, which has more personalised teaching techniques becoming available.
Their short-term tactical guidance for businesses starting out in AI is to start by asking whether a company already has its own ethical praxis in place, and if it exists, is it OK to talk about it openly, while allowing others to have their say? There is also a need to think objectively about whether current business models are sustainable into the future.
Lastly, whatever else is done, businesses must make sure that not just good things come out of it but that possible bad things are spotted and stopped; with the observation that not innovating can be a bad thing.
My take
AI has roots that go back to antiquarian literature, and a first practical implementation in 1951 at Manchester University (a chequers-playing program), but despite many-a false along the road to the `time of AI’ that time does, now, really seem to have arrived.
So it was perhaps apposite that Microsoft, with strength in both cloud services and intelligent edge technologies, should not only add AI coverage to its conference but be one of the first to address the underlying ethics of it. This is a technology that will no doubt deliver many benefits over the coming years, but it will also do some harm – not just at the hands of the malicious but also of the unthinking.
It is also right to address the issues because now is the time for businesses to make a start at exploiting AI, lest FIRN takes too much hold. FIRN (Functional Inertia Restriction Neurosis) was something I first observed back in the days of the first digital calculators. It stops people actually doing anything because they are always waiting for `something’ – the price to drop or the next specification upgrade. As vendors usually do both at the same time, potential users remain conflicted forever. So just jump in is now the answer.
This is despite the fact that, until AI has been widely used, the possible implications and consequences inevitably fall into the realm of Donald Rumsfeld’s classic piece of `wisdom’ – `there are things we don’t know that we don’t know’. So it is not just jump in, but also `keep looking’.
And one final thought. If the great and the good on the panel are right, and the UK is the current centre of gravity in AI development and application, then there is a need for that framework, or something, that stops the technology vendors being sold on to the highest bidder. It is indeed ironic that such things are being said at a US vendor’s conference. There certainly seems a question to answer for the UK’s oft-lauded global centres of investment finance about the duration of their attention span.
Image credit - TwitterRead more on: Cloud platforms - infrastructure and architectureData privacyFuture of workIoT robotics and AIMachine intelligence and AIRegulation 