
Satya Nadella, Microsoft CEO, at Convergence 2015
A new wave of intelligent computing will mean every kind of business will soon become a software-as-a-service (SaaS) business, Microsoft CEO Satya Nadella told attendees at the vendor’s Convergence 2015 conference in Atlanta this morning.
The advent of machine intelligence provides the ability to “reason over” the huge volumes of data now being collected from connected, smart devices, he said. This is moving business computing beyond the “static” capabilities of earlier client-server systems that acted as systems of record, to a new era of more dynamic systems of intelligence.
I think we are at the dawn of a new generation of business systems.
With the ability to reason over data, we now can build these systems of intelligence.
This is going from having systems that are very useful onto themselves but are somewhat static and converting them to learning systems … where everything that you have becomes intelligent.
Across all industries, businesses that build these new systems of intelligence will themselves become software businesses, Nadella went on. This would allow them to command software-style gross margins, which, as the accompanying slide indicated, are typically as much as 80 percent.
Every industry is now a software industry where they are building these systems of intelligence. You all are transforming processes by digitizing things that were not digitized before …
Every one of these businesses now is going to become a software business. You’re going to reason over that data, you’re going to build applications, you’re going to do analytics and predictions. You’re going to provide SaaS services that go along with your products.
That’s going to change the gross margin to become more like software margins. That’s what the evolution to these systems of intelligence is going to bring in.
Business credentials
There were several announcements of Microsoft offerings designed to help businesses achieve this software-powered future. To harness the potential of the Internet of Things (IoT), a new Azure IoT Suite provides a development platform and a selection of applications such as remote monitoring, asset management and predictive maintenance, while there will be a version of Windows 10 for Internet of Things.
At the business applications layer, Nadella in his keynote spend some time showing features from the Power BI analytics service and Office Delve intelligent search service, both of which become generally available today.
Today also saw the announcement of the Spring ’15 release of Microsoft Dynamics CRM, availability of the IT Professional and Developer Preview of Office 2016, and the technical preview of Skype for Business, formerly known as Lync, with connection to the global Skype network.
Nadella was keen to emphasize Microsoft’s business credentials, including a sideswipe in his keynote that was clearly aimed at Google and Apple:
We are not in business because we have an ad business on the side or because we are building devices. We are in the business of empowerment.
The theme of empowerment ran throughout the keynote. Nadella said this was the key to harnessing the potential of these new technologies:
Make sure everyone inside your organization has the power to access these insights and then have the power to act on those insights.
Only when businesses create a culture that empowers everyone to have access to data and insight that drive action will they be positioned to truly transform.
My take
It’s long been my belief that, to compete in a future in which, as Marc Andreessen put it, software is eating the world, all businesses will have to become software businesses. And in a world in which software is delivered online and on-demand, that inevitably implies they all become SaaS businesses.
Now Microsoft’s CEO is pushing the same message. Where that leaves many customers of Microsoft’s own business software customers, most of whom remain firmly planted on-premise, is a question I’ll be pursuing with Microsoft Dynamics executives this week. But overall it’s a welcome change of perspective.
The phrase systems of intelligence was one I heard just a few weeks ago from Salesforce. Now I’m hearing it at Microsoft. Although machine intelligence and analytics are only just starting to become mainstream buzzwords, we already have a new generation of systems named for them, succeeding systems engagement as the next new thing. Enterprises should remember that, while there are good things happening, much of this remains hype and there is a lot of ground to cover before these capabilities can be deployed by the majority of businesses.
One other thing that was interesting to see here in Atlanta is the Convergence event finally living up to its name by bringing together not only the Dynamics portfolio but also other Microsoft offerings for business, including Office 365 and Azure. This too is a long-overdue move that will help customers tie their various Microsoft products together as they journey into this new world.
Disclosure: Microsoft funded my travel to attend Convergence.
Image credits: Satya Nadella keynote image by @rwang0.

Read more on: Analytics planning and data analysisInternet of Things 