
Garth Case
According to Garth Case, Vice-President for IT at the National Basketball Association (NBA), after 20 years with the organization, there’s one question that he gets asked all the time:
Have I met Michael Jordan, Shaq, Kobe or LeBron? I’m lucky enough to say yes to all of that, I have.
But while that’s an easy answer for Case to produce, the NBA is called upon to provide an enormous amount of information as part of its day-to-day operations – and that’s a considerably bigger ask, as delegates at the Microsoft Build 2018 developer conference heard. Case told them:
For those of you that don’t know, during the NBA regular season, 30 teams play 82 games. Each game generates terabytes of content. As you can imagine, this much information makes it difficult to manage and curate and get insights delivered consistently across all our internal and external channels.
In a nutshell, the NBA was sitting on top of what Case called “our growing data problem” and needed to find a solution. The amount of data was inevitably only going to carry on growing and the problem at hand was therefore going to get bigger:
Eighteen months ago, when we first started to organize and understand our data, we started like most [organizations], thinking that we could build a data lake and that would solve all our problems. But our data lake quickly became a ‘data swamp’ and it was difficult to hear important signals in the data through all the noise.
There was a realization that emerged from this that while the NBA was confident that it had developed “the perfect analytics layer”, there was an essential component missing and that was a learning layer. Case explained:
Analytics layers are usually active post-ingest of data. But a learning layer could be active through all stages – from ingest all the way to archive. It would help us organize and graph our data, surface patterns that connect dots and allow us to focus on the high-value information. We would now be able to hear the signals loud and clear.
And importantly, this created a new destination for the NBA:
This pivot in our journey meant that we were no longer building just a data lake, we’re building a smart data platform. This revelation gave birth to many use cases and scenarios, most of them related to data mining, process automation and decision intelligence.
AI and JFK
So that’s the theory; now the IT team needed to come up with a way to create this smart data platform. Case and his team found a solution whose roots lay back in 1963 and the assassination of JFK:
As I searched for technologies that we could use to build our smart data platform, I saw a demo where Microsoft used an AI-driven approach to understand the recently released JFK files. They were able to run thousands of unstructured documents through their system and build a knowledge graph using a set of AI models and services.
Their use of new cognitive capabilities in Azure Search, as well as leveraging custom and pre-built AI, appeared to be the perfect recipe for a cocktail that would enable us to understand our content and add the layer of learning and intelligence we needed to build our smart data platform.
As the platform was built out, the tech team also produced a number of value-driven use cases and scenarios, including NBA Photo Sorter. This does what it says on the tin, said Case, but while not a particularly ‘sexy’ sounding application, it addresses a significant business problem:
Before the Photo Sorter was created, the effort of tagging photos took a very, very long time, was extremely manual, resource intensive, and sometimes inaccurate.
Now with the help of Azure, photos and other types of content can be automatically tagged and related quickly with increased accuracy. The Photo Sorter has already aided us in quickly tagging VIP photos from our events. These photos are turned into printed and digital albums which are given to VIPs as a personalized gift.
This is only the beginning, Case concluded:
As we get more insight from our data, I see a future where we can not only further automate our business, but use the system to connect our channels and drive personalized, value-based engagement with our fans across the world.
We’ve embarked on a journey to bring AI into the world of the NBA, across all types of data and content. My intent is to use AI to power the next generation of experiences for employees, our teams, fans, everyone around the world.
My take
NBA Photo Sorter is the kind of digital transformation effort that sounds mundane, but which delivers genuine operational benefits from the get-go. As I’ve said before, too many digital transformation initiatives are envisioned as all-encompassing, multi-year ventures with long-term goals and ROI expectations. That’s fine, but there’s no reason not to look for the quick fixes that prove the value of tech investment to the business side of the organization.
Image credit - Microsoft Read more on: Digital enterprise in the real worldIoT robotics and AIMachine intelligence and AI 