
Satya Nadella
The new world order at Microsoft is taking shape, with new cloud revenue counter-balancing declines in Windows. Azure cloud platform revenue more than doubled year-on-year while sales of Office 365 are up 70% for the same period.
For Microsoft, revenue from its Intelligent cloud business, which includes products such as its Azure cloud infrastructure and services business, rose five percent year-on-year to to $6.3 billion, while the so-called Combined Cloud business is up 15%.
That’s in contrast to the overall revenue numbers for the business, which were down 10.1% to $23.80 billion, while net income was down to $5 billion from $5.86 billion. Revenue in the business that includes Windows fell five percent to $12.66 billion.
CEO Satya Nadella says:
Our commercial cloud run rate surpassed $9.4 billion, up over 70% year over year and almost halfway to our goal of $20 billion. We nearly doubled our cloud customers over the last 12 months.
This is due to how Microsoft positions its cloud offerings, argues Nadella:
We speak to more of the real world needs I think of an IT organization or a business organization that’s trying to transform through digital technology.
I mean if you put yourself as a CIO of a organization, in a multinational organization, and you want to operate in multiple geographies with different regimes for data sovereignty, and then you want to be able to take some workloads, move them all to the cloud, some you want to be able to tier with the cloud, that’s the kind of flexibility we provide.
Upsell
The SaaS, PaaS and IaaS nature of the Microsoft cloud portfolio offers cross and up-sell opportunities:
We also see network effects between if you’re using Office 365, you want to extend the data in Office 365 by building applications that join it with some other data inside of our Data Lake service in Azure. Obviously Azure becomes the natural choice for such application development and we’re increasingly seeing that. So that’s really our strategy. Our strategy is not to compete in these constituent parts independently with different competitors, it is to bring one architecture and really drive the value for our customers because of that.
We see organizations like NTT DOCOMO, Honeywell, NASA’s Jet Propulsion Labs, Dow Chemical and the UN Development Programme deploy innovative solutions on Azure. We see that Azure customers who also purchase Office 365 consume eight times more Azure than other customers. More than 70% of the Fortune 500 have at least two different Microsoft cloud offerings, up 13 points year over year.
He adds:
Our Dynamics business is also contributing to our growth in the cloud. This quarter we released major updates to Dynamics NAV and Dynamics CRM, both of which deliver enhancements in mobility, insights and organizational productivity, as well as deeper integration with Azure and Office 365. Three out of four of our CRM customers are choosing to deploy in the cloud, which is driving continued triple digit paid seat growth for CRM Online in the enterprise.
Nadella concludes:
The enterprise cloud opportunity is massive, larger than any market we have ever participated in. Last quarter, I reflected on how we are now one of the two leaders in the space. At the same time, we are the only one in this market providing SaaS, PaaS, IaaS and hybrid cloud at scale. We are growing in each of these areas simultaneously. Our unique approach is resonating. Our cloud architecture reflects real world distributed cloud computing needs and services that enable businesses to convert data into intelligence and drive business transformation.
Meanwhile Amazon Web Services generated $2.4 billion in revenue during its fourth quarter, up 69% year-on-year. But that represents a continuing decline in growth numbers, down from 78% in the third quarter and 82% in the second quarter. That means Azure is producing a higher growth rate than AWS, albeit clearly from a lower base.
AWS delivered an operating profit of $687 million, up from $240 million in profit and sales of $1.4 billion the year before.
The cloud business was the bright spot in a set of Amazon numbers that, overall, disappointed Wall Street and sent the share price down 16% after hours.
My take
Windows no more, cloud all the way.
Read more on: Cloud ERP financials and supply chainCloud platforms - infrastructure and architectureCollaboration sharing and digital productivity 