

The original founders of the Government Digital Service in the UK and its former director, Mike Bracken, have announced the creation of a new global consultancy that plans to help public institutions outside of the UK tackle the transition to digital.
Since Bracken’s departure from Whitehall a couple of months ago, he and his GDS colleagues (Russell Davies, Tom Loosemore and Ben Terrett), have all taken up roles at the Co-Operative Group to help the organisation achieve its digital ambitions.
However, Bracken’s role at the Co-Op as CDO has since been described as “part-time” and he and his team appear to have ambitions to take their GDS experience to governments globally with the new consultancy – dubbed public.digital.
Public.digital’s website states:

We founded GDS. We transformed digital delivery for the UK government. Now we’re working outside the UK – helping governments, public institutions, transnational organisations and political leaders do the same
“We have expertise in: Leadership, Strategy, Transformation, Design.
Right now, we are Mike Bracken, Russell Davies, Tom Loosemore and Ben Terrett. If you think we might be able to help, get in touch at [email protected]

Bracken and his team already have strong links with forward-thinking governments across the world, including the US and Australia, having advised and led the movement on digital government during their time at GDS.
 In an interview with Global Government Forum, Bracken said that he aims to “see governments start again with a digital approach to delivery of services; to strengthen the democratic engagement with citizens – we won’t work with certain governments; and to bring the best of the internet generation, with all its values, into the heart of government.”
The announcement follows last week’s Spending Review, which saw the Government Digital Service receive an unexpected windfall from the Chancellor – to the amount of £450 million. Despite the fear that the digital agenda in government would fall behind following Bracken’s departure, it appears that GDS is now receiving the much needed political and financial support it needed from those at the top of government.
Read more on: Digital government and public services

