
A tale of two retailers as Walmart and Macy’s fend off the onslaught from e-commerce behemoth Amazon, with the former making progress while the latter languishes. 
Walmart saw its online sales soared 29% in its fiscal fourth quarter, which covers the all-important holiday shopping season. 
There’s still a long way to go – Walmart’s online sales only account for 3% of its global sales, or about $14 billion in cash compared with $94 billion over at Amazon. But the progress made can’t be denied. Walmart now offers 35 million items online – again, a fraction of Amazon’s inventory – but four times as many as this time last year. 
CEO Doug McMillon is comfortable with progress: 

We’re moving with speed to better serve our customers every day and progressing against our four key objectives, which are: make every day easier for busy families; change how we work by becoming a more digital enterprise; deliver results and operate with discipline; and be the most trusted retailer.
We continue to invest in e-commerce to accelerate growth. We’re gaining traction and moving faster. We’re the second-largest US online retailer by revenue, one of the top three online retailers by traffic and our Walmart app is among the top three apps in retail. 
We recently announced free two-day shipping on millions of items with a minimum order of $35. And as you might expect, we’ve seen a nice uptick in our e-commerce business since this launch.

Walmart had a healthy Black Friday, he adds, particularly online:

According to Bain, Black Friday weekend sales marked the first time the number of people shopping online surpassed people shopping in stores, and over half did so through mobile devices. And more than 70% of traffic to Walmart.com during Black Friday and Cyber Monday was driven by mobile. 

E-commerce is also opening up the Chinese market, says McMillon: 

We announced an alliance with, and investment in, JD.com last summer, improving our e-commerce proposition and extending the reach of Walmart and Sam’s Club brands to millions of new customers. We subsequently announced an increased ownership of JD.com to approximately 10%. And we recently furthered this relationship with the launch of an exclusive Walmart Global Imports Store on JD.com Worldwide, which provides Chinese customers access to thousands of products imported from Walmart stores from around the world.

Walmart’s physical retail presence still counts, adds McMillon, pointing to the opening of Supercenters as an example of how the firm can innovate here: 

In the last month, we opened two new Supercenters in Florida and Texas, with features like scan-and-go, touch-screens where customers can access more items on Walmart.com, virtual item displays, and an integrated Health & Wellness section.
While e-commerce is growing rapidly customers continue to rely on brick and mortar formats. The Supercenter remains the best retail format in the world, and going forward, we will continue to leverage these unique assets, even more with initiatives like online grocery, in-store pickup and others. Rapid advances in technology mean we need to become more of a digital enterprise – and that’s what we’re doing.

Real estate sell-off
Macy’s meanwhile has been selling off its real estate, including its flagship men’s store in San Francisco. In January the retailer said it would close a further 68 stores nationwide and according to CEO Terry Lundgren, there’s more to come – 34 more over the next few years – in a bid to strike the right balance between offline and online: 

This will give us a healthy physical portfolio, one that complements our growing digital business. And this is how the large majority of Americans shop. Ninety percent of what we sell at Macy’s and Bloomingdale’s is still sold in a physical store. That’s for all product sales, including apparel, shoes, beauty, handbags, jewelry, home furnishings, all the things we carry. Ninety percent of these categories still sold in physical stores. Lot of people don’t believe that or understand that. 
Now it’s less than that at Macy’s and Bloomingdale’s because we have such a highly developed online business, which continues to see double digit growth, but I want to emphasize that physical stores will play an extremely important role in the future of shopping, for us as well as for others.
We feel very good about our digital investments, which have created the best, or certainly one of the best omnichannel experiences in the retail industry. But we acknowledge that more experimentation with in-store technology and creative solutions for customers who are shopping in our physical stores is an opportunity for focused capital investments in 2017.

He adds: 

We feel great about the progress the investments we’ve made on our digital platform, with our online business chugging along nicely and very well developed. The investments we’ve made in our Macy’s app has been very positively received. So, we’re doing some good things there.
But clearly the answer has to lie in our conversion of consumers who are shopping in our physical stores into sales. Instead of just shopping and browsing and then clicking and buying either at Macys.com or somewhere else, converting them into purchasers inside of our stores. And we’ve got test stores lined up, we’ve got a lot of the exciting things that we’re testing and doing.
But it’d be a bad idea for us just to roll those out immediately and hope they work. So, rather, we’re going to spend 2017 to try various new formats that we do believe will improve our conversion rate.

Lundgren says that the retailer does have evolving theories on how to strike the right online/offline mix: 

More and more, we’re convinced that the consumer is entering the store with their mobile device and making their decision where they’re going to shop before they leave their home or their car. [We need to make] sure that we are able to convert those individuals once they choose to come to our store to make a purchase inside our store, as opposed to a search that might bring them to an alternative site where they believe they can get a similar or a same product for a better value. That can happen. We have to be stronger, more aggressive on that subject to ensure that we are always very competitive and that’s where it has to go for us.

In the end, it’s all about rethinking the role of the department store. Lundgren says: 

If the department store did not exist today, there’d be a group of smart people sitting in Silicon Valley inventing the department store today, because it will serve a purpose.

My take
Still a lot of work to do on the part of both firms in the face of competition from Amazon. Walmart’s progress online is tangible, but still a very minor part of the overall revenue mix. Macy’s real estate sell-off meanwhile remains a gamble.
Image credit - Walmart/Macy's Read more on: Retail e-commerce and the omni-channel 