
MWC
There is an undercurrent to this year’s Mobile World Congress (MWC) in Barcelona, and it is one that should give the likes of BT some cause for concern. You see, BT’s creaking internet infrastructure now stands on the point of obsolescence, with a predicted lifespan of four years, maybe less. 
The Congress has grown to be the global showground for all things that can be classed as ‘handsets’ or ‘apps’, and to be fair, this year is not too much different. But by the same token it is noticeable that while there are new gadgets and new apps, there is not too much of either that is face-smackingly original or unusual. Interesting developments and extensions of app ideas there are in plenty, but there is a tangible sense of holding back.
That is because of the undercurrent – the real developmental work going on in and around the mobile market. This is waiting for the arrival of the next big step in infrastructure – 5G communications. Expected to be in widespread use by 2020, its impact will be significant. The performance that will be available to individual users, said to be 50 x that available with 4G, is usually characterised by examples such as having the ability to download a two-hour movie in just one second. This will no doubt make current users of BT’s wired infrastructure here in the UK giggle hysterically with unbelief.
The performance and costs already available with existing 4G technology is impressive. In Hong Kong, two fibre pairs to the home are available for $35, and when an executive of Chinese ICT vendor, Huawei, says in passing that he gets `half a Gig bandwidth for nine bucks a month in Shenzhen’, a flavour of what is coming can be tasted. The move to 5G will take this much, much further, but it will all be dependent upon one thing, of course: having the right infrastructure in place. 
The machinations of getting to that point make up that undercurrent at this year’s event, and they are extremely important machinations, for mobile is now about to go not just mainstream but `onlystream’. It is not just consumers that will be the beneficiaries, either. All corners of business are going to need to be ready to consider a mobile – or at least certainly wireless – infrastructure across their businesses.
And this won’t necessarily apply to just the airy-fairy end of games, entertainment and media. It begins to look as though the Internet of Things (IoT), from the Industrial Internet through to smart homes and cities, will be exploiting mobile and WiFi as the primary communications infrastructure in the foreseeable future.
5G coming, and that is serious
What this means, of course, is that a sense of coherence, if not outright standardization, is going to be vital across all the infrastructure vendors for 5G to work even remotely well. The stakes, in terms of the revenue that can be generated from the potential services that 5G will support, are simply too high for a technology free-for-all to get in the way at this late stage.
For example, Facebook’s CEO, Mark Zuckerberg used a Q&A session at MWC on Monday evening to announce the Telecom Infra Project. This is designed to overhaul telecom network infrastructure in order to meet the world’s data needs ahead of the roll out of 5G. Facebook has teamed up with mobile providers and operators including Nokia, Intel and Deutsche Telekom, all looking for a more efficient way of handling data-intensive operations like watching video and virtual reality.
He also indicated that a prime goal would be to get internet services to those that don’t have, rather than just provide faster services to those that have. This is certainly something close to Zuckerberg’s heart for the company has been trying for a while to roll out its Free Basics service, aimed at bringing free internet connectivity to two thirds of the world. It offers free internet access to certain websites, including the BBC, Wikipedia, health information sites and local news and weather forecasts, but has met with opposition. 
India’s national telecoms regulator, for example, has blocked it for being unfair for allegedly promoting some sites over others, though other countries are said to be taking the service.
In terms of services that might flourish, he also suggested that virtual reality could well become a killer application, which would fit in well with Facebook.
IoT and 4.5G
Back on the IoT front, mobile chip maker Qualcomm’s CEO, Steve Mollenkopf, has joined with the Open Internet Consortium to form a new Internet of Things standards group called the Open Connectivity Foundation (OCF). The importance of this is the acceptance of the need for as much commonality and standardisation as possible. 
Since 2013, the chipmaker has championed its own IoT interoperability standards group, the AllSeen Alliance, which worked against Open Internet Consortium members, and in particular Intel. Now, it isn’t.
Qualcomm is also collaborating with Huawei on underpinning technologies and, just before MWC started, they announced that they had successfully completed a joint test of 1Gbps devices that will need to work together to provide commercially-ready 4.5G infrastructure and user devices.
4.5G is – as the term suggests – something of a half-way house on the road to 5G and has one specific advantage for infrastructure vendors like Huawei. While it cannot yet provide full 5G services, provisioning for 4.5G means that it will be installing much of the infrastructure 5G will require. This should get it close to a ‘flick of a switch’ change over from 4.5G to 5G.
Speaking at Huawei’s MWC pre-announcement in London last week, President of Wireless Marketing Operations Qiu Heng said he expected to see use of 4.5G explode this year, with an expectation that there will be 6.7 billion users by 2020. The goal is that it will provide users across the board with 1G/bit comms as standard.
On top if that, he expects to see the next billion connections coming from IoT use in short order. He sees this being helped by the availability of Connection-Plus for IoT applications. This offers a 20dB gain on GSM coverage, which is between 5x and 10x improvement, and at last allows signals to reach underground. This is already being trialled it in the UAE, China and Germany:

In fact we expect to see 10 billion IoT connections by 2020. The leading operators in 9 countries already launching 4.5G services based on Huawei, and this will be the start of using standardised networks and data centers.

This is just the company’s own share of what is expected, based on the fact it is offering users a comprehensive IoT platform, two Access Modes, and its own IoT Operating System.
Again, it is the need to build partnerships and collaborations which are seen as playing a key part in making 5G actually happen. Huawei already has over 10 Open Labs Partner Programs running, where it is looking to work with the carriers in particular. It also has an Open Developer Ecosystem Platform, where it can engage with the developer community. 
The company is also going to invest $1 billion over the next five years in a developer enablement plan, aimed at both business and consumer developer efforts. 
This MWC has seen the re-emergence of Nokia as an infrastructure player with a 5G/IoT focus following the acquisition of Alcatel-Lucent.
Its new 5G-ready AirScale product supports any technology, from 2G through LTE Advance Pro – and 5G when it arrives. It also includes a new base station with future-ready baseband and next generation RF elements that will give customers a connectivity experience that exceeds all others. AirScale also uses 60% less energy than the Flexi.
The company’s keeness on IoT’s future has also prompted the acquisition of Nakina, which is expected to close very soon. Here the goal is to have the best network security in place for 5G and IoT. The company is epected to do more of these small, ‘bolt on’ deals to give an edge in the marketplace.

My take
It looks like the mobile industry is taking a deep breath, while doing a great of groundwork for the coming adventure. Some say 5G will be `here’ by 2020 and some say `established’. Chances are, CIOs and business managers need to be making plans to look very seriously at making a move to 5G mobile for everything from 2018 onwards. Any business committed to using BT cabled infrastructure at any point in their network after that time could be left in everyone else’s cart tracks. 
Read more on: InfrastructureInternet of ThingsMobile 