
Earlier in the week, I outlined what we are doing about GDPR compliance. So far that has been well received. Things are moving rapidly and this update explains a couple of things about which you should be aware.
Email updates
Today, I sent out the first email update request to the relatively small number of people on the main mailing list who signed up but have never opened any of the emails we have sent. We have to presume that their interests have changed but need to ensure we don’t delete anyone who maintains an interest but only has very limited time. We are monitoring activity on that mailing and will initialize follow-ups in the run-up to 25th May. After that, we will delete the records for all those who have not replied/opened our request(s).
Data retention
Data retention is a thorny topic. Google has requested that we update our preferences for the retention of collected data. This comes into effect on 25th May. Google offers a variety of choices ranging from 14 months to ‘do not automatically expire.’ But it is a tad more complicated than that. I refer you to Google’s data retention page for further details.
I have also updated our Terms and Privacy page to reflect what we want them to do on 25th May but am amplifying that here so that everyone has an opportunity to understand what we are doing and our motives for taking the actions we are pursuing.
We have asked Google to set the retention time period to ‘do not automatically expire.’ That might seem excessive given that many analysts prefer to work around near real-time data. We do too. But – this option gives us a one-off opportunity to get a snapshot of what has happened at diginomica since we opened our doors 5 years ago and get a set of annual baseline numbers in a single visualization against which we can perform analytical assessments that are important to our business.
Once that is complete – and please remember these new rules only go into effect on 25th May 2018 – then we will be in a position to understand which retention period makes the best sense for us and our readers. I suspect this will happen within a week of 25th May 2018.
We will continue to update the Terms & Privacy page as these and other topics become clearer. Subject to any major changes, it is most likely that we will post Terms & Privacy update references to Twitter and LinkedIn. We may also post the same update to Facebook but to be honest, Facebook is not a focus for us. We discovered a long time ago that Facebook is not material for B2B buyers. If anything, I discovered that Facebook consistently delivers fraudulent results long before Facebook’s own murky data collection and usage issues became widely known.
Why we collect data
I want to use this opportunity to restate why we collect data and what we do with the data we collect.
I’m something of a stats nerd having trained in that discipline as a social science undergraduate, postgraduate Masters candidate and as a trainee accountant. I also know that stats can be deceptive. But they do provide the basis for informing us about what is important and to whom. Remember that we are always trying to serve the needs of the informed buyer and so a combination of various sets of numbers, sliced and diced in many ways is important to us.
Over the last few years, we have seen the emergence of new services that are quite good at giving us pointers towards the things that matter. And the state of the art is improving all the time.
However, we’re not stats hoarders and believe that once you’ve found a stats model that works in the context of your business model, then focus on that until the model doesn’t work. Rinse and repeat in the context of ever changing business needs.
Image credit - via © cacaroot - FotoliaRead more on: Analytics planning and data analysis 