
Good question
Now in her fourth year of ‘turnaround’, Yahoo! CEO Marissa Mayer has sent for reinforcements in the form of Google.
That may give some market watchers a sense of deja vu as back in 2008 the two firms attempted a search-tie up that was scuppered by a review by the US Department of Justice on anti-trust grounds.
But it’s a different world now of course. Yahoo!’s fall from grace might lead to it escaping the anti-trust glare quite so much. For example, Yahoo!’s share of the worldwide digital ads market will sink to 2% in 2015, compared to Google’s 30.4%, according to eMarketer.
This latest iteration of its flirtation with Google will see Yahoo! sending an unspecified share of its traffic to Google and its AdSense search advertising platform.
Yahoo! has an existing relationship to send search traffic to Microsoft’s Bing and will continue to send 51% of traffic in that direction. How much of the remaining 49% will head to Google remains to be seen.
Not much to go on
Certainly Mayer isn’t letting slip much information to date:
Yahoo! has a healthy search market share today…we’ve made large strategic changes to the business to improve the quality of our traffic and our partners, investing in our own search marketplace while introducing even more competitive monetization choices.
Over the next few quarters, we’re working to differentiate our product across both algorithmic and paid search results. We’ll also continue the momentum needed to drive our Gemini platform forward by moving additional demand to the system and building a robust marketplace.
Mobile search continues to be a critical area of investment for us and one of the key ways we are investing is by moving additional traffic and advertisers to the Gemini platform in order to fully optimize and train our ad system. Overall, we remain optimistic about growth opportunities in search.
Nevertheless, outside assistance is required. That’s meant having to renegotiate the terms of the existing Microsoft relationship as well as the new outreach to Google. Mayer says:
Our relationship with Microsoft remains strong and vibrant, and the teams have been working through the changes in our relationship and marketplace very effectively. I’d like to thank Satya [Nadella] and his team for their terrific efforts and partnership.
We have signed a three-year partnership with Google to bolster our search capabilities. This partnership will be supplementary to our existing relationship with Microsoft. The partnership with Google is non-exclusive and does not have minimum volume commitments. It covers both desktop and mobile traffic in the United States and many of our primary international markets.
We believe that by establishing partnerships with both leaders in the search space, we can achieve a competitive search dynamic that will provide a better experience for our users and advertisers and will improve our monetization.
But with Yahoo! now in bed with both Microsoft and Google and boasting its own search offerings, squaring the circle – or triangle rather – is presumably going to be more complicated. Mayer says:
As part of this process, we’re going to be investing in understanding how to balance the marketplace of our search queries in terms of how to provide the best results as well as the best monetization. We see some opportunities in terms of providing coverage of more ads on more queries. We also see some opportunities in different international regions to just achieve a different blending.
We’re very confident in our Yahoo! Gemini platform for search. When we look at mobile we actually have a different view in terms of what mobile search should be over time and what the best possible ways to monetize that are and really provide value to advertisers.
So for us the Yahoo! Gemini platform is really where we want to invest, particularly on mobile in new formats, new ideas. You should expect to see a lot of our mobile traffic move to Yahoo! Gemini and for us to basically develop a technology that does a good job competitively balancing both the Bing and Google opportunities in terms of monetization.
That Gemini investment is going to be a major priority, she adds:
We see a lot of new exciting formats in search both on mobile and on desktop, and this is an area where we can see a really nice dovetailing between our Gemini search offering as well as Gemini native. A lot of the same formats work very well in either location or in either setting, and so we really want to have both of those marketplaces grow together and ultimately strengthen each other.
Learning on the job
All of that sounds fine, but there’s a hefty element of having to ‘learn on the job’ here. Mayer offers up the following:
The analogy that works particularly well here is one of a class. If you’re given the final exam of a class on the first day of the course you don’t do very well, but by the time you’ve actually learned over the course of the class you can do much better.
Each of our search queries is essentially a test, and whether or not we can place those ads in the appropriate order in terms of quality and the ability to monetize and targeting is really the challenge. So when we first start trying that, we don’t necessarily place all of those correctly, which results in slightly lower monetization.
But each interaction with the user, each click in terms of where it lands teaches us something. And over the course of learning, we actually can improve our performance in terms of monetization, basically improve our performance on the test. And that’s the process we’re going through now.
So, more ‘jam tomorrow’ in other words, a message that investors have been hearing for 3 years now. And this ‘learning’ process is going to have an impact on the bottom line, as Mayer admits:
The primary investment for Gemini comes in the form of suppressed revenue. In order for our system to learn, we basically need to receive the search, decide that we might be willing to make less money on it, rank the ads ourselves, get the user feedback, and ultimately learn from it. Because these are reinforced learning systems, and so they basically need to see how users interact and respond to some options that we have in order to actually improve over time.
My take
Entering Mayer’s fourth year at the helm, there’s still this nagging sense of everything being a long term gambit in a fast-moving market sector. Third quarter figures yesterday saw an 8% year-on-year decline in revenues.
The messaging is annoying contradictory. Gemini is one of Yahoo!’s biggest assets. Well, yes. But it’s Gemini that’s suppressing revenues because it’s still “learning” how to make money!
Mayer now wants to “reset” Yahoo!’s focus (again), this time to focus on fewer areas. This is probably wise given that investments in areas such as high-profile original content have failed to date to deliver the additional ad revenues they were supposed to.
That’s meant a write-off of $42 million in the last quarter alone on shows such as Community, Sin City Saints and Other Space. No wonder CFO Ken Goldman cites them as part of:
what went wrong.
And still hanging over the company is Alibaba, the Chinese e-commerce giant, a share in which Yahoo! plans to spin-off for $24 billion. That was always pitched as a good thing, but that was before the Chinese market collapsed and before the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) started raising questions about the tax bill that will come with the spin-off.
Mayer told investors yesterday:
We have encountered challenges and not achieved the results we had hoped for.
That’s telling them something they’re already perfectly well aware of and something they’ve heard many times before.
The question for Mayer and her team is how long they’re willing to hear it again.
Read more on: Cloud platforms - infrastructure and architectureCRM and customer experienceDigital and content marketinge-commerceSocial 