
Can’t hear you!
There has been further evidence of a significant chasm between Cloud Service Providers (CSPs) and a growing user community making the move to exploit cloud services.
This has surfaced with the recent survey conducted by Forrester Consulting, which shows not only that both sides of the equation are failing to talk to each other, but they have little idea what to say anyway.
The survey, jointly sponsored by Iland and Cisco, was primarily designed to show the areas where new cloud users felt that the CSPs were letting them down, as well as where those new users maybe needed better education in advance of getting too deep into using cloud services. It also showed, however, a serious lack of knowledge by both parties.
The research base was 275 global respondents, the majority with 1,000+ employees and 90% of which had been involved in cloud projects over the past six months.
It has to be said, however, that the most telling impression to come out of the findings is that CSPs really do seem to have little understanding of what it is they are actually selling, or how to sell it.
There is a strong undercurrent in the results that suggests CSPs are still showing signs of wanting to sell cloud services as a package of technology that, like an applications package of old, is sold, installed, and then largely becomes the end users’ responsibility.
It would be easy to suggest that none of the findings show that only a minority of cloud users feel they have significant problems with CSPs, and at face value that is true. But it is also self-evidently true that the majority of current business users of cloud services can be numbered amongst the ‘early adopter’ community. In that context, some of the negative numbers shown in the survey might even be considered reasonable.
But the CSPs really do need to address the issues the survey has highlighted if they are to be successful in selling services to end user businesses in a way that gives users confidence. The results in the early adopter phase may be considered inevitable, but once that is past they really will be considered unacceptable.
For example, the survey showed that when it came to CSP transparency on important operational metadata, its availability was seen as incomplete by 44% of the respondents, while 43% felt that historical data was lacking, and 33% felt the same about billing and cost data.
This latter item was a particular sore point for users, with 36% reporting unexpected bills or line items and 39% being charged for resources that are not used. There were also complaints about the problems of reporting to user managements and costs and performance, with 43% reporting unexpected performance problems or outages.
Service first
When it came to the support offered by CSPs their failure to appreciate that they are selling service, not things, was shown in a set of three questions which asked respondents whether they agreed with the statement. The results are quite telling:

`I am just another account, my cloud provider does not know me or my company’ had 39% agreeing.
`If I were a bigger customer, my cloud provider would care more about my success’ had 45% agreeing.
`My provider charges me for every little question or incident’ had 33% agreeing.

On the other side of this coin, the survey showed that 31% of respondents felt they would have a better relationship with CSPs if they had the ability to talk to a person on the phone. That would lead to better, expert architectural support (desired by 41% and faster response times to help requests (47%).
The Forrester recommendations include suggestions that CSPs expose as much information as possible, while users need to ensure in advance that they can talk directly with the CSP’s support and compliance teams when they need to, and under what terms and conditions this will be allowed.
Most important of all, potential customers must not simply settle for being `just another account number’. Issues such as support and on-boarding of services are crucial elements when working with a CSP, so test drive them first.
And if the CSP objects, the response is the obvious one.
There is also an underlying step that putative cloud users need to take, and that is to establish whether the CSP they are targeting really does understand their business. When selling a service that is intended to support the business, this can be a crucial factor.
Poor marks
One of Iland’s own customers, Fusion Business Solutions, provides its own CSP perspective. Jeremy Bowman, Fusion’s Director of IT Operations, puts forward some interesting insights, such as the existence of unexpected cost is usually put down to the ability of the customer to right size the type of environment they require. This is also the key to the resources paid for and not used:
The reporting to management issue is mainly about Service Level Agreements (SLAs), and service providers do not have to provide SLAs to customers but have to expect their service providers, such as Iland, to keep to their SLAs.
But it could also be argued that, as Fusion is a specialist CSP dedicated to offering customers a particular service in which it has real expertise. The company is a BMC partner offering customers BMC ISTM services on-demand or on-premise. The company’s expertise, therefore, is to know its customers’ business needs in ISTM at least as well as they do.
My take
That ability for a CSP to know and understand the customers’ area of business is the basis of good service provision to the end user, and this survey, along with the earlier CIF survey, shows that the majority of CSPs are failing in this area.
This is in fact a market where domain expertise will sell far more than a competitive price, and where domain expertise will make customers want to stick.
And in a market where the drip-feed of the annuity business model is the rule having them want to stay is an essential business requirement.
Read more on: Analytics planning and data analysisCloud platforms - infrastructure and architectureCRM and customer experienceDigital and content marketingInfrastructureMobileThe new professional and IT as a service 