
Ben Gummer
When Theresa May called a snap election back in April, everybody thought a huge Conservative majority was inevitable. And at the time it seemed that way, what with May’s approval ratings riding high and the Tory party holding a 20-point lead over the opposition in most opinion polls.
However, following a negative campaign, some seriously misjudged manifesto commitments and a sense that May herself was shying away from public discourse, those approval ratings began to slide and the gap with Labour began to shrink.
Far from increasing the Conservative’s majority, Theresa May has actually lost the Tory party 12 seats and is 8 seats short of an outright win. We are in hung parliament territory and the race is on to form a government as quickly as possible, given the dreaded Brexit negotiations begin in just 11 days.
And one of the shock Tory seat losses of the night was in Ipswich, where Cabinet Office Minister Ben Gummer didn’t secure enough votes to hold onto his constituency, losing out to Labour’s Sandy Martin.
Despite being a shock for Gummer, who is influential amongst May’s team and played a hand in putting together the party’s manifesto, this also creates further uncertainty for the digital agenda in government.
This will mean that we are expecting our third Cabinet Office Minister in the space of just over two years, bringing into question the stability of the digital and transformation agenda – which is driven out of the Cabinet Office and managed by the Minister (whilst having heavy involvement from the Government Digital Service).
Put this within the context of a number of leadership changes at GDS and a number of valued staff members departing from the department (and elsewhere in government), it’s fair to say that the situation is fairly volatile.
Gummer launched the latest transformation strategy in February of this year – following a number of delays and leaks. Whilst it received a mixed reception, questions will now be raised when the new Minister is appointed about its future.
At the time of the launch of the transformation strategy, Gummer said:
I want to see a revolution in the way we deliver public services – so that people up and down our country feel that government is at their service at every single stage in the journey.
That is why we are today publishing our Government Transformation Strategy, outlining our commitment to reshape government by ensuring millions of people are able to access online the services they need, whenever they need. We will deliver these changes while driving efficiencies wherever possible, making considerable savings for the taxpayer.
Only by transforming the relationship between the citizen and the state – so that the latter serves the former – will we deliver the Prime Minister’s commitment to build a country that works for everyone.
Another point worth making is that during Theresa May’s time as Prime Minister, there has been a feeling that decisions and policy making has happened behind the closed doors of Number 10, without broader consultation and collaboration. This was certainly true of the Transformation Strategy, which was apparently delayed due to the Prime Minister’s office vetoing a number of points.
Senior Conservative figures are now calling for a more collaborative approach if Theresa May stays on, given the party manifesto disaster. This could mean good news for any change to digital policy going forward – the more input the better.
This week we also questioned whether or not the government should appoint a Minister for Digital Government, following a blog post by think tank the Institute for Government urging the new Prime minister to do so.
There has been a mixed response to the suggestion, but many do feel that some political clout is going to be needed to drive through substantive structural reform for new service models. Could this be an opportunity for the new Cabinet Office Minster, whomever that may be?
Nicky Stewart, commercial director at UKCloud, a large supplier of infrastructure services to government, believes that this is necessary. She said:
Nicky Stewart:
A great deal has been achieved in UK government transformation, with ‘cloud first’ and ‘digital by default’ among the policies providing a focus and purpose that has enabled the government to ramp up its digital capability and move workloads to the cloud – leading to the UK being recognized by the United Nations as the most digitally advanced government in the world.
There is a concern, however, that some of the momentum and direction has been lost though. The Institute for Government has recently called on the Government to create a digital minister role post-election, arguing that there has been a lack of digital leadership since Francis Maude left.
We would agree that the new government needs to create a minister for digital government and call for a heavy-weight to be appointed to the role. Instead of risking a loss of Prime Ministerial support in which big decisions could be avoided, unity lost and progress stalled, the government needs to ensure that there is a top-level support and heavyweight leadership driving the digital agenda forward. In addition, we believe that the Minister should have a key role in ensuring that government’s digital purchasing decisions sure up the UK’s digital economy, and help get it in the best of health for Brexit.
My take
There’s so much at stake and we look like we are heading for a volatile few months at the heart of government, let alone when looking at the digital agenda. I’ve got a feeling that transformation and digital won’t be at the top of anyone’s agenda, as the Conservatives try to hold together a coalition and the government tries to figure out what it is doing with Brexit.
Image credit - Images free for commercial use Disclosure - UKCloud is a diginomica/government premier partner at time of writing. Read more on: CentralDigital government and public services

