
Institutional Investor’s recent article “Coming Downturn. Cranking Leverage. What Could Go Wrong?” caught my eye. The article discussed several forces in play with private equity financed deals and these factors could be relevant in the recent effort to take Ultimate Software private. These included:
Most private equity fund managers expect that a downturn is coming — but they’re not cutting the amount of debt they’re putting on companies.
Loading debt onto a company just as the economy is cooling off may not be wise. If the debt they must service is barely doable in the short-term, it could be unmanageable in a downturn. The operations just might not generate the cash needed to pay the creditors. Getting the debt just right is part art and part science. But, all it takes is a bad quarter, the loss of a whale account, new pricing pressure from a competitor, a slumping economy, key management defections, loss of founders, etc. to make the debt payment ability a precarious situation.
With the Ultimate deal, there’s no word on how much debt the company will have to service. In a previous post, I showed some theoretical math on how onerous debt service costs could be. I have something of an update on this below.
Using a lot of debt to finance this deal could work in a booming economy as the company can grow aggressively and generate a lot of free cash flow. That cash can pay down debt (and thus reduce the size of the debt service costs) or make the debt costs as a percent of sales get lower over time.
What’s a reasonable amount debt for this deal?
Let’s go back to the Institutional Investor piece for more guidance. Specifically, they tell us:
And they’re still in love with leverage. In this year’s survey, BDO asked private equity firms for the first time about debt and new companies. About one-third of sponsors said they’re putting more debt (more than 3 times EBITDA, or earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation, and amortization) on new companies, while one-quarter say they’re using average leverage, in the range of two to three times EBITA.
According to Yahoo Finance, Ultimate recently ended its last fiscal year with a $132.87 million in EBITDA (i.e., earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization). Acquiring debt of 3X EBITDA would mean that Ultimate would incur just under $400 million in debt. At approximately 10% annual interest for this debt would trigger a $40 million annual debt service cost. For a growing firm like Ultimate, that might well work. Higher debt loads would likely start to impact Ultimate’s cost structure, R&D efforts and/or global expansion goals.
A $400 million debt figure would barely put a dent in the approximately $11 billion proposed purchase price of Ultimate. The remaining $10.6 billion would all have to come from the investment monies of the Ultimate buyer syndicate. Those firms include: Hellman & Friedman, Blackstone Group, GIC, Canada Pension Plan Investment Board (CPPIB) and JMI Equity. I suspect that this syndicate includes GIC and CPPIB so that all of the needed capital doesn’t have to come from one or two of the larger private equity funds the other firms possess.
When I asked one of Ultimate’s competitors what they thought the debt amount for this deal might be, they figured it would run $3 billion or approximately 22X EBITDA. At that level of debt, the servicing costs would likely run around $300 million annually. For a company planning on growth, they couldn’t do much growing after paying those servicing costs.

Source – Yahoo Finance
The 3X debt to EBITDA figure mentioned earlier might be great advice for mature firms in mature industries. That metric likely applies to a broad range of industries and not just for software. Corporate Finance Institute has this nice webpage showing an example of McDonalds Net Debt/EBITDA.
How much debt a privately held Ultimate could afford is a great question. Again, referencing Ultimate’s latest financial data, the company had $1.14 billion in revenues. But when you factor out cost of revenue, SG&A and R&D, you’re only left with $83 million in net income (even less once you take out taxes). The only way to assume more debt is to cut costs in those previously mentioned areas (i.e., Sales, SG&A and R&D). Ultimate’s new owners will have to decide both the amount of debt they’ll seek AND whether (and how deep) they’ll need to cut costs to service the debt. The two decisions are inextricably intertwined.

Source – Yahoo Finance
Could Ultimate assume debt of $1 billion or more? It’s possible but they’d have to reduce their SG&A costs (or other costs) by $60-80 million annually. Given the amount of focus the deal announcement had about retaining Ultimate’s executives and the company’s placement on Great Places to Work lists, it will be hard for the firm to cut a lot of headcount without triggering PR blowback.
So, my best guess, and it’s only a guess, is that new debt will be around $500 million to $1 billion.
Will this debt propel growth?
The deal announcement and pronouncements from others indicated that growth was to be a key driver for Ultimate in the years to come. They’ll want to expand geographically and they’ll also want to expand their product footprint. Geographic expansion requires sales people, offices and country-specific functionality – none of these come cheap. A larger product footprint requires R&D monies – also not cheap. If the new owners are patient, these growth opportunities could be done organically.
But if patience is in short supply, then acquisitions might be the faster route to a more global Ultimate as well as an Ultimate with more products to sell (and cross-sell).
In fact, cross-selling acquired products is something that SAP and Oracle have done a lot of in recent years. Since those firms already have dozens of offices globally, a marketing machine, lots of top executive contacts in major firms, and, a small army of salespeople at their disposal, then giving these people another (acquired and fully functional) product or two to sell can really goose top line revenues quickly. The best products for these firms to buy are often newer, hot solutions that have barely cracked the global market. Integrating these solutions with their legacy products is a can that often gets kicked down the road for another team to sort out years after the cross-selling has slowed down.
Will Ultimate’s new owners actually help Ultimate grow? This sobering statistic from Institutional Investor is worth noting:
Only 17 percent are investing in the operations of their portfolio companies, which is notable given how important the improvement of underlying businesses has become to investors’ overall private equity returns.
My guess is that this investor group will go contrary to that statistic and invest in Ultimate’s growth. Of course, that could change if something happens to the economy, the company’s financial condition or some other factor.
What’s the next liquidity event?
Private equity firms aren’t buy’em and hold’em kinds of companies. They often look for a liquidity event to occur within seven years of the deal. Sometimes, the private equity firm sees an acquired firm as worth more in parts than as a whole. Chunks of the company are sold off with PE investors reaping rewards (and management fees) along the way. Sometimes, the PE firm carves up the company keeping the best assets for itself and fobbing off other parts to third parties (i.e., asset stripping). Sometimes, PE firms may rollup several acquired firms into a larger, and theoretically, more efficient firm worthy of a premium price. And, some deals are designed to organically grow the firm to a materially improved revenue and profitability level at which point the company is taken public or sold again.
But, through it all, the company (or its assets) eventually get sold. It’s how the PE firms can return the capital entrusted to them by their investors. No one is giving the PE firms the permanent use of their money. So, who would buy a bigger, more global Ultimate a few years down the road? The Starr Conspiracy recently opined:
If you look at basic cash on hand, there are two logical options: Alphabet Inc. (i.e., Google) or Microsoft. Apple, Facebook, and Amazon would be longshots with the cash potential. The final interesting possibility here is Salesforce, which contributed heavily to a recent $20 million round of funding, designed to fuel the growth and international expansion of their platinum partner, Simplus. While CNBC and others have recommended Apple buy Salesforce in the past, Salesforce acquiring Ultimate to combine traditional HCM and traditional CRM might actually make Salesforce itself a more attractive acquisition for someone looking to topple the Microsoft-LinkedIn partnership.
Though that partnership hasn’t fully fleshed itself out, let’s remember that $26 billion is significantly more than $11 billion. So for all the hot takes on Ultimate — and they deserve to be stated — it’s still less than half of LinkedIn’s perceived value a few years ago. Does that discussion factor into what happens with Ultimate next?
I don’t find a lot of value in speculating on an acquisition that might or might not happen years and years from now. Let’s wait to see who actually buys Ultimate, how the new owners recast the firm and what kind of results they can book in the next couple of years. At that point, we can open up the future sale discussion.
My take
The deal that was announced a couple of weeks ago is still not out of the go-shop window. So, any discussion is academic for now.
The money behind a deal is always the most interesting and important issue to comprehend as it foreshadows the potential strategy of the company post-deal. Why so few people aren’t examining this escapes me.
And, of all of the monetary concerns, the debt load is the one to watch. Too much debt and the company’s growth, headcount, culture or other factors could be adversely affected.
I’d expect the new owners to put their stamp, of sorts, on the post-deal Ultimate. They will likely bring in a team of their experts to examine the company’s internal processes, systems and more. They’ll likely outsource some functions, trim some budgets and/or headcount, and, possibly change out some people, too. It’s the new owners’ prerogative. Smart buyers, though, try not to introduce too many disruptions all at once. We’ll have to see how this new ownership group manages things and then determine if it’s going to work.
We should know a lot more once the 50-day go-shop period lapsed. Until then…
 
Image credit - Freeimages/MokraRead more on: HCM and the digital future of workHR admin and payroll 