

Morrisons has had a difficult few years. It was slow to recognise the demand from customers for a multi-channel supermarket chain, which resulted in it falling behind the likes of Asda and Tesco.
To play catch up it signed a 25 year deal with Ocado to carry out its online deliveries. However, given the length of the contract and the fact that Ocado is yet to cover some of Morrisons’ core areas, such as the North of England and Scotland, it is thought that current chief executive David Potts isn’t happy with the situation he inherited from his predecessor.
Add to the mix that there has been increased price competition in the sector from the likes of Aldi and Lidl, it’s easy to see why Morrisons hasn’t been fairing too well.
Today’s year-end results indicate the struggles the supermarket has faced in getting back on track. For the year ending 31 January, Morrisons reported underlying pre-tax profit of £242 million, which is down from £345 million the previous year.
Turnover fell 4.1% to £16.1 billion and like-for-like sales were down 2%.
Going forward
 The company declared in its forward looking statements that during 2016/17 it expects to realise the remainder of its £1 billion three-year cost savings target, but added that the “turnaround will take time and will continue to require sustained investment”.
But it added that in the medium term the supermarket should see £50 million to £100 million in incremental underlying profit before tax from “broader business opportunities”, which have been identified within online, manufacturing, wholesale and popular and useful services.
From chief executive David Potts’ comments, it’s easy to see that digital, multi-channel and investments in the customer journey are core to the company’s plans. He said:
By improving the shopping trip for customers, we have started the journey to turnaround the business and make our supermarkets strong. Our listening programme is informing and shaping the six priorities that are now driving the improvements that customers are noticing.
Our strong balance sheet and cash flow provide the platform for turnaround and growth, but what makes us truly unique as food maker and shopkeeper is the personality and dedication of our thousands of colleagues. I am confident these strengths will help us fix, rebuild and grow Morrisons.
Phases two and three
Investors were told today that phase 1 of the supermarket’s turnaround plan focuses on ‘fixing’ things, which essentially meant delivering a better shopping trip for customers and stabilising like-for-like sales. Morrisons needed to cut costs and operate more efficiently.
It said that sales improved during the year, which Q4 performing well, and that it remained confident about cutting £1 billion in costs by 2017.
However, Morrisons is now moving on to Phases 2 and 3, which focus on rebuilding and growing the business. Investors were told “we will turnaround Morrisons and become a broader, stronger business”.
As part of this, Morrisons’ recent deal with Amazon was highlighted as a good example of how the supermarket chain can grow to become “broader and stronger”.
At the end of last month it was revealed that Morrisons had entered into a wholesale agreement with Amazon, for it to deliver the supermarket’s fresh foods. Amazon’s investments in logistics, where in some parts of the UK it can have goods at your door in under an hour, could become a real competitive advantage for Morrisons.
When the deal was announced, I wrote:
The problem is that for Morrisons to continue competing with the likes of Tesco and Asda, which dominate the online delivery market, it needs to be able to differentiate its delivery service, or at the very least offer a service that matches those that have been doing it for a few years already.
To do it itself it would need to both exit the Ocado agreement (costly) and invest in its own delivery network (also costly). The alternative is to partner. And if you’re going to partner with anyone, Amazon is a pretty good bet – when considering what it’s capable of in terms of customer experience journeys and delivery times.
Amazon Now, for example, can see goods delivered via a mobile app delivered to your front door in under an hour. That’s a differentiator that the likes of Tesco and Asda may find difficult to compete with.
My take
Still a long way to go for Morrisons, but it’s willingness to partner and its focus on customer journey will stand it in good stead. Will it be able to catch up before the other supermarkets make their own investments? It’s a hard one to call.
Read more on: Retail e-commerce and the omni-channel 