
Cheers – not this year, boys
Whatever else comes out of the continuing troubles at grocery retailer Morrisons, one good thing has emerged in the run-up to Christmas – we won’t have to endure endless adverts with Ant and Dec getting their Christmas dinner from the UK’s fourth-biggest supermarket chain.
The TV twosome are among the latest casualties of the ongoing overhaul of Morrisons corporate strategy under new CEO David Potts, formerly of Tesco. Rather than paying out millions of pounds to Saturday night TV’s cheeky chappies, Morrisons will be showcasing its own staff for its festive marketing campaign.
That’s a nice idea, if a touch ironic at a time when more than 2,000 Morrisons employees are suing their employer over a data breach that resulted in salary and bank details of 100,000 staffers being posted online. (This was the work of former Morrisons auditor Andrew Skelton, who was jailed for 8 years in July, who leaked the data after receiving an official warning him not to use the corporate post room to send out personal eBay packages.)
But elsewhere Morrisons performance still makes for grim reading. We’ve covered a great deal about the firm’s abortive forays into online and digital as well as its excessively-complicated Match and More loyalty scheme.
Match and More  has now been simplified, dropping the price matching element and becoming a more conventional points collection loyalty scheme. This hasn’t exactly brought about a ringing endorsement from customers though, with Potts admitting that reaction has been “muted” so far.
Last week the supermarket announced quarterly sales at established stores dropped 2.6%, excluding fuel, in the three months to 1 November, compared with a 2.4% drop in the previous three months. Total sales excluding fuel slid 2%, worse than market analysts had expected. Online sales contributed just 1% to third quarter sales.
That leads Potts to come out with blandishments such as:
The business is moving at pace on the long journey towards improving the shopping trip for customers.
A long journey
As well as scrapping the Match and More format, this journey has consisted to date of closing 21 supermarkets, axing 720 head office jobs, and selling off 140 of its M Local convenience stores.
On the online front, Morrisons launched in partnership with Ocado in January 2014 and Potts says that talks are underway on how to extend the reach. Currently, around 52% of UK addresses can receive a Morrisons delivery.
Potts cites Scotland as in need of particular attention. There are 60 Morrisons stores in Scotland but no online delivery options. That’s lead to the firm losing around 19% of sales there to online channels from Sainsbury and Asda. He adds:
We are trying to figure out how we can reach that with our contractual partner and use our own software.
That might not be too easy. For its part, Ocado is playing hardball with Morrisons, warning it that it is tied-in to a 25-year contract that prevents it from launching its own online business. Duncan Tatton-Brown, Ocado’s finance director, said in September:
Ocado is the exclusive provider of online grocery services for Morrisons. That is the terms of the deal for the remaining 23 years. The contract will prevent [Morrisons] launching another service.
If [Morrisons] want coverage elsewhere in the UK they have to come through us. We are happy to have that discussion. The decision is theirs. Who provides it is us.
In other words, getting out of this contract would be a very expensive proposition, and not guaranteed to succeed, but it ties Morrisons hands when it comes to an online presence. Potts is clearly wary of the cost implications of further investment in internet activity:
It has been a good start to have made that investment, but I have to make that business work, and any further internet investment has to carry a higher hurdle in terms of its return on capital invested.
That may be sensible given Morrisons current position. Aldi, one of its rivals, and a major contributor to the pressures the firm is under, has announced it will start offering online delivery on some items, but will be steering clear of groceries as the online grocery business is complicated and hard to make money on. Matthews Barnes, Aldi UK and Ireland hanging director, emphatically states:
Groceries are not on the radar.
But lack of investment in digital cost Morrisons dearly before and could do so again. In a note to clients, Bank of America Merrill Lynch warns:
The pull back by the group on bringing its IT up to date with competitors (in particular, putting [a] sales ordering system on hold) combined with the ongoing risk of some price irrational behaviour being triggered in the UK, make us cautious.
Meanwhile, self-service tills are being introduced in 40 stores a week, with sales via self-scan machines up 10%  on the previous version. Potts also wants to see less reliance on voucher schemes:
It’s not quite cold turkey because we’re still doing some vouchers. Retailers have always considered reaching for vouchers when trade’s a bit sticky because they tend to give you a shot in the arm…it’s always been considered to be slightly more promiscuous trade than the underlying shopping trip improvements you can make around loyalty.
Coupon shopping simply isn’t as big a thing in the UK as it is in the US. According to research from rival Tesco this week, more than a third (35%) of supermarket shoppers have never used a price matching scheme in store, while 80% never have online. Matt Davies, Tesco UK and Ireland chief executive, says:
Shoppers tell us price matching vouchers are a pain and don’t really help them. We all know it can be stressful and awkward when you have to rummage through your wallet to find a price match voucher.
Successful?
So is this working? Potts insists that research shows that 60% of customers are now “very satisfied” with their shop at Morrisons, up from 51% a year ago. He says:
It’s quite a challenge for customers to say, yes, they were very satisfied. We’ve made progress. Our stores are easier to get around, they’re cleaner and staff have got a smile on their face.
Shore Capital’s Clive Black argues that there is some progress:
The team is trying to simplify things for customers, operatives and suppliers, so creating a platform to drive volumes, margins and ultimately shareholder returns.
This means taking away costly whistles and bells such as coupons and vouchers and replacing them with a more straightforward offer revolving around product, price and promotion. Such a change is to the short-term detriment of sales.
But not everyone is convinced to say the least. John Ibbotson of retail consultancy Retail Vision, bluntly states:
To claim you are making good progress on the back of these numbers is bordering on the delusional.
In fairness, Potts is doing as well as anyone probably could but he has arguably received one of the biggest hospital passes in UK retail history. It’s hard to see Morrisons ever making a full recovery, and it’s potentially ripe for takeover.
Only question is, who will buy it?
Morrisons is entering the critical Christmas period in near critical condition.
My take
No Ant and Dec – it’s a Christmas miracle!
More seriously, Morrisons remains in deep trouble.
As for those new self-service tills, my local branch has been upgraded to incorporate them. The old self-service check-outs were dreadful. The new ones are triumphantly even worse, asking if you’re using your own bag, then freaking out every time an item is put into that bag.
I’ll be sticking with Ocado for my turkey delivery.
Read more on: CRM and customer experiencee-commerceRetail e-commerce and the omni-channel 