
 
A report put out by the UK government this week highlights many worrying examples of how firms are not sufficiently protecting themselves against the ever-growing threat of cyber attacks. Not only this, but the research points to a number of areas in which the business and IT are either not properly aligned in their approach to cyber protection, or are both blissfully unaware of their actual level of protection.
The report itself has been produced in collaboration with the insurance market and a number of top UK companies, with the aim of raising awareness of the issue of cyber security insurance and to position the UK as a world centre for the market.
And considering that 81% of large businesses and 60% of small businesses suffered a security breach in 2014, according to a separate government report, with more and more relying upon their digital channels for revenue, this is a board-level issue that senior executives are attempting to get to grips with.
It has been estimated that a serious security breach at a large firm costs between £600,000 and £1.5 million to rectify, whilst at SMEs the costs typically vary between £65,000 and £115,000.
The problem, of course, is that the speed at which these attacks take place and the level of sophistication is accelerating at a faster pace than organisations can build up resilience. This is accentuated by the fact that firms are exposed to risks in third party suppliers, which make up part of the any given company’s supply chain, and could well be a less-protected SME.
However, the government believes that the insurance market can play a critical role in getting firms better protected – not only by offering premiums that cover for any losses as the result of an attack – but by acting as a control, whereby the insurance companies ask the right questions and make sure that firms are up to a certain level of security.
Part of this process, the report highlights, involves making sure that companies stop viewing cyber as an ‘IT-only’ issue and instead focus on its key commercial risks, which have the potential to impact large parts of an operation.
Upon the launch of the report, Francis Maude, Minister for the Cabinet Office and Paymaster General, said:

It is part of this government’s long-term economic plan to make the UK one of the safest places in the world to do business online. The UK’s insurance market is world renowned and we want it to be the same in relation to cyber risks. The market has extensive knowledge and experience of more established risks to help businesses manage and mitigate relatively new cyber risks.
Insurance is not a substitute for good cyber security but is an important addition to a company’s overall risk management. Insurers can help guide and incentivise significant improvements in cyber security practice across industry by asking the right questions of their customers on how they handle cyber threats.

Mark Weil, CEO of Marsh UK & Ireland, the insurance firm that helped write the report, highlighted that firms need to up their risk management significantly. He said:

Cyber security and the importance of managing cyber risk as a business risk is something we take very seriously at RBS. At RBS we have an ambition to be a bank that supports small businesses and helps them to grow. We see this growth going hand in hand with strong and resilient companies, both large and small. That is why we’re delighted to support this report and encourage further effort from industry and government to help SMEs stay strong in today’s digital world.

One of the most revealing results from the research was that despite the existence of insurance solutions for most forms of cyber risk, it turns out that very few firms are even aware that ‘cyber’ is an insurable risk. Not only this, most of those that are informed about such cover, and believe that they are protected against such risks, don’t actually have the protection that they believe they do.
The report found that 52% of CEOs or CIOs of large organisations believe that they have insurance that would cover them in the event of a breach, but only 10% of firms have cyber cover which is either stand-alone cover or implicit in other policies.
The actual penetration of standalone cyber insurance products among UK large businesses is currently at approximately 2%.
The report states:

This evidence suggests a failure by insurers to communicate their value to business leaders in coping with cyber risk. This may, in part, reflect the new and therefore uncertain nature of this risk, with boards more focused on security improvement and recovery planning than on risk transfer. It nevertheless risks leaving insurance marginalised from one of the key risks facing firms.

Interestingly, however, despite the government’s involvement in this research and it wanting to promote the availability of insurance to firms, it hinted in the report that it isn’t yet willing to become a ‘backstop’ for a market that is estimated to be exposed to £100 billion in losses.
The scale of the risk in the cyber security market is greater than many others, given that it is non-physical. As the report highlights it is possible for insurers to suffer losses from a vast number of clients across different geographies as a result of a single event. That creates aggregation risk, for which an insurer or reinsurer could find itself burdened with catastrophic losses, and which might result in the non-payment of claims.
The report outlines:

Despite the lack of a clear consensus of the size of the possible maximum loss that the insurance industry could face, at the moment most insurers are comfortable with the size of their total exposure and the market does not face any supply constraints in the short term. Indeed, underwriters participating in this project have expressed a strong appetite to grow this line of
The government wants UK brokers to play a role
business.
It is possible that aggregate exposure either does already or will soon become a problem for the market to absorb, since the fact that such a risk has not yet occurred is no doubt encouraging the market to continue to grow its exposure.
While some market participants have questioned whether a possible Government backstop may be necessary given the scale of possible exposure, there is no conclusive evidence of the need for such a solution at present.
Other challenges in creating a pool in advance of systemic claims materialising involve the definition of what events and losses would be in scope (in particular, given the complexity referred to earlier of how cyber is treated in existing policies), the lack of data to model the level and price of risk to be transferred, and a lack of consensus among insurers about the need for recourse to Government support.

Finally, the report includes a number of recommendations that should be taken into account going forward – many of which include the government’s own Cyber Essentials certification, which is a new Government-backed and industry supported scheme to guide businesses in protecting themselves against cyber threats. These include:
For insurers and government:

participating insurers will include the Cyber Essentials certification as part of their cyber risk assessment for SMEs when backed by a suitable insurance policy in order to improve their supply chain resilience – this will simplify the application process for businesses
a new forum will be established by government with the insurance sector, including the ABI and Lloyds, on data and insight exchange for policy discussions

For businesses:

firms should review their management of cyber risk – effective risk management needs to include a board-level owner for cyber risk, a joined up recovery plan and the use of stress testing to confirm financial resilience against cyber threats

For insurance brokers:

participating insurers will include Cyber Essentials accreditation as part of their risk assessment for SMEs to encourage greater adoption – Marsh will launch a new cyber insurance product for SMEs which will absorb the cost of Cyber Essentials certification for the majority of firms, which the government encourages other brokers to follow
brokers should provide firms with a cyber assurance statement to give the board confidence of their comprehensive cover

For the market:

Lloyds will work with UK Trade & Investment to market the cyber capabilities of the London insurance market globally
a new multi-disciplinary task-force set up by CityUK, aimed at bringing together different sectors to discuss a joint UK cyber offering related to insurance for export

My take
Whilst insurance may act as a useful tool to recoup losses suffered as a result of a cyber attack, this wouldn’t necessarily protect a firm against any reputational damage suffered. However, if insurance can act as a control that sets a certain bar for firms to measure themselves against, by not letting them get insured until they reach a certain standard, that may improve the situation in the market.
[mailmunch-form id=”14637″]
Read more on: Digital government and public servicesSecurity

