
The UK government faced a bit of a community backlash in February when it emerged that one of the key frameworks for buying digital services in Whitehall was nothing more than a ‘body shopping’ front for cheap skills.
In what was somewhat of an unprecedented move, design agencies publicly spoke out against the problems with the Digital Services Framework (DSF) and the buying process.
DSF was introduced to complement commodity services that could be procured through the far more successful G-Cloud framework, with the idea being that off-the-shelf IT could be bought where possible and then digital services/skills could be introduced to build specialist projects elsewhere.
However, with a lengthy procurement process for DSF and the use of a reverse auction process (where only the cheapest suppliers were selected), agencies were only being brought in to complement existing skills or projects happening in departments (body-shopping), rather than helping government achieve new digital outcomes.
At the time I said that the Government Digital Service needs to understand digital isn’t a commodity service and Harry Metcalf, MD at digital design agency dxw, one of the first suppliers to speak out against DSF, said:
A good company is more than the sum total of its staff’s LinkedIn profiles. As big a part of the quality and effectiveness of a company as its individuals are its culture and its shared experience. Its collective sense of purpose and mission, and its corporate memory. And the effectiveness of its teams, based on their trust, friendship, mutual respect and understanding. In dxw’s experience, clients value these things as much as they value our technical expertise.
Taking a handful of developers from one company, some designers from another, a delivery manager from a third and co-locating them in an unfamiliar place, with unfamiliar management and unfamiliar process, hoping that they develop the skills of a strong team and then disbanding them after a few months is short-sighted at best, and unworkable at worst. It overlooks the value that can be gained from a close working relationship with an organisation whose skills and values are complementary to those of the buyer.
A week of heated public discussion resulted in Tony Singleton, the lead on the G-Cloud and DSF for the Government Digital Service, backing down and admitting that things needed to (and would!) change. I praised Singleton and GDS for the move, highlighting that this isn’t how government had worked in the past and was a sign of positive change.
We don’t want to hear about frameworks
 Since then Singleton and his team have been carrying out pretty extensive market engagement activities in an attempt to understand what the buyers in Whitehall really need and how best it can get the suppliers to them.
At the end of last week a blog post was published by GDS that gave us a hint of what is to come, where the department said that the latest framework for buying digital services isn’t going to be an ‘iteration’, but rather a complete redesign.
And that instead of ‘Digital Services Framework 3’, it’s now going to be renamed as ‘Digital Outcomes and Specialists’. Note the lack of the use of the word ‘framework’ this time around. This is deliberate. The blog notes:
User research and feedback from our recent regional events tells us that a significant number of public sector buyers find framework names confusing. We want to move away from using frameworks as brand names. The frameworks should sit behind and inform the Digital Marketplace service rather than being an integral part of it.
Buyers will simply  need to know there’s a single place, the Digital Marketplace, that they can go to to buy what they need.
This does make sense to me. As a buyer I wouldn’t be interested in knowing which framework pertained to which services or product I need. I would want one place to go to (the Digital Marketplace) where I knew I could buy cloud, or support for a project, or design skills, or whatever.
This does, however, raise interesting questions for what it means for the G-Cloud brand name that the UK government has built up and championed around the world – it truly is a recognisable product that is praised internationally. Is that now going to be less of a thing?
I wouldn’t necessarily say that’s a bad thing. But if that’s the case, GDS should put the same efforts behind the Digital Marketplace branding and sell it as the new and improved government store for all things digital.
Digital Outcomes and Specialists
Off the back of last week’s blog, GDS then released another post about the changes that we could expect from the new Digital Outcomes and Specialists (framework). And from the couple of people that I’ve spoken to in the industry about the detail that has been released, it seems that all the changes that have been made so far are being positively received. Progress!
GDS outlined the three new types of services that will be procured under Digital Outcomes and Specialists. These are:
Digital Outcomes – Suppliers in the digital outcomes category will provide solutions to research, test, design, build, deliver, evolve, retire or support a digital service during the phases outlined in the  Service Design Manual.
Digital Specialists as a Service – Digital specialist suppliers provide their expertise as a service. The various roles and how to build a good service  can also be found in the  Service Design Manual. Government departments and teams often need digital specialists to deliver a specific piece of work on a service, programme or project. Specialists will be commissioned to deliver a specific outcome with defined deliverables.
User Research Studios and Participants – The first two criteria in the  Digital by Default Service Standard  outline the importance of understanding user needs through user research. Obviously important to digital transformation in government.
The blog also explained how GDS is attempting to make contracts simpler for buyers and suppliers, by reducing the length of the call-off contract between the frameworks and by simplifying terms and conditions and other requirements. Basically, putting things into plain english.
It also explained how Digital Outcomes and Specialists should improve on the evaluation process, with regards to how the suppliers get onto the framework and how buyers should evaluate their offerings on the Digital Marketplace.
For example, GDS is now talking about how buyers will be encouraged to talk to suppliers in an open and transparent forum before they start the tender process. I’m sure this will be hugely welcomed by both parties, as it’s very hard to spec out a list of requirements when you don’t really know the realities of what you need.
GDS is now also going to encourage face-to-face meetings between buyers and suppliers, so as to not only get a better understanding of the project, but to also make sure that there is a good cultural fit between the two.
There will also be some improvements in terms of feedback options and buyers will be encouraged to be clearer and more succinct in their briefs.
My take
On the whole I’m pretty pleased with what is coming out of this process so far. GDS is doing what it should have done the first time around and is engaging with buyers and the supplier community about what they need and how it can best be provided.
Execution will of course be key, but all the right noises are being made. Let’s hope spend through the framework won’t be so disappointing third time around….
Read more on: G-Cloud and the Digital Marketplace

