
David Chou at Half Moon Bay
A major theme at last week’s Connected Enterprise event was health care disruption. After his appearance on the digital health care panel, I caught up with David Chou. Formerly the CIO of the University of Mississippi Medical Center, Chou shared his story of managing change. He spoke to overcoming leadership obstacles such as his relatively young age in a CIO role. We also hit on the future of digital health care, and the roadblocks in the way.
Jon Reed: What was your role at the Mississippi Medical Center?
David Chou: I was the CIO. They’re an academic medical center that comprises of three verticals: healthcare, higher education, and research. I had direct responsibilities for all technology across three verticals.
Reed: And what was the hardest part of your job?
Chou: It’s a unique ecosystem, because it’s the only medical school in the state. So if you grew up in the state of Mississippi, and you want to be a doctor, that’s the only place you can go to get your education. So we had to create this whole ecosystem of experience. Coming in as a student, you need to have a great experience going through your lectures. But we also need to start embedding you, understanding the technology platform – because you may potentially be a doctor there. So my mission was to get them involved and educated early on with technology.
“The future of health care is keeping patients away”
Reed: For those who missed your digital health care panel, what were the highlights?
Chou: On the panel today, a lot of it, we all talked about patients-as-digital-consumers. That’s what we want. We want that same experience across healthcare – just like any other verticals. But the reality is that in health care, we’ve adopted a major transformation going from paper to electronic the last few years. Most institutions are still playing catch up. Folks are finally starting to move away from focus on ERM implementations. Now they’re focusing on the next phase.
But what is that next phase? And what is that digital experience going to be like? I don’t think we’ve figured it out yet. We’re still dabbling in it – no one is putting it in full force. One of the things I shared on the panel is that the reimbursement model is not helping health care move towards digital.
Reed: Why is the reimbursement model broken?
Chou: We always talk about population and health wellness. That’s all about keeping the patient healthy don’t have to come to the hospital. The future of health care is keeping patients away. But the current reimbursement model is similar to the airlines. How many seats can you fill on this plane? You want it filled up. Same with health care. You still want to fill up your beds, because for a majority, that’s how you earn your revenue. So when you think about it from that perspective, how much wellness and prevention can you do before it affects your bottom line?
Reed: A sobering thought. Any ways out of that logjam?

Chou: When I look at health care globally, we could talk about Singapore, we could talk about Asia and Taiwan – they all have a national patient identifier. The reimbursement model is all coming in from the government, one pot. So for countries like that, it’s easier to go digital, because you know what to expect in terms of revenues.
Reed: Right – but is there any hope for reimbursement reform in the U.S.?
Chou: Well, people are at least talking about payment reform. Just look at the insurance model right now: a lot of folks are moving toward a high deductible plan. When you have a high deductible plan, you’re almost self-insured, you’re almost paying out of pocket right now. Because of that cash model, consumers can have more choices. They’re going to be more selective. So whichever health care player is going to provide that convenience factor – that on-demand health care – that’s who the patients are going to go to. I don’t think they care about the continuity of care, or their allegiance to a brand anymore.
Digital change is culture change
Reed: And what thorny problems did you tackle at the Mississippi Medical Center?
Chou: Changing the brand of the department. Changing the brand of the facility. The culture has been: “Let’s call IT only when we have a problem.” When I was there, I tried to be a business value partner. The new approach was: “Tell me what kind of problem you have. Let me help you solve that problem.” That was a big cultural change.
Reed: I was expecting you to tell me about the systems you implemented…
Chou: The ERM, the ERP systems – I think those come with the territory. I don’t think anyone should brag about them. We all have software systems, but how do change a culture? How do you create a different environment that’s digital?
Reed: So how did you foster that change?
Chou: Lots of communication. Lots of discussion with the team. They have to be accountable. That mostly came down to leadership and coaching.
Reed: And how many on the team were you trying to influence?
Chou: I had 400 on the team, with six direct reports and a budget of about $82 million. CIOs need to start thinking of themselves as the CEO of a department. I’m accountable for the P&L for this department. I need to make sure I’m within the budget; I need make sure I’m providing leadership; I need to be involved with the finances.
Dealing with pushback and measuring results
Reed: And did you encounter any pushback? There must have been people on your team who were significantly older than you.
Chou: Oh, definitely. All the time. And it’s not just the age thing – it’s the age plus the message.
Any time you are trying to be a change agent, it’s tough. People naturally do not want to change.
Reed: And how did they change?
Chou: I won’t say they changed drastically, but slowly they understood what needs to be done. The good folks are always engaged. But the majority had that public sector mentality, and were comfortable doing what they had always done.
Reed: Did you have moments where you could tell they saw the benefits?
Chou: I’m a big believer in social media. The first time I stepped on campus, I said, “Hey guys, I need you to help me promote the department. I need you guys to have a LinkedIn profile.” Not even one had a LinkedIn profile. They said, “Why do I need one? Do I need to get one because you want me to get other job offers?” I said, “No, you need to have one for yourself first. First of all, you need to build your own personal brand. Second, I’m trying to have a bigger mission to have the department out there for recruiting.”
Reed: That’s a risk also right? When people raise their social profile, you could lose them.
Chou: That’s right – people got good benefits out of it. Some of them moved into new positions. Which is fine, I’m okay with that. Because it made our own workplace more appealing.
Reed: And from are more traditional ROI viewpoint?
Chou: From a pure technology aspect, the system has been more stable. We put in a lot governance processes just to increase communication between application team and the hardware technology team. We didn’t have downtime when I was there – our system never went down.
Reed: Any final advice to aspiring digital CIOs?
Chou: You main new skill is sales. That’s one new job you’re involved with in every department, and every line of business. Because of all the operational connections that we had, the business was able to see how a more engaged IT department can make a difference in their lives.
Yes, you probably still manage the help desk and break/fix, but the future CIO is really about using technology to build a competitive advantage.
End note: this is part of a series of digital health care interviews I conducted at Constellation’s Connected Enterprise – stay tuned for more writeups and analysis.
Image credits: Photo of David Chou by Jon Reed, Half Moon Bay.
Disclosure: Constellation Research puts on the Connected Enterprise Event and provided for my conference attendance and hotel. Diginomica has no financial relationship with Constellation, but Den Howlett serves on Constellations’s Board of Directors.
Read more on: Frictionless enterpriseHealthcare transformationUse cases 