
MPs on the Public Accounts Committee have heavily criticised the Cabinet Office for not effectively coordinating and managing the protection of government and citizen data across Whitehall, leaving the UK vulnerable to the increasing number of cyber attacks.
A report outlining the many number of ways in which the Cabinet Office isn’t taking its central role seriously in the management of government data comes shortly after the Chancellor of the Exchequer announced his new £1.9 billion cyber security strategy.
Core to the strategy was the announcement of a new National Cyber Security Centre, which will be based out of Victoria in Central London, and be the UK’s “outward facing authority on cyber”.
However, MPs on the influential committee stated that the Centre’s role and scope still remains unclear.
Equally, the report raises concerns about the security skills gap currently facing government department – at a time when the Cabinet Office is still yet to find a replacement Director of Data, after Paul Maltby left his position at the end of last year.
Meg Hillier MP, Chair of the PAC, said:
Government has a vital role to play in cyber security across society but it needs to raise its game.
Its approach to handling personal data breaches has been chaotic and does not inspire confidence in its ability to take swift, coordinated and effective action in the face of higher-threat attacks.
The threat of cyber crime is ever-growing yet evidence shows Britain ranks below Brazil, South Africa and China in keeping phones and laptops secure.
In this context it should concern us all that the Government is struggling to ensure its security profession has the skills it needs.
Leadership from the centre is inadequate and, while the National Cyber Security Centre has the potential to address this, practical aspects of its role must be clarified quickly.
Better management from the centre
MPs on the Committee lamented the government for taking “too long” to consolidate and coordinate the “alphabet soup” of agencies involved in protecting Britain in cyberspace. This is despite the fact that the threat from cyber attacks has been one of the UK’s top four risks to national security since 2010.
The report outlines how over the years the government has formed a number of teams and organisations, all of which have overlapping mandates and activities related to the protection of information.
Many of these bodies have been amalgamated into the National Cyber Security Centre. However, MPs state that the breadth of the organisation’s role is “considerable” and it is still unclear which organisations from across the public and private sector can all on it for assistance.
The Committee has called on the Cabinet Office to develop a detailed plan for the Centre by the end of this financial year. It also said that the government should establish a clear approach for protecting information across the whole of the public sector and delivery partners – not just central government.
The report also criticising current and past attempts to centrally manage government information, stating that a number of projects are not yet delivering as planned. It claims that initial project assumptions were overly optimistic and have not been challenged at regular intervals to ensure they remained relevant.
For example, the Government Security Classifications system never got a detailed financial business case – something which was due – and as a result, the government has no idea whether or not it has achieved the £110 to £150 million estimated savings it forecast for it.
The Cabinet Office has also taken a very laid back approach to the monitoring of costs and performance of individual departments’ efforts to protect information. For example, it does not mandate how departments should report on the costs and benefits of their data protection initiatives.
This has meant that there are major and unexplained variations in the extent to which individual departments report security breaches. The report states:
In 2014–15, the 17 largest departments recorded a total of 14 data incidents that they considered reportable to the Information Commissioner’s Office, and recorded 8,981 non-reportable incidents.
Of the 8,981, Her Majesty’s Revenue and Customs recorded 6,038 (67%) and the Ministry of Justice 2,798 (31%). The other 15 departments recorded only 145 between them, fewer than 2% of the total. Several departments recorded no non reportable incidents at all, including the Department for Work and Pensions, a large department with a comparable level of online activity to HMRC.
The Cabinet Office does not collect or analyse departments’ performance in protecting information on a routine or timely basis and was not aware of the wide variability and inconsistency of departments’ self-reporting processes prior to the National Audit Office’s analysis. Departments with a high reporting rate are likely to be better protected because they have developed a reporting culture to allow early identification of threats.
Without a consistent approach across Whitehall to identifying, recording and reporting security incidents, the Cabinet Office is unable to make informed decisions about where to direct and prioritise its attention.
Skills
We at diginomica/government recently outlined how the public sector’s data plans were both ambitious and lacking in leadership. Sorting out Whitehall’s data is central to the Government-as-a-Platform strategy, and is obviously also key to more effective protection of information.
However, since the departure of Paul Maltby as the government’s director of data towards the end of last year, the Cabinet Office has yet to find a replacement and is still advertising for the position online.
The Committee’s report highlights that the government is struggling to ensure that its security profession is suitably skilled. Whilst the Cabinet Office established a security profession in 2014 to develop professional learning and career development activities for civil servants working in this field, MPs argue that it “remains unclear as to what skills gaps exist and how to fill these in the face of UK-wide skills shortages in this field”.
According to the report, the Cabinet Office is planning to amalgamate 40 separate departmental security teams into four larger clusters, and has established a first pilot cluster, to “better enable the sharing of scarce skills across central government.
The Committee has asked that the Cabinet Office write to it within six months, setting out its findings from the pilot security cluster and what steps it is taking to improve the government’s capability in this area.
My take
A fairly scathing attack on the government’s – and in particular the Cabinet Office’s – attempts to protect data across Whitehall. As an outsider it does seem that the problem is so big that those in charge find the challenge somewhat overwhelming.
I do think that at this moment in time the challenge should be tackled by centralising capability and resources. Not to take away from the skills in-department, but to put into a place a consistent and measurable approach to data protection and security.
This all forms part of the government’s broader approach to data, which should be tackled as a baseline for digital development, before anything else.
Image credit - Digital safety blue concept © Sergey Nivens - Fotolia.com; new skills, 3D rendering, blue street sign © Argus - Fotolia.com.Read more on: Digital government and public servicesSecurity

