
For a number of reasons, the details of which I won’t bore you with now, just before Christmas my partner and I decided that we could do with finding and buying a reliable, cheap second hand car. And sure enough, after a week or two of looking around, I ended up purchasing a 2004 VW Golf for a very reasonable price.
What I wasn’t prepared for, however, was how poor the UK’s digital capabilities are (both across the public and private sector), in terms of getting set up and on the road. I haven’t owned a car for about 6 years and I couldn’t believe how little has changed over that time in terms of getting car insurance, buying a residential parking permit and registering my new vehicle.
What could have been a few straightforward processes, removing a significant amount of pain and admin, has ended up being laborious, costly and annoying.
Compared to searching for a car – which was done entirely online via excellent sites such as Autotrader and eBay – the post-purchase experience has been disastrous (with one small exception).
The buy
So having decided to buy this particular car, I was surprised to see that registering the vehicle in my name still requires the buyer to fill in some details on a form with the seller, who then has to post them to the DVLA. The DVLA upon receiving these will then (I assume) send out the new registration documents to my home address.
At the time I thought it a bit of admin, but I didn’t realise the pain that this delay would cause me down the line in attempting to get a parking permit.
 Anyway, I signed the documents, got a sales receipt and went on my way with my new car to sort out the tax and insurance so that I could get on the road.
Sorting out the tax was the easiest part of this whole process. When I last owned a car, getting taxed required going into a Post Office, filling out forms, paying for either six months or a year (which would typically cost up to £200) and getting a physical tax disc that you placed on the front window of your vehicle.
However, I was pleasantly surprised to see that the government (via GOV.UK) has a new mobile friendly system that allowed me to quickly fill in some details and set up a direct debit for taxing my car of £17 a month. From start to finish the whole thing took about 8 minutes – and I did it from my car using my iPhone.
Didn’t have to talk to anyone, didn’t have to fill in any lengthy forms, didn’t have to shell out a huge amount of money. Hurrah!
But this excitement was short lived, as I went on to insure my vehicle.
I had used price comparison websites to find out who the cheapest provider was and actually all of the options were coming out quite pricey. So I decided to Google to find out if any insurance providers were not using these price comparison websites for any particular reason and sure enough found out that Aviva had opted out of them.
Aviva actually turned out to be significantly cheaper than the rest too. So much for an easily comparable marketplace…
So I went ahead and completed the quote with Aviva and signed up to a pay-monthly option, which requires me signing a credit agreement. They asked if I’d be happy to get this over email, which I said I’d prefer.
However, the email never arrived. And so I set up my online account with Aviva to see if the details were there, which they weren’t, which meant having to call back a couple of days later to find out what to do.
And now they are having to send out paper documents via post, because they can’t figure out a) why the credit agreement email wasn’t sent out and b) why it isn’t appearing on my online portal. So when it turns up I’ll have to in turn fill out a bunch of paper documents and then go to the post office to return them (as opposed to ticking a box online, which was the original option).
Fail.
Parking
Living in fairly central location in London means that parking on streets is tightly controlled and residents are required to pay for a parking permit, which I was expecting. Given that it costs £1 for 20 minutes of parking outside my flat, I don’t mind paying £100 for a year-long resident permit.
However, when I went on to the local Haringey council website to apply for one, it was soon evident that this was not going to be a simple process. Going through the system, which wasn’t straightforward, it was going to require that I provide proof of residence by uploading scanned documents (such as utility bills and council tax documents) and provide proof of ownership of the vehicle (by uploading scanned documents of the vehicle registration – which I did not yet have).
Given that the online system wasn’t capable of cross referencing my name and address with the council tax database and the DVLA vehicle ownership database, I decided it might be easier to go into the local council service centre with the documents and get a permit. At least I’d be able to get it on the day I went.
In the meantime, i decided to try a website called JustPark, which allows you to find local people with a driveway, which you can hire and pay to park your car there for the day. Which is exactly what I did.
I found a local spot for £10 a day, which I figured would get me by until I managed to get to the local service centre. The process of booking the spot and parking there was fairly straightforward.
However, when I went to go and collect my car I found that I had a parking fine on my vehicle for not displaying the correct permit! This is despite checking with the owner of the parking spot that I was parked in the correct place.
I now have to either pay £100 fine or start a complaints process with JustPark, as the owner of the spot is now not returning my texts. More failures.
To make things worse, when I got to the local council service centre to buy my residents parking permit, I was told that I wouldn’t be able to buy one until I had my vehicle registration documents (which I’m still waiting for). This is despite it saying on the council website that an sales receipt for the vehicle should suffice.
But according to the local service centre manager, my sales receipt wasn’t good enough because the seller hadn’t written on it “paid in full”. What difference that makes, I have no idea.
So I was told I was going to have to purchase a temporary permit for £22, which lasts a month. And then I’d have to come back and buy my full resident’s permit once I had my vehicle registration documents.
A con if I’ve ever seen one…
The future of transport
This whole debacle got me thinking about the future of transport, especially given announcements like the one we saw earlier this week with Lyft and GM planning to create an autonomous network of driverless vehicles.
Given how difficult and costly it is to buy a car – when you factor in insurance, upfront costs, tax, parking, MOTs, services – it *almost* doesn’t make financial sense. If I were just needing to travel around London, or to be more precise north/east areas of London, the cost of Uber over a year would almost certainly be less.
However, in our case, we have bought the car to do trips outside of the capital to visit family more often, so that doesn’t work for us at the moment.
But if the likes of Uber and Zipcar were able to drive down the cost of hiring vehicles (by enhancing the network and taking out the driving costs) then I can see a point in time when owning a car becomes even less appealing.
The younger generation, particularly those living in urban areas such as London, may see less of a need to spend time and money learning to drive and buying a car when they can at the click of a button get a low cost alternative that requires zero investment.
Also, despite all the rhetoric across the public and private sector regarding the improvement and availability of digital services, comparing my experiences this week to the experience of using Uber shows how far some have to go.
It’s obvious that data is siloed and disorganised, web apps aren’t good enough and customers are paying too much for what are essentially more labor intensive processes.
Nothing like a bit of first hand experience to give you a reality check about the state of play.
In the meantime, I’ll try to enjoy driving my car about a bit this weekend…
Read more on: CRM and customer experienceDigital government and public services

