
My colleague Stuart Lauchlan is not a fan of Ocado. Having had decent experiences, a catalogue of failures over the course of 24 hours put paid to that relationship. In his write up, Lauchlan referred to logistics issues on the ground and an apparent disconnect between customer care and the delivery people:
As ever, it’s the ten yards to the front door where the e-commerce operation breaks down.
More to the point though, he pointed up the fragility of the relationship that exists between brands and people:
What I do know, is that that’s it for me with Ocado. It’s a pity, but if a service that is built around convenience and reliability becomes inconvenient and unreliable, then game over for me. It’s a tough world in the online grocery business and only the truly fit will survive. This is not the time for Ocado to start falling short on delivery and execution.
Given Lauchlan’s experience, why would I give them a try? After all, it’s often said that a bad experience colors another’s view of service and last time I checked, I’m not into masochism.
In this case, the number of people I know personally reporting positive Ocado experiences, and without prompting, proved persuasive enough for me to take a punt. How did it go?
The signup process is simple enough and nothing like as tortuous as I found the Morrison’s experience. Selecting goods is equally straightforward with decent alternatives available. So far so good.
Unlike Morrisons, which wants to charge for delivery time slots, Ocado offers free delivery. That’s hardly surprising given that most of the goods it offers come from Waitrose, which in our area, is considered a premium brand.
In looking at the final total and excluding several one off high value items, Ocado is not price competitive. But on the other hand, I was able to get products that are otherwise difficult to find elsewhere. I could have removed staples and commodity items and shopped elsewhere but in this case I stuck with Ocado as a way of running an end to end customer experience experiment.
Prior to delivery, I received email confirmation that the order was scheduled for dispatch at the chosen time. A good reminder for someone like me who can be forgetful.
The order arrived within the given time slot. A good start. The delivery person went through the order with me. That was a surprise but then he knew this was a first time order so I guess I was getting the white glove treatment.
The products were all bagged appropriately, fresh with fresh, tins with tins etc. I’d deliberately added a few fresh fish items to see how that went. Those were delivered in robust sealed packages with personalized labeling.
Finally, the delivery person handed me some paperwork that told me the various use by dates for fresh items. This is a useful and helpful touch although I would have preferred a digital version as well.
My order didn’t require any substitutions so there was no complexity there. Finally, the delivery person pointed out that I qualified for some additional discounting for offers that had come on line on the delivery date.
Taking all these things together, and bearing in mind this is a one off experience, I rate the whole Ocado shopping experience as close to perfection as you’re likely to get. What about the quality of goods?
For me the big test comes in the fresh fish. Get that wrong and the whole order is a disaster. In my case I was more than happy with both the size and quality. Check out this good looking dover sole. And the king scallops were the perfect size for a dish I had in mind. They also cooked well.
But then I am mindful that the UK retail grocery market is so competitive it is often difficult to make genuine comparisons without straying into confirmation bias.
Lidl and Aldi for example were often viewed as low cost providers that cater to poorer people. Waitrose is for those who are well off. But those distinctions appear to be melting away as changes in consumer behavior, largely brought about by the recession, lifted the low cost providers.
Even so, I am left with a big question mark. Does convenience and experience trump price and brand? I don’t yet know. In my case, I needed the convenience of home delivery. Equally, I can imagine that as people’s lives get busier, the nascent delivery services will take on greater importance.
However, in using home delivery services, there is a disconnect between the person ordering goods and the social element around shopping. It may sound trivial today but as our lives become increasingly connected online, I worry that we run the risk of losing something of our humanity. It’s all very well having a delivery person talk through the order but that’s not the same as having banter with the person behind the fish and meat counters or engaging with the antics of demanding children at the checkout.
I’m going to continue with what has become something of a thought experiment. Next time around, I’m going to retry Morrisons. Why given my past dismal experience? Ocado provides the delivery arm of Morrisons experience. It will therefore be useful to check for differences – if any – in the experience.
Image credit - via the authorRead more on: Customer service managementFrictionless enterpriseRetail e-commerce and the omni-channelUse cases 