
It’s not easy to disrupt a trusted industry. When it comes to buying prescription glasses or contact lenses, some customers are still happiest making their purchase from the high-street opticians practice where their eye test was performed.
But increasingly, those in search of a wider choice of frames or lower prices take a copy of their prescription away with them and head online. And when they get there, they’re looking for a website that inspires the same kind of trust and confidence as they get from their friendly local optician, according to Howard Bryant, CFO and CIO of the MyOptique Group, a pan-European business that sells glasses, sunglasses and contact lenses online: 

In e-commerce, site performance is everything. Customers can be skittish when buying online and easily put off by slow or unresponsive websites, so we need to do everything to prevent that from happening.

MyOptique is clearly getting it right. It operates six online retail brands – Glasses Direct, SunglassesShop, LensOn, Lensbest, EyewareBrands and Netzoptiker – which together have served three million customers and shipped over 280 million contact lenses and 7 million glasses and sunglasses since it began as Glasses Direct in 2004. Last year, revenues were approaching £70 million, says Bryant, up from around £3 million when he joined the company back in 2008. 
But supporting that rapid growth has not been without its challenges from an IT perspective, he says. And since the company started pouring money into TV advertising in recent years, high spikes in web traffic have piled on the pressure, too. The company’s initial response to high growth and increased volatility was to increase by 50% its physical IT estate, previously hosted by Bytemark in Manchester, but it soon became clear that this approach wouldn’t be sustainable in the longer term. As Bryant recalls:

In early 2015, I sat down with our head of technology Andy Dawkins and asked him, ‘So tell me, if we keep growing at this rate, what’s it going to take to keep everything running smoothly?’ He showed me a graph and I swallowed hard. It was then we started thinking about a cloud solution.

Not long after, Dawkins attended the Amazon Web Services 2015 event, where he saw executives from managed IT services provider Claranet give a presentation. That got the ball rolling on a conversation that subsequently led to MyOptique migrating its entire web server estate to AWS, a project that was completed earlier this year. The company was helped in this project by Claranet, which built a new environment on AWS in around four months, while MyOptique’s existing setup continued to function. This was not, says Bryant:

…a job for the faint-hearted. When we started this process, we were by no means expert, we had a lot of complexity to deal with, in terms of our existing infrastructure and managing the migration to the new infrastructure. And there’s no time in our business to simply ‘turn the business off’: we had to keep the business running and growing day-to-day, so we had to ensure the migration was seamless. There was a terrific amount of risk involved.

Mitigation
So how did MyOptique mitigate that risk? For a start, it always left itself the option of rolling back to existing infrastructure if the migration failed, but the cost and mess of doing that made it an absolute last resort, says Bryant. A big effort was focused on testing:

We spent a huge amount of time testing fictional orders on the new infrastructure, turning off sections of our operations centre at a time and then saying, “Right, you guys are going to spend two hours running through end-to-end fictional orders, processing them, changing them, handling returns, entering discount codes.’ We did that a lot, to get the functional testing right and seeing how each function would work in an overall workflow.
We also did a fair amount of scale testing – just throwing a lot of orders at the system, to make sure it didn’t crack under the strain. And we also worked with our colleagues in marketing to make sure we weren’t going on TV at ‘throttle up’ the following week and we pulled back on some of our planned promotional activity.We went live earlier this year and, within a week, we were seeing how as traffic goes up and down, the number of servers we’re spawning goes up and down too. It’s a bit like magic.

From a customer perspective, he adds, the ‘purchase path’ – the time from a customer entering the site to them successfully submitting an order –  has shrunk by around 20%, due primarily to the speed at which the new infrastructure can serve up web pages to the customer and collect and process their inputs at the back end:

It’s probably a bit early to say what the effect of that reduction will be in terms of sales, but I do think, in terms of our ability to handle future growth, future throughput and maintain a cutting-edge customer experience, it will prove a big success for us.

And from an innovation perspective, MyOptique now has plenty of infrastructure available for building new apps and experiences, says Bryant:

In a hardware-constrained environment, there’s only so many resources you can put aside for testing routines and creating development stacks. Since moving to AWS, we’ve found we can create testing environments at will and almost limitlessly, and have many developers and testers working in parallel, rather than in series. That makes a big difference to what we’re able to deliver in terms of innovation.

The next stage in the journey, he adds, is for the company’s web servers on AWS to be joined by the company’s back-end operational systems, a migration that’s already underway, again with the help of Claranet. 

Image credit - MyOptiqueRead more on: Digital enterprise in the real worldRetail e-commerce and the omni-channel 