
Well-run projects draw on the successes and failures of previous ones, even on the grandest of scales. The value of ‘lessons learned’ is one that NASA takes extremely seriously.
Take, for example, the US space agency’s Juno mission: this week, NASA announced that Juno is set to make its fourth flyby of Jupiter, a destination the spacecraft took five years to reach.
During these flybys, Juno is probing the planet’s cloud cover to learn more about its origins, structure, atmosphere and magnetosphere. It’s pioneering stuff, but at the same time, Juno draws on lessons learned from Galileo, a mission that previously orbited Jupiter, and the construction of the Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter (MRO), because Juno uses much of the same avionics as that spacecraft.
Much of NASA’s work on benefiting from ‘lessons learned’ – a key principle in knowledge management – is reflected in its Lessons Learned Information System (LLIS), but this vast, agency-wide system isn’t always that easy for engineers to navigate. So NASA is modernizing its approach through the use of a graph database from Neo4j.
The thinking behind this project first occurred to NASA chief knowledge architect David Meza a few years back, when a young engineer came to him with a list of 23 keywords, relating to lessons learned he was keen to investigate for a new project. Using standard enterprise search was returning results with no problem – but those results related to around 10 million different documents, says Meza:
So he was just getting everything and he really couldn’t tell which were the relevant lessons learned. I knew we could do a lot better.
Meza was soon experimenting with Neo4j, which at that time, was quite an early product. But he could clearly see the potential benefits of storing lessons learned in a graph database, which clearly displayed how different ‘nodes’, or individual lessons, were connected by topic. In effect, it intelligently groups together lessons learned based on their content and the word used in them.
I realized from my own experiences and my knowledge of how engineers think, that this was a good match. Engineers think more visually, they like connecting dots, so it was clear that a graph database would resonate better with an engineering audience, because of the way they understand data in their own minds. When I saw Neo4j get to the point of being more enterprise-ready, I decided to see how we could utilize it.
Value to humanity
So far, Neo4j is only being used at NASA’s Johnson Space Center in Houston, Texas, where Meza himself is based. But it’s already enabling engineers to make some interesting connections, he says. In one case, he found that Neo4J was making a connection between lessons learned in water tank contamination, fluid valves and battery fire risks. The link wasn’t clear at first, he says.
But closer scrutiny of the lessons learned documents involved showed that NASA engineers had already seen how chemicals leaking from a battery could corrode valves and cause water contamination in tanks. A keyword search, by contrast, might not necessarily lead an engineer researching water contamination to look into the risks posed here by batteries. Says Meza:
I’m still looking into getting this into more of our centres, but because each organization in NASA is a little bit different, I need to look at different centres’ lessons learned and work with them to get them into a graph database. And my team is small, but I’m hoping because of the success we’ve achieved here at Johnson, we’ll be able to roll out Neo4j more widely.
In another success story, he says, an engineer working on the Orion mission found information from the Apollo project, using Neo4j, which prevented an issue and saved,
…well over two years of work and one million dollars of taxpayer funds.
For now, however, Meza is using Neo4j in a project of his own, which focuses on how the work of the International Space Station (ISS) over the last ten to 15 years has contributed to the wider ‘knowledge economy’, he says.
This is not just a case of the work of the ISS that benefits academics and researchers in their quest for knowledge, but also how it results in spin-off companies, in patents filed, in jobs created and so on. We’re a government-funded organization looking to provide value to humanity – value in many forms – and I think a graph database may allow me to do that better.
Image credit - Images sourced via author Read more on: Analytics planning and data analysisUse cases 