
Laundry v legacy
What different challenges face a startup and a legacy business when it comes to using mobile technologies and digital marketing to address their users? A comparison between mobile-first laundry start-up Laundrapp and established conservation charity The National Trust makes for an informative exemplar. 
Laundrapp – the start-up
Edward Relf is a serial entrepreneur and early-stage investor. His most recent venture, Laundrapp, is an app-based, mobile-first business that seeks to do for laundry and dry cleaning what Uber, Airbnb, and Deliveroo have done for travel, accommodation, and deliveries.
Like many mobile-first businesses, Laundrapp aims to break apart a long-established marketplace and put the benefits at users’ fingertips, while using the network effect to help local businesses make money. It does this by connecting time- and space-poor customers with dry cleaning and laundry services. Laundrapp provides the digital platform and the branded door-to-door deliveries, while existing laundry and dry-cleaning companies do the rest. 
Says Relf:

The background was a walk down my local high street in north London. I could see that the betting shop, the flower shop, the supermarket, and so on, had all been disrupted by digital, but then I got to the dry cleaners and I couldn’t work out how that had been disrupted. I later found that it’s because it’s bloody hard!

So is it a luxury to start with a blank page and build a mobile-first business from scratch, rather than try to transform a legacy from within? Relf’s unsure: 

I wish it was a luxury. It’s a different type of challenge. We have a distinct advantage in being able to implement a lot of strategy, methodology and platforms straight away. So yes, we’re mobile first, we’re app based, and the website was responsive from day one, but we have far harder challenges from being an early stage business and trying to disrupt an industry that is decades old.But by far the biggest challenge is actually changing consumer habits and behaviour. That’s not easy, and you can’t counteract it overnight with a paid social media campaign or YouTube video.

In a sense, Relf isn’t trying to kickstart new behavior, as he claims, but to reset it to an earlier time – the 1950s and 60s, when laundry services to the home were commonplace for middle-class families. The subsequent ‘white goods’ explosion of low-cost washing machines and driers are less of an aid in the 21st Century when both adults in a household are working, and people want to spend less time doing chores and more on working flexibly in home offices. 
So in an increasingly digital realm, an interesting side effect is the rebirth of bespoke, personal, analog-style services that are accessed via digital front ends. In short, our tablets and smartphones are reconnecting us with old ideas: guest houses, private drivers and cleaners, bespoke goods, and more. 
To succeed in this environment is not just about technology, therefore: you don’t solve problems by throwing applications at them; you need a mixed set of skills. Just as today’s robotics experts have to understand society and psychology, so today’s digital entrepreneurs need to be grafters and to get their hands dirty in the physical world. 
Relf is canny enough to realise that you can build the most advanced mobile platforms in the world, as some supermarkets have done, but the strategy falls over if the delivery driver is aggressive or has no people skills. Relf realises that his drivers are the real front end of his brand, and so he’s donned the uniform himself to speak to customers directly on their doorsteps. He says:

Storytelling is critical to a startup like Laundrapp, because in the early stages you really have nothing but your story, your idea. It’s the story that will get you the seed and early stage investment in your business. And beyond that, it’s about building trust with the customer. It’s very difficult to win trust, but it’s very easy to lose it.

The National Trust – the conservationist
The National Trust has that word at its core. But the charity that preserves the UK’s built legacy of houses, land, and monuments – across 775 miles of coastline from the White Cliffs of Dover to the Giant’s Causeway – is itself a heritage organization, with a technology legacy dating back 15-20 years.
So how to hone an ambitious strategy for the future while grappling with a huge systems legacy – not to mention the work practices that are supported by it? Head of Digital Tom Barker says: 

I’ve inherited lots of legacy systems – websites, databases, apps, social media accounts, and blogs. So the challenge I have is how to take that forward over the next five years and get the National Trust to a point where many organisations are today: a competent base level. But it’s not as hard as I thought it was going to be. The Trust is governed by an executive board and all of those people get the importance of digital, so really it’s been a question of giving them a logical reason of why they should do this. 

He adds:

We’re a charity, we’re heavily audited internally and externally, and rightly so, which means we don’t have the luxury of trying too many things out; we have to have a good reason to do something. One example of this was going to the Executive and saying:, ‘We’ve got to change the way we work, we’ve got to change our business model’, which at the time was called ‘Go Local’, where if you were the general manager of a property you had carte blanche of how to market that via websites, social media, and so on. I said, You can’t do this anymore: no new websites to be created, and all social media sites and blogs – if you’re going to represent the Trust in any way online – you have to sit a mandatory training module.’

Having a mobile strategy has become essential for the Trust? Barker explains: 

Getting a mobile presence is hugely important. We’re not unusual in that about three years ago we hit that tipping point where more people visited our website from a mobile device than from a desktop or laptop.  We rebuilt the mobile app last year, which has a huge installed base of 1.7 million people, but the challenge was recognising that we wouldn’t be able to get everything up and running straight away.  The previous website had 50,000 pages, which had to be audited and condensed down to a more manageable number, 9,000, and we had to train a lot of people – 500 people across the country – to use the new CMS. 
But one thing we couldn’t do straight away was add a sign-in capability, meaning we could see how it was being used, but not who was using it. But because we were seeing a large number of drop-offs on the previous site, we thought: ‘Lets get the most basic functionality on mobile devices and then we’ll add sign-in.’ To wait would have added six to nine months to the project, and with drop-offs of about 60 per cent that’s not acceptable.

One of the keys with a mobile-first startup such as Laundrapp is helping people to make money by simplifying marketplace access via a smart devices. How similar is the National Trust to that model, when – on the surface at least – the aim is more about helping visitors to share in the national legacy Says Barker: 

Well, we are saying, ‘Come to us and buy stuff!’. But one of the challenges we have as an organization is explaining to people what it is that we do. This is where all channels need to play a new role. Historically, we’ve been seen as stately homes in the country for middle class families to visit at the weekend. But over the past few years there has been a shift in strategy towards, ‘Come and be part of this. Please walk on the grass, please the climb trees, here are 50 things for kids to do, come and take part.’
That’s been great for visitor numbers, but one of the problems of that success of that people lose sight of why we exist in the first place. The heart of the matter is we’re a conservation charity. But if you position it as a charity, people say, ‘Well, you’re not a real charity, you’re not trying to find a cure for cancer’. So one of the things we’re going to do now is focus on our cause, explain to people why we do what we do and how that benefits the population. 
The website, the mobile app, the content strategy, and everything we do, are about how people’s involvement helps to support an organisation that can then give something back. We have four and a half million members, and thats a huge demographic, and we have to meet the highest common denominator across all of them.

My take
A young business telling its story from day one, and an old organization that has circled back to remind people about what its story was in the first place. Both are using technology to not only tell their story, but to represent their story and make it accessible to the largest number of people in the simplest, highest-quality, way. Both are changing consumer behaviour, by matching strategy to business need – and then supporting it with technology.
Image credit - FreeImages.com/National Trust Disclosure - Relf and Barker were speaking at the London Digital Marketing Forum. Read more on: CRM and customer experienceDigital and content marketingDigital enterprise in the real worldRetail e-commerce and the omni-channelUX and application design 