
The financial services industry is in a state of flux. The incumbent retail providers and lenders have been tasked with overhauling their legacy IT estate to create more agile digital services that are being demanded by consumers, whilst also facing challenges from new entrants that are ‘digital first’.
The past few years haven’t been pretty, with a number of banks in the UK experiencing outages that have left their customers without access to their money. Some have even been fined by regulators for their abysmal service.
Nationwide, a mutual bank and mortgage provider, is no different. Whilst only having undergone a £1 billion IT transformation around five years ago, it is already thinking about the digital technologies it needs and the risks these bring to its resilience.
That was the message it put out today as part of its half year results, for the period ending September 2015. Whilst Nationwide’s pre-tax profits were up 34% to £802 million and its gross mortgage lending was up 14% to a record £14.9 billion, there was a distinct message from the organisation that whilst digital is both an opportunity and an almighty challenge.
Just last week Nationwide announced that it would be hiring Joe Garner as it’s new chief executive, who will be taking up his position in the spring to replace current chief executive Graham Beale, in a bid to help take on the digital overhaul required.
Garner is joining from BT’s Openreach division and is perceived to have the required background in technology to make this happen. When announcing the hire, Nationwide chairman David Roberts told the Financial Times:
We believe financial services will become much more competitive and key for the new chief executive is the ability to compete in that marketplace.
We wanted someone who really understood new technology and the challenges of moving into a digital age.
The opportunity
It’s evident from today’s results that Nationwide recognises the opportunity available to it. It told its members:
As a building society our aim is to optimise our profitability to allow us to grow and invest in the business while at the same time maintaining our capital strength. As a modern mutual it is important that we continue to invest in order to meet our members’ current and future needs by providing good long term value products, services and security.
Such investment comes at a cost, but we believe this is the right thing to do, particularly at a time when digital innovation and other initiatives are having a major impact on consumer behaviour and expectations of service and digital access.
For example, it highlighted that over the period its expenses increased by £38 million, which was a direct reflection of enhancements in digital capability, including Nationwide Now (a video linking service) and Apple Pay. It also said that the costs reflected investments in IT resilience and brand development.
 Nationwide added that its underlying cost-income ratio increased from 49.3% to 51% and that this trend was likely to continue in the short and medium term, which it said was in line with the ‘strategic aim’ of creating a “modern mutual”. It said:
Our focus will be on improving the service we deliver to members and will result in continued investment in our distribution capability including our branches, digital technology and Nationwide Now.
In addition, we will invest in the automation of back office administration to improve the speed, reliability and efficiency of key processes, as well as improving the resilience and availability of our services. We will also make further investment in our brand to broaden our appeal and support business growth.
The risk
However, Nationwide didn’t shy away from the monumental challenges facing it as an individual organisation within the financial services industry, as well as the industry as a whole. It made note of “recent high profile cyber attacks” and also referenced the banking failures we often see making the headlines.
The Group is committed to maintaining the security of customer data and, as a result, continues to invest in security and detection capabilities designed to ensure it can respond to security threats effectively.
Similarly, over the last six months there has continued to be well-publicised instances of failures in industry banking and payments infrastructures. The increased use of digital banking services renders such resilience issues more important and so the Group continues to invest in improving the operational resilience of its banking infrastructure to protect customer service experience.
Equally, Nationwide is right to highlight that managing both its legacy architecture and introducing digital technologies brings a level of complexity to the organisation that introduces a certain amount of risk. It warns that this could lead to some level of disruption down the line. The bank said:
New payments technology, whilst increasing payment options for customers, is increasing the operational complexity of payments infrastructures across the industry. At the same time, the increased use of digital banking services means that the financial services sector is seeing increased expectations of an “always on” 24/7 service and lower tolerance of system unavailability combined with heightened concerns over the security of banking systems.
In order to ensure that it can offer members a range of service options, the Group continues to make significant investment in transforming its products and delivery channels to embrace advances in digital technology, whilst still offering more traditional products and services that are important to many of the Group’s members.
The pace of change, together with the introduction of new systems, introduces operational complexity which could lead to disruption of the Group’s operating environment and impact service experience.
My take
An honest and frank assessment of what many ‘traditional’ banks in the financial services industry are currently experiencing. Nationwide is making all the right noises about what it needs to do, but execution will be key.
Read more on: Financial services and fintech 