
Food giant Nestlé hit the financial headlines late last week when it turned in a 39% year-on-year fall in full-year profits. Much of that was attributed to a combination of currency issues as well as the disposal of its interest in cosmetics brand L’Oreal.
Nonetheless CEO Paul Bulcke admits that for 2016, the firm is on “high alert” and is looking to digital transformation to play a large part in shoring up the company’s position:
I have been very explicit about our commitment as a company to digital. And I made it one of our priorities on group corporate level for this company. And since [2012] we have moved fast and and we have embraced digital in very different ways and dimensions.
He adds:
We have many strong brands and it is about permanently maintaining the relevance of these brands through innovation, through renovation, through brand support, communication, distribution and even also expanding them geographically where it makes sense.
To that end, there are three primary challenges, he argues:
In 2016, it’s important firstly, to keep focus on what works, keep focus on the businesses and the brands that are performing well. Secondly, that we continue to support the turnaround of businesses and brands that we believe in and brands with opportunity, but which are or were challenged. Thirdly, that we combine this with embracing and looking for new opportunities, like digital and e-commerce.
Bulcke says that the firm’s digital transformation efforts have been paying off, such as:
in social media, where we have attracted and built digital talent throughout the whole organization, specifically on listening and engaging in social media conversations with consumers. We have driven that and rolled it out throughout the whole organization in many, many markets.
When it comes to e-commerce, the firm can point to the success of Nespresso coffee as a foundation for what the entire organisation needs to be doing, says Bulcke:
The business model of Nespresso is actually e-based. We deployed one group-wide e-business strategy that embraces digital marketing and e-commerce at the same time. It is inducing permanent learning and execution in this fast-moving area everywhere in our company. We have rolled out this strategy together with clear roadmaps in already more than 20 of our most important markets with concrete structures and engagements.
For us, if we were to consider e-commerce, as such, in Nestle as a market, it would already be a top-five market in sales for us. So it is substantial and it is important and it is accelerating in growth materially. It is growing fast. But there’s so much upside. Our brand strength offline is not yet truly reflected online. So we have a motivation there.
Communications channels
Nestlé also intends to up its digital marketing spend to communicate the benefits of its R&D investment as well as raising brand awareness. Bulcke explains:
I truly believe that nutrition, health and wellness, that fundamental agenda that we have as a company, is linked with knowledge. It’s linked with understanding how nutrients interact with the human body. It’s linked with how do we bring our driving calories out of our product portfolio, less salt. How do we drive this with the newest insights? So it is linked with deeper research and development. The platforms, like Nestle health science or skin health, are intrinsically linked with deeper knowledge. And it is a competitive advantage to have that, to invest in that and to connect with these newer insights.
The same goes then with the same logic for marketing span, engaging, reengaging, connecting with the consumer. I know that digital – and we’ve deeply engaged there – has higher Return on Investment if you do it right and you’re in the front line there. And we are. Yet at the same time our deeper innovation, more present connection with consumers, talking about nutrition, is more communication-intense and I feel that’s where we have to invest in.
All of this involves a close attention to ROI and efficiency, he adds:
Promotional efficiency is a very important point. It’s resource again, return on resources, this whole mantra of return on resources. Hence, for example, backing off promotional dimensions on certain brands that we don’t see the payback for and focusing on really what matters. There’s a fundamental. We’re working also in bringing more tools. There’s a mindset of Return on Time, my time. I want to invest where it matters, where I feel I can make a difference. That is linked with what we’re looking for. The same thing goes for everything. And that mindset is definitely there in promotions too.
That means a lot more focus on social media channels, for example, as one of the most efficient comms channels:
In social media, we’re working with these big partners there to really drive and implement and test tools to test the efficiency of communication. I saw these worldwide renowned partners we’re working with and we’re working with the best. I’m saying that we’re quite a little bit in front of quite a few others in really looking into return on our efforts in social media, for example.
My take
Bulcke is setting very conservative expectations for Nestlé in 2016, which is probably wise.
The 2012 strategic commitment to digital transformation gives the firm something of a head start on the competitors eating into its market shares across various brands, but there needs to be a shift to a front foot, rather than the defensive tone that’s been the case throughout 2015.
Whether effective digital exploitation can enable that remains to be seen.
Image credit - via NestléRead more on: Customer service managemente-commerceMobileRetail e-commerce and the omni-channelSocialUse cases 