
In a world of disappointing customer service, Nest service has stood out as providing an excellent omnichannel experience. At least for me.
While in the USA, our apartment came with a Nest thermostat pre-installed. I was familiar with the device, how it works and so on but never had cause to contact Nest for support. It worked flawlessly and, from what I can gather, it saved me money on power bills.
A dying device
When I returned to the UK, I decided to get Nest again, augmenting with mains powered smoke/CO detectors/alarms. The smoke detectors installed just fine but I had quite a lot of trouble with the thermostat. It was slow, lost the network, randomly stopped working and one day all I could see was the glowing house icon, no other obvious signs of life and no control over the heating system. No fun on a winter’s day.
Going through all the options available in the online self-help didn’t yield a satisfactory result. What next?
Nest offers a chat facility. At this point, I am thinking: ‘Oh no, not another of those stupid chatbots.’ Nevertheless, it was worth a punt. To my surprise, I was met with a reply from a human, although the early greetings felt canned.
As I expected, the chat asked me to go through the factory reset (which I’d already done a few times with no success,)  and of course, it yielded no result. We quickly moved into phone mode and sure enough, it was the same person who had been in the chat. We tried a few more things, again without success and at that point, she said she needed to consult with a senior specialist as she had run out of options. She very politely asked if she could call back.
Expecting a long wait, I was again surprised to find an email a few minutes later explaining that the unit was obviously defective and would need to be replaced. Since I’d had network connection issues, the thermostat had not registered on the Nest system so she needed the serial number. I photographed the back of the device so she could get the number and was told that was fine, a replacement would be sent.
A little while longer and very apologetically, she came back saying there was an ID issue because of some problem with setting up the return. That didn’t make sense but heh, I was getting quick responses. A senior engineer took over the case and, rather annoyingly, asked a couple of the same questions I’d already answered. Expecting to have another round of Q&A, I gave up for the day.
The next morning, another email came in asking if they could call. At this point, the engineer explained that the serial number didn’t match my email address. That didn’t make sense because I couldn’t get it registered so…it turns out the serial number was transcribed incorrectly by one letter. That’s not hard to do because it is incredibly hard to read the number on the back of the device.
Once we got that cleared up then it was a case of waiting for the replacement to arrive, along with a pre-printed return parcel slip.
The next day and a replacement arrived. Or rather it would have done if the UPS driver had banged on the door louder so I could hear him. We have installed a loud brass knocker because of exactly that problem yet it seems delivery people are incapable of using it. Anyhoo, a trip to a local UPS access point and a replacement was to hand.
I installed the new device without hitch, it found the network and is now doing what I expected. It’s also working well on my phone. Alexa hasn’t much of a clue about the Nest thermostat despite my being told it’s an Alexa skill.
Nest will get their defective device back in a day or so.
Why rate so highly?
Even though there was the odd glitch, why do I rate this as gold star customer service?

The communications, whether voice, email or chat was on point. Not only was it effective, it was polite and clear. At no time did I get lost in what was being communicated. Yes, there was a moment of confusion but that was cleared up via a phone call. The annoyance at having to repeat myself was ultimately understandable in the context of an incorrect serial number.
At no point did I feel as though I was stranded, or waiting in call center hell. Yes, there was one call where I had to wait, but the wait time wasn’t excessive.
The speed at which the replacement arrived was extraordinary, especially as it came from Poland. That’s EU cross-border clearance for you. G-d help us after Brexit.
The UPS issue wasn’t Nest’s fault so they don’t get dinged for that.
Getting the serial number wrong might have earned a downgrade but it is very hard to read. That’s a manufacturing design issue, not a service issue.

My take
Reflecting on the experience, I wondered why I was so happy. I concluded three things:

Current expectations for good customer service are not that high. I’ve said on many occasions that despite talk of CS investment, there’s very little sign of it turning into something that is convenient for me as a customer.
When you get good service across all channels and between the people tasked to deliver the service, it is easy to forgive the things that go wrong during the interaction.
Next day, no quibble replacement is almost unheard of. That puts the cherry on the cake.

Image credit - NestRead more on: Customer service management 