
Times are scary for traditional storage vendors as the public cloud vendors get stronger. Can companies like NetApp survive the blood letting?
Depending on whether you’re a glass half full type of person, last week’s Net App Insight conference was either unfortunately timed or a perfect opportunity for the company, coming as it did the week after the AWS Re:Invent shindig and opening on the day the EMC-Dell merger was announced.
Like Dell and EMC, the market’s shift to the cloud has been a horror movie for NetApp with the company seeing revenues shrink 11% last year and which saw long standing CEO Tom Georgens paying the ultimate penalty, replaced by VP of Product Operation George Kurian in June.
When diginomica spoke to Kurian shortly after his appointment, the new CEO was upbeat about NetApp’s prospects of reversing the sales decline through migrating the existing customer base to the company’s range of more modern products based around the ‘data fabric’ strategy.
We’ve got work to do. I think some of that is related to capacity investments in the salesforce so that we can do more with the largest customers , the enterprises and service providers.
We have work to do with migrating customers to the new products. We still have a long way to go.
The cloud is in early phase of its development and most of the discussions around cloud are around cost management and not having to operate a portion of the IT portfolio. I think the way the cloud gets leveraged is very much a work in progress.
That work in progress is still very much underway with the company’s CMO, Julie Parrish, leaving the company shortly before the annual conference which further underscored the difficulties facing traditional networking and storage vendors in the face of the cloud onslaught.
Kurian’s view about increased sales was cautiously reflected in talking to the company’s resellers. Mark Melvin, Chief Technology Officer of Washington DC based ePlus technologies told diginomica how their vendor financing structures are improving the financial argument for on premise solutions, but that’s a bridge to far for many other integrators we spoke to.
The main hope NetApp’s senior management have is customers will move back to some on-premise solutions after experiencing ‘sticker shock’ from AWS and other public cloud services. Val Bercovici, NetApp’s ‘cloud czar’ says this process is already under way.
2014 was the turning point. Enterprises started getting their first cloud bills and the conversation changed overnight. The bills had way more line items than they expected and were much more complicated to interpret and the bottom line was far different than expected.
The economics of elasticity are phenomenal on Amazon or Azure, but the economics of running a stable or predictable workload are lousy.
Essentially customers are repatriating data, once the innovation cycle is done in terms of developing and testing new functionality, it’s cheaper to operate it at a more focused service provider or back in-house on premise.
If this is the case then NetApp are going to have to start showing increased sales to those companies scared off the private cloud by excessive bills. Lee Caswell, the company’s VP of products and services sees the Dell – EMC deal as an opportunity for NetApp to improve their revenues.
We see it as a large opportunity, this (the Dell-EMC deal) is really a financial transaction driven by investors. These are very complex deals that take a long time to consummate and usually that means distraction, a lack of focus and other things. We think our strategy of a clear, focused product portfolio is going to help us respond to the market.
Caswell also cites the HP split and Symantec’s divesting of Veritas as adding further uncertainty to the market which will play into NetApp’s hands.
Being the last hero standing after the chainsaw massacre of the public cloud disruption is an interesting strategy for a company. By next year’s NetApp Insight we will see how that has turned out.
My Take
NetApp, one of the ‘old guard’ vendors described by AWS’ Andy Jassy two weeks ago, has been living through a horror movie for the last three years that has been the driving factor of the Dell-EMC deal, NetApp’s revenue collapse, and the other contortions among vendors.
NetApp’s product positioning as bridges between private infrastructure and the public cloud has merit but it has market facing challenges as everyone fights over a smaller and focused market. This is the problem facing all the players. There’s no way can survive an environment with much smaller margins available.
Being the last hybrid hero standing after the AWS Chainsaw Massacre might be a nice thing to aspire to, but it’s not a realistic business strategy. NetApp reporting losses means it isn’t the strongest character in the movie.
For NetApp to deliver on its promises, Kurian and his management team must focus their business on the profitable parts of the market. It must also help resellers supporting high value customers while ditching legacy and low margin products. There’s going to be a lot more bloodshed yet at both NetApp and across the entire storage industry.
Stay tuned for the sequel.
Disclosure: NetApp covered most of the author’s travel and expense for attending NetApp Insight
Image credit: via Flickering Myths
Read more on: Infrastructure 