

The Crown – great expectations for Netflix
It’s time for me to apologize for the volatility again – this time it’s in a good direction.

It’s only three months since analysts were predicting dire times ahead for Netflix as the digital media provider turned in a shortfall in new subscribers, leaving CEO Reed Hastings apologising to investors for the development as rivals such as Amazon Prime beefed up their growth expectations. 
Flash forward to this week and those growth worries have been firmly knocked on the head with new subscriber numbers up 21% in the domestic US market, adding 370,000 users to its total, ahead of its expectation of 300,000. International numbers were even more impressive, adding 3.2 million new customers against analyst expectations of 2 million. In total, Netflix now has 83.3 million subscribers worldwide. 
Hastings attributes the growth to strong original content, with Stranger Things and Narcos being particularly popular, but also reiterates his thesis that Netflix is riding on the back of a wider revolution: 

We’re fundamentally in this growth cycle that’s to do with the Internet, Smart TV, people getting used to on-demand, all of those aspects. It’s much more of a deep force that’s changing the market as more and more people are getting used to Internet television.

He makes the comparison between Internet TV’s disruptive potential and that of the mobile phone on the telephony market: 

Fixed line telephony was an amazing invention, 100 years of development and broad, incredible benefits to society, and the same thing is true with linear TV. It’s been an amazing innovation, but the age of linear is starting to fade and it’s going to be replaced by Internet. And those firms like the BBC or CBS, that are doing all access, that are investing heavily, I think will move into the future on internet consumption.

He points to what he calls the “general trend lines”, by which he means the the growth of YouTube-type advertising supported services, Facebook video, Snapchat:

You’re just going to see these new scenarios everywhere. Eventually, movies and TV shows will be global, ubiquitous, some amazing budgets. I think you have to think big about the future. We’re closing in on 100 million members.

But let’s not get carried away, he cautions, there’s a long way to go: 

I remind everyone at Netflix that Facebook and YouTube have 1 billion daily actives. And so, in many parts, we are just so small compared to those other Internet video firms and we have a lot of catch-up to do and that’s again investing in our content and making it globally interesting and compelling which we’re working on.

Content as king
The content creation element of Netflix is perhaps the most astonishing aspect of its success. The firm plans to spend $6 billion on content next year. To put that in context, that’s well ahead of ‘traditional’ broadcasters, such as CBS or NBC, and of challengers such as Amazon, which, according to research by Boston Consulting Group, is on track to spend $3.6 billion on content this year. Only ESPN currently spends more than Netflix. 
All of that could change of course. Amazon has committed to doubling its spend on licensed content and triple its spend on original material, such as The Collection and  Transparent, during the latter half of 2017. In addition, Amazon CEO Jeff Bezos has begun talking about video becoming the fourth pillar of Amazon’s business model. 
So the competitive threat is real and growing. Amazon, in common with the likes of the BBC Store, offers subscribers the ability to download content for offline viewing, a capability that Netflix continues to make evasive noises about, but one which is likely to become increasingly a competitive differentiator that it will have to address. 
For now, Hastings remains phlegmatic about the threat from Amazon or other rivals, in public at least:

We think about it as share of screen time. When people are doing other things with their screens, be they mobile or television screens, they’re not doing Netflix. So Snapchat, YouTube, Facebook video, all of that is it takes a lot of hours, probably much more so than Amazon. But there are so many competitors out there for screen time than we win today. Such a small percentage of total screen time bit moves by specific competitors are unlikely to have a material effect. What affects us is, can we continue to win affection? And that’s through doing all of this incredible content through expanding globally, having all those rights be global eventually, so those are the things we’re focused on.

International expansion remains a factor to watch. There’s a lot of room for improvement here, particularly when it comes to the amount and quality of content on offer within national borders. On a recent visit to the US, I was depressed to see the sheer amount of content on offer to domestic viewers that isn’t available in the UK. 
Hastings concedes there is an issue here:

In some countries, we have the Disney movie output, Australia, Canada, US, but in other countries like in the UK we lost the bidding to Sky about two years ago. So it really varies by market. We’re one of the bidders and we hope to over time to be one of the biggest bidders so they choose us, but it really does vary by market.
We try to get global rights for everything, like How To Get Away With Murder from ABC, because then it’s available to everyone, which is clearly what consumers want.

But there’s still a way to go on the international footprint and again Hastings issues a timely competitive reality reminder: 

We’ve got a lot of room to go to improve the service. We’ve only just now localized Poland and Turkey. That brings us up to 22 languages. YouTube is at 50. So we’ve got a long way to go in that localization effort.

But at the end of the day, it all comes back to the content, he argues: 

Do we have more Stranger Things, where it breaks through [into the mainstream] and everyone feels like they have to get in, Luke Cage, Get Down, Narcos? We have a show coming, The Crown, that is some of our most impressive television I have ever seen. 
When you ask yourself about 60 million to 90 million [possible viewers], when you watch that show, it’s going to seem quite achievable. But it’s all hangs on how well we execute and we’re just going to work really hard on that front.
We’ll keep investing in growing the content spend even domestically for quite a long time. We see an ability to continue to please consumers with a wide range of content. If you’re trying to model the business long-term, you should think of content and how it’s viewed and brand love, always continuing [to go] up in the US and internationally for a long time.

My take
The slowdown in subscribers earlier in the year seems to have been a bump in the road for Netflix, but the competitive ambitions of Amazon in this space cannot be ignored. Netflix hit gold with Stranger Things and Narcos and it’s likely that The Crown will a major TV event when it premiers next month. 
But Amazon’s own original content ambitions are impressive and it’s shown a demonstrable willingness to partner with established broadcasters to meets them, as seen in its joint-investment with the BBC on Ripper Street. 2017 is going to an interesting tipping point year for the Internet TV competitive landscape. 
Image credit - NetflixRead more on: CRM and customer experienceDigital and content marketingRetail e-commerce and the omni-channel 