
Good news, bad news for Netflix this week.
The good news – the new TV series of Star Trek will air on Netflix worldwide from January 2017, which should beef up subscriber numbers.
The bad news – those subscriber numbers need beefing up badly as figures released on Monday show that growth has stalled alarmingly.
The company added 1.68 million users in the three months to June – well below its forecasts of 2.5 million, while subscriber cancellations rose “slightly and unexpectedly”. That was enough to spook Wall Street and send Netflix shares down 13%, even though revenue for the quarter rose 28% to $2.1 billion.
But that growth came in large part from price increases, which were a primary contributor to the increased cancellation numbers.
International growth remains a problem. The firm remains locked out of the Chinese market, while there may be problems ahead in Europe if a European Commission plan goes ahead that would insist that 20% of streaming content must be produced locally.
Add to this the growing threat from Amazon Prime’s video streaming and things aren’t looking so great for Netflix at the moment, although CEO Reed Hastings doesn’t see competition as a major reason for the uptick in churn:
If it was saturation, what we would be seeing is hit to gross ads more than we would in terms of churn. So, other possible explanations were that we did something on our service, around that week, but we’ve looked at everything and the fact that its coincident with the group of trend data we included really indicates that people don’t like price increases, we know that.
It’s a necessary phase for us to get through and then with the increased revenue, we’re continuing to invest in better and better content. So that’s what makes us feel very strong and positive about the long-term and that this is a short term phenomenon.
It is all about content at the end of the day, he adds, not the pricing model:
We’re continuing to improve the content, which is the fundamental driver of value for subscribers, how much they watch, how unique the content is, how exclusive it is…I think this is really around change resistance, whatever the price is for something people don’t like it to go up. But in terms of new members, which is most of what drives growth, the new pricing is working great.
The future
Hastings repeats a familiar meme when he insists that the future of video belongs to firms like Netflix:
Smart TVs are continuing to sell. Everyone is using internet video and internet television more and more. You see the rise of these virtual MVBDs. All of these things are building out the internet ecosystem and I don’t see why 10, 20 years from now, why every American household isn’t subscribing to Netflix except for maybe competition.
So we’ve got to stay on our toes on that basis, but think about entertainment and pay television are pretty ubiquitous. So in the Internet video, that’s a pretty big bet that’s continuing to pay off. You put those two forces together and that’s why we feel so good about the long-term in this market.
In terms of the non-US market, Hastings sees attitudes towards Netflix evolving in a healthy manner:
One of the most positive developments from our original programming has been today an original show from Netflix can be just as attractive as a show from any network in the United States, when licensing for territories around the world…When we’re launching our new original series, there is a huge appetite for them around the world.
With that EU proposal at back of mind, it’s important to note that Netflix has been producing localized content already. Chief Content Officer Ted Sarandos points out:
We’ve launched original shows in Japan. We’ve launched in Mexico and we currently have productions going on in Germany, Spain, Italy, Korea, Japan, France, Brazil, Cambodia. So we are producing around the world original programming and it really has an outsized impact in those first couple of shows because I think it does show those local markets that we’re investing in their production infrastructure, we’re investing in their culture and taken, most importantly taking those shows and distributing them around the world.
So when we released a show like Ebana in Japan, people are watching Ebana all around the world at the exact same time, which makes us a very important part of the entertainment landscape in those countries and ultimately to those consumers as well.
Ultimately Hasting’s message to Wall Street is to stick with the firm through the bumps in the road:
We’ve been doing this a long time. We’ve had these short quarters before. Nine years ago in 2007 we actually went down in subscribers. So, this quarter we’re growing, but not as much as we want, but in 2007 we went down from 6.8 million to 6.7 million in this Q2, which is a generally seasonally tight quarter for us. It didn’t feel great going down, but now here we are at over $80 million. So, you just got to take a long term perspective and Internet TV is going to be an enormous market. We’re very confident of that and our competitive position is very strong so those are the two fundamental things that give us confidence in the long term and want to us to continue to invest in more content.
My take
Confession time – I was one of those cancelled subscribers. This was in large part due to the poorer level of content on offer in the UK compared to the US. That’s all tied up in copyright and licensing of course, but nonetheless I found myself questioning the last time I watched something on Netflix. The answer was the last series of House of Cards. It’s entirely possible that I’ll sign up again for the next series, but until that happens, I’m out. This is an increasingly competitive market space to be in and content is going to be the major differentiator for all players. Cutting deals like the Star Trek one is what needs to be done.
Image credit - CBS Read more on: Cloud platforms - infrastructure and architectureCRM and customer experienceDigital and content marketing 