
One of the big tests that faces every high-flying superstar tech firm is how to explain away that first, inevitable stumble to Wall Street.
That was at least in part the challenge facing Netflix CEO Reed Hastings yesterday as the online entertainment market disruptor fell well short of its predicted number of US subscribers over the past three months. The firm had expected to add 1.15 million new subscribers in its domestic market, but in fact only managed 880,000.
The news outside of the US was considerably better with 2.74 million new customers internationally. That brought the overall total of new subscribers for the quarter to 3.62 million, better than the 3.55 million forecast, taking the Netflix subscriber total worldwide to 69.17 million as of 30 September.
However, the stumble in the US market alarmed Wall Street and raised concerns that competitors such as Hulu, Amazon and HBO’s new online offering are starting to eat into Netflix’s lunch. That’s an impression that Hastings is keen to dispel and he’s turned to an interesting argument to do so.
It seems the problem lies with the wider introduction into the US financial services market of chip-and-pin technology. Or more precisely, with Netflix’s inability to collect payment from subscribers whose credit and debit cards have changed over to chip-based technology.
Or as CFO David Wells says:
For us as a recurring merchant, where we really want to reduce the friction of renewal and reduce the friction of having any sort of interaction where we have to update your payment method and present an opportunity not to do that, it just means that there is more noise introduced into that.
There may be other things going on here, but certainly the transition to the chip cards is not helping, and that has to be a factor in it. And we’re only partially the way through, so the US issuers are going to continue that in Q4. They were supposed to be done in October, and they’re not. They’re about a third of the way through. So we’ll continue to see that in the US as we go along.
Of course the flaw in this argument is that the change in payment method – and the requirement to re-enter card details – should only impact on existing subscribers, not people signing up for the first time .
Ruthless
Nonetheless the content streaming market is getting more competitive – and more ruthless. Recently Amazon blocked sales of Apple and Google streaming devices with their competitive products. That presents a potentially interesting situation for Netflix, which is heavily dependent on Amazon Web Services. Hastings will only say:
AWS has been a great supplier to us. They demonstrated again and again strong market leadership, strong attentiveness to our account. We could not be happier with AWS.
They’ve always kept that separate from Amazon Retail. So with Amazon Retail, we’ve had up and down issues for a couple of years, we couldn’t buy ads on IMDB, things like that, and that never spilled over to AWS.
We’re very committed to AWS and are comfortable with that commitment.
There is at present an upgrade wave going on among streaming device manufacturers, with Amazon, Roku, Google and Apple all announcing new iterations of their offerings in recent weeks, empowering more ‘dumb’ TVs to become smart. This is an important trend and opportunity, says Hastings:
They’re both growing. They compete with each other. So those categories are growing. It’s only really the game consoles that are not growing as fast for secular reasons, the early on. They were the only high-connected devices attached to the TV. And now, they are facing competition in share from smart TVs and from these attached devices.
The other emerging threat comes from broadband providers, such as Verizon, BT and Comcast, morphing into subscription streaming services. Netflix has to work with such firms, but now finds itself competing with them as well. Hastings says:
Everybody has got to get into streaming. It’s been our main message for several years, that what is known as channels is going to become apps. All of these providers need to have great apps on a phone, on a tablet, on a TV, so it’s completely consistent with all of that.
What we see is if we have great content, then consumers watch our service and enjoy it and tell their friends about it. It kind of doesn’t matter that there is also a great sports game on or there is also a shows on Verizon or on Comcast.
So part of the reason that we may seem a little blasé is that it really hasn’t affected us. What has affected us is when we have great show like Narcos that just takes the world by storm. So that’s what we’re focused on, how do we have more incredible shows?
He adds:
I would say the biggest challenge is, our being the service that people want, really feeling out more movies and more TV shows. We’re working so hard to have these great original productions, and if we could have 10 more Oranges and 5 more Narcos, I know I’m putting a lot of pressure, that would be really transformative.
As for the broadband providers, Hastings says:
It’s early in the market. They are great companies. They will work on that. But I’m not going to critique them. They’re all, they are in, they are trying, and that’s a great thing. Of course, you seen Sony Vue, you’ve seen the Dish sling product. So people are really innovative, which is great for consumers. And not every product, when it first comes out is great, and they’ll continue to work on them.
Adaption
But Netflix is having to adapt to other competitive platforms, most notably agreeing to sell subscriptions to Apple phone users via iOS in-app purchases. This implies that Netflix is now having to pay 30% tax to Apple, although Hastings won’t be drawn on details, other than to say:
It’s a great opportunity to expand. Historically, we’ve only been on the Apple TV and that on the iPhone. We’re really excited about the potential, especially as we go global over the next year-and-a-half to be able to serve all of the iPhone customers around the world. So [there is] some higher motivation on our side to get access to that incredible iPhone customer base around the world.
Apple CEO Tim Cook has come out as arguing that the future of TV is apps, a case that’s already been made repeatedly by Hastings. Assuming this is true, there are implications for Netflix if consumers want to have ‘a la carte’ apps to choose thier own viewing schedules or whether bundling options will remain a prefered option.
Hastings acknowledges this will be a question to be pondered over the next few years:
I could imagine future bundles emerging. Once there is a whole bunch of apps, and as you go through this industry change now, next probably three, five, 10 years, where there is a lot of discrete offerings, everybody is improving their brand value.
And then you get to a maturing phase of the market, and then there is some consolidation, which could be acquisitions, it could be other things or it could be bundles. But the next couple years, when you have this new phase of the market, I think everyone is just racing to make a great app like Netflix, like HBO Now.
There are already examples of a new world order emerging, with Hulu bundling Showtime with its own service. This isn’t something that Netflix will mirroring in the near term, says Hastings:
We think we’re better focused on just establishing the Netflix brand. Again, at this phase in the market, we think the real key is focus. At some future time the bundling may be appropriate.
Of course, we’ll keep an eye and watch the Hulu Showtime take rate to see, to confirm that there is very little traction of that. So we’ll be open minded. But our instinct is focused on making Netflix the passion brand in this space.
My take
They got away with it. The share price had an initial tumble, but bounced back later. In what’s becoming an increasingly competitive and cut-throat market, this won’t be the last time there needs to be some executive smooth-talking – and the chip-and-pin thing isn’t going to travel well…
Read more on: Cloud platforms - infrastructure and architectureCRM and customer experienceDigital and content marketinge-commerceInfrastructureSocial 