
Ted Sarandos
Content is king of course. As digital economy maxims go, that’s one that won’t get challenged by most right-thinking individuals.
That being the case, that makes Ted Sarandos a force to be reckoned with. Sarandos is Chief Content Officer at Netflix and as such the holder of probably the biggest single programming budget of any media executive in the industry.
When talk turns to digital disruption, it’s to Uber and Air BnB that most commentators inevitably point, but in fact, as we’ve noted many times, Netflix has been a hugely significant disruptor of the traditional TV industry, creating the phenomenon of binge-watching entire series at the viewer’s own pace.
Combined with the rise of on-demand TV services that allow viewers to build their own schedules around their own lives rather than around the whims of a broadcaster’s scheduling department, Netflix is at the very heart of a perfect storm in the media market.
As Sarandos admitted at the UBS 43rd Annual Global Media and Communications conference this week, Netflix needs to build on its current lead in the sector. While never named, the prospect of Apple entering the video streaming business with its own original content, tied to an overhauled Apple TV strategy, looms large on the horizon.
That’s why Netflix is upping its original content commitments. This year’s 16 original scripted series this year will nearly double to 31 next year. Significantly the firm is also upping its original movie output, something that will become a differentiator for Netflix, says Sarandos, citing a new partnership with Disney as a key element in this:
The movies in [existing] output deals, not only are they 10 months old, they’re widely available on DVD and Video on Demand in hotels and airplanes. So it’s not really a differentiator for our service.
Disney is a whole different kind of an output. I was attracted to Disney output because Disney is a solely differentiated brand among movie studios. They have some key franchises with consumers. So when you say we have the Star Wars movies, that means something. When you say we have the Avengers, and the Marvel movies that means something. When you say we have Disney animated features that means something to consumers. When you say I have Paramount movies that means absolutely nothing to most consumers.
What is most important is to focus on quality of content, says Sarandos, as consumer expectations of video and the internet have reached a new level of maturity:
It wasn’t that long ago that people would look to the internet as a convenience source of video, not a high quality source of video. If you wanted to watch a quick video of Tiger Woods getting a hole-in-one or someone getting hit with a baseball bat, you know that was where you go to the Internet for.
Now Netflix is not only producing some of the best programs on television, there are streaming in 4K in quality better than television. So it’s a change in the dynamics of viewing.
When people come in, why they put the credit card down is that they are attracted to that programming and they are excited about a show and they watch something and they get hooked in and binge through 13 hours of a show in 10 days. That’s a very unique proposition and we have to keep delivering on that.
It’s also about the customer experience, he adds:
As we are growing the subscriber base, it’s because people are attracted to Netflix for great content that they are going to watch. Obviously they stick with it because of the great ease-of-use and the amazing user interface and the fact that when you push play, it works everywhere in the world, at all different broadband speeds and on all different devices.
Frustration
One frustration to date is the difficulty traditional media metrics have in measuring the extent of Netflix’s reach. Sarandon explains:
They don’t measure all the devices. In a world where you had four networks and all the viewing was on television, you can extrapolate a lot from the sample sets. But in a world where we are on Netflix, watching happens on 700 different SKUs around the world.
This makes it difficult to measure:
the viewing of any given show, the mix between what’s watched on a laptop and what’s watched on a big screen TV and what’s watched on our iPad, the different show to show depending on the demographics. I don’t think those sample sets are capturing the scale of the Netflix viewing.
Away from original content, Netflix is also a disruptor of the traditional media licensing industry, operating as a global buyer against an established hierarchy that is based around regional structures:
All of the studios and networks have situated themselves to be regional sellers. So they have international sales teams. That’s because there has never been a global buyer, so it makes complete sense that Sony and Disney and Warner Brothers would have regional sales teams.
Now we are a global buyer, buying global rights for shows and movies and there is some resistance to it, mostly from the regional sellers. People who are in charge of regional selling don’t want their job marginalized.
That’s something we are navigating with, just the politics of the selling community. [It’s] just a cultural issue. It’s a pretty big change. At the end of the day, it’s a real structural change that I think all of our studio partners are wrestling with because there is certainly an efficiency to what we are offering.
It should be economically neutral, meaning that I’m trying to use the scale to get a discount where you see us using the scale to get access. So, at the end of the day I think it’s something that will be good for the studios to have more efficient selling machines, to be more efficient selling machines, but you know we are kind of alone in this space of buying global rights.
My take
A genuine digital disruptor.
Read more on: Content marketingCRM and customer experienceDigital and content marketingSocial 