
With US Election day tomorrow, The New York Times has taken the decision to drop its paywall for the next three days as the news cycle reaches its frenzied climax.
Normally, NYTimes.com visitors can read 10 articles for free per month, before having to subscribe, but in an email to readers on Sunday, Executive Editor Dean Baquet and Editorial Page Editor James Bennet stated:
We believe that everyone, without exception, deserves a deeper understanding of the candidates, the issues and the results of this unprecedented election. So we have decided to open our digital platforms to all — without charge — on Nov. 7, 8 and 9. We invite you to come back as often as you like to take advantage of our reporting, analysis and commentary, from the lead-up through the aftermath.
It’s the latest digital development from the media outlet which is becoming a benchmark of the competing pressures of online v print publishing. Last week the firm reported a 19% decline in print advertising revenue, countered by a 19% increase in digital revenue. Digital revenue was $103 million out of a total of $363.5 million.
Mobile makes up nearly a quarter (24%) of total digital advertising revenue, while ‘traditional’ online display advertising is on the decline. Meanwhile circulation revenue from digital-only subscriptions amounted to $58.6 million, up 16.4% year-on-year, with a 30% increase in digital-only subscribers, now standing at around 1.6 million.
Those sorts of numbers enable CEO Mark Thompson to talk confidently of achieving the pivot from a print-dominated to digital business model:
We’re continuing to optimize our consumer marketing and the configuration of our pay model. Our investment in international is translating into more subscriptions. We are reducing churn. We’re putting more focus into corporate and education subscriptions.
Our market research and our practical experience on the ground makes us more bullish about the future growth of this model than we were even a year ago. We believe we’ll get to the second million digital subscriber mark sooner than we did the first and that there are many millions more potential subscribers for us in the United States, as well as an immense international opportunity.
He adds:
What’s been very pleasing is that we’ve seen our various measures of engaged users, the number of people who are coming to us four times a month, 10 times a month, the amount of time spent, the breadth of content that people are looking at, is also ticking up. So we believe because both of the underlying quality of our journalism but also improvements to our digital products that we’re seeing a rising tide of engagement with The New York Times.
New reality
On the advertising front, Thompson now refers to the website display model as “our legacy digital advertising business” and sees the future as lying with branded content, programmatic advertising and virtual reality (VR) solutions. On the last point, the firm has just announced a tie-up with Samsung to launch The Daily 360, offering “at least” one VR video a day. Thompson sees this as:
a model of the kind of collaboration we’re moving towards. The project will enable us to deliver high quality 360 and VR journalism to our subscribers and other users every day of the year while also driving significant revenue.
For all that, Thompson doesn’t expect print advertising to go away entirely, although it now only contributes 22% to total revenues and expectations set that another fall of around 19% will be seen in the current quarter:
We still believe that advertising in high-quality print publications can have an impact on memorability which allows it to play a unique and critical role which cannot be replicated by either digital or TV. I believe that’s true not just with The New York Times but with other high quality players, players like the Wall Street Journal and The New Yorker, for instance.
He concludes:
When we think about the print product, we don’t just think about print advertising or anything like that.We’re talking about a company which once had a reliance of maybe 80% of revenue on print advertising…In the present quarter, print advertising represented 22%, only 22%, of the company’s revenues.
We want to defend it, and we want to fight for every dollar we can get from print advertising. I think sometimes as people who observe The Times don’t realize the extent to which our success in subscription, both in print and now in digital, combined with our digital advertising, means that our exposure to print advertising is much less than many of our competitors.
My take
The New York Times is riding the digital transformation wave better than many of its competitors. The Wall Street Journal, for example, has around a million digital-only subscribers and last month launched a review of operations – WSJ2020 – to set a direction for the paper online and offline over the next three years.
For its part, The New York Times had its 2020 Report review earlier this year and that’s set to result in a yet stronger shift to digital and probable downsizing of headcount next year.
The disruption to the traditional print news industry is ongoing. The contentious and combative nature of the current US Election has seen social media platforms setting the news agenda, while the traditional news outlets have played catch-up or acted as fact-checkers after the fact.
Whatever the result tomorow night, it will be to social media that people turn for instant reaction, while the likes of The New York Times will end up being the source of considered opinion in the days ahead. It’s a brave new world for some.
Image credit - NYTimes.com Read more on: Digital and content marketingDigital enterprise in the real worlde-commerceMobile 