
I’ve written previously about the disparity between opportunities given to men and those given to women in the technology industry. In my experience, women face a far tougher time not only getting into senior positions, but then also face a tougher time getting treated equally in those positions and then getting paid fairly for their efforts.
You only have to go to a few enterprise technology conferences to realise that the industry could easily be perceived to be just full of middle-aged, white men.
It isn’t, of course. There are pockets of incredibly talented people from a wide variety of backgrounds. But it seems that generally speaking, it is white, middle-aged men that time and time again take those top spots.
This week the UK government released a report, that whilst is not specific to the technology industry (although there are some highlights in there too), generally supports the view that there is a shocking gap between what men and women achieve in industry in terms of pay and opportunity (pretty much across the board).
And although we may ‘know’ this already – it’s always good to have the facts on record. And it’s good to talk about those facts. Because knowing facts can change behaviour.
Education versus work
 One of the interesting things to come out of the UK Commission for Employment and Skills report is that although it found an average 19% pay gap between men and women in work, if you look at education results, women perform better. Not that education is always a good indicator of performance in the work place, it’s just useful to note that women do perform well in certain subject areas (e.g. ICT). The report states:
In Wales as in England and Scotland, females are far more likely than males to stay in education after age 16. Overall, the data show a higher proportion of females achieve A level grades A*-C in every year and the differential has been rising.
There are considerable differences in the subjects chosen by males and females but just because some are more popular among men than women does not mean that men perform better in those subjects. Data for 2008/09 showed female/male attainment gaps at A*-C for Physics, ICT and Physical Education of 11.6%, 11.8% and 14.5%.
So, although more men are taking subjects like science and ICT at school, women are outperforming them academically. The report goes on to note that women also tend to outperform men when they go on to university. It states:
The most obvious feature is that participation in higher education has been significantly greater amongst females than males over the last 10 years. To some extent males have been catching up; the number of female first degrees increased by 12.4 per cent, while the number of males increased by 24.9 per cent over the period. Even so, as shown by the ratio of females to males there were still over 30 per cent more female qualifiers in 2014 than males.
Pay
However, despite performing better than their male counter-parts throughout their academic careers, women then go on to get rewarded less in the work place. The report found that women get paid less than men when in full time work. But women end up significantly worse off because part-time workers get paid substantially less than full-time workers and there are a lot more women in part time work, than full time work. It said:
[The] hourly rates of pay for full-time workers exceed rates for part-timers. For women the difference in 2014 was between £12.31 and £8.44 per hour at the median. The male differential is even greater with £13.59 for full-time work and £8.00 for part-time in 2014.
In terms of gender differences full-time pay rates are consistently higher for men than women across the period shown although the ratio of male to female pay has been falling reasonably steadily over time. Since 1999 median pay rates for part-time work differ little between men and women; if anything the female rate is slightly higher for much of the period, as it is in 2014.
But clearly rates of pay for part-time work are low for both genders. This impacts more heavily on the female cohort in the workforce because a fifth of female employees work part-time compared with only around 6% of male employees.
Not only this, but women don’t benefit as much from bonuses and things tend to be worse in the private sector than the public sector. The report states:
Payments of premia and bonuses is a further feature of earnings differentials between men and women. Payments for overtime and payments by results have typically benefited men over women. The male/female ratio for the impact on earnings from payments by results showed that men benefited over women to a value of between 2 and 2.5% of their average pay. This differential benefit has if anything been increasing since 2000
The private sector starts (1997) with a pay gap of just over 25 per cent, which falls to about 18 per cent by the end of the period (2014); the public sector starts with a gap of 16 per cent, which falls to a value of 11 per cent by the end of the period.
If you take a look at the following table, it is noticeable that the difference between men and women pay is quite shocking across a number of industries (including information and communications):

Why?
I’ve written previously about why I think women aren’t treated equally in the work place – namely that I don’t think there is enough of an incentive to change the current system, because it suits those earning more to keep things status quo. Also I don’t think that the current corporate structures and rules allow for women’s skills to be valued in the workplace and/or allow them to both work and have a family. The report picks up on these things too.
It states:
While the gender pay gap is relatively small for the young and single, it increases with age, marriage and parenthood. In addition, women in some ethnic groups fare particularly badly (Yeandle et al. 2006). Women are disproportionately affected by the relatively low pay and quality of part-time work because nearly one-fifth of women work part-time compared with only around 6% of male workers. Pay and progression disparities affect women’s lifetime income both in work and in retirement as the impact of lower pay and differential pension contributions accumulates over the life course (Polacheck, 2014; Javornik, 2014).
The matter of part-time working has much to do with the uneven distribution of caring responsibilities carried by women, and how those responsibilities interweave with available patterns of work in the economy and the affordability of childcare and elder-care. Even with some distinctive changes, such as remote working, still the prevailing model of working hours and patterns does not fit well for many workers with significant out-of-work responsibilities.
Typical work patterns which limit the choice of roles feasible for those needing to combine work with family care therefore disadvantage women more than men. With good-quality part-time and flexible opportunities limited many work below their potential (failing to utilise all their skills, experience or qualifications) often becoming ‘stuck’ in low-paid, part-time jobs (Grant et al. 2005) because of their better fit with maternal and caring roles (Sefton et al. 2008) and to reduce childcare costs.
Progression into more senior roles can also be problematic linked as they often still are too long or unsociable hours at odds with the capacity of workers who need to combine a paid job and unpaid work in the home. The lack of progression opportunities is a further important factor behind the ongoing gender pay gap.
My take
A depressing read, for both women and men.
Read more on: DiversityFuture of workTalent management 