
Lew Cirne
A good end to the full fiscal year for New Relic yesterday as revenues rose 35% year-on-year to $355.1 million, while net losses were down to $45.3 million.
The firm now has 17,000 total Paid Business Accounts, with a growing number paying more than $100,000 in annual recurring revenue, as well as 2,100+ Enterprise Paid Business Accounts (more then 1000 employees), which now contribute 54% of ARR, up from 46% at the end of fiscal 2017.
For CEO Lew Cirne, the trajectory is upwards as he sees the market potential as still largely untapped, telling analysts on the post-results conference call:
Industry research firm IDC predicted that by 2021 at least 50% of all global GDP will be digitized. Think about that for a second – digital transformation is driving companies to be more productive and efficient with how they build and operate modern software, particularly customer facing applications. For more and more companies, the digital customer experience is the primary brand experience which is why it is critical to have insights into the health of their digital business.
In addition, the demands of becoming a software-driven business are putting significant pressure on developers and operations teams to move quickly and to push new products and features to customers more frequently. This pressure, combined with the accelerating pace of technology change has led organizations to rapidly adopt modern software development technologies and practices, including DevOps, micro-services, server-less computing, containers and of course, cloud computing.
Cirne also cited a second, commissioned, study from Four Star Consulting that report that the “typical enterprise” has around 12 different monitoring tools in situ:
But many of these are single purpose tools that fail to deliver on a unified deal of one entire digital environment. We believe that we are redefining the market category as a platform for customer-facing projects and that our true competition continues to be non-consumption.
In March, Gartner estimated that only 5% of application workflows were monitored by APM; a figure that we expect to quadruple by 2021, which means we have significant runway to help every enterprise instrument their entire environment. We continue to see a fragmented under-served and expanding multi-billion dollar market opportunity for the New Relic platform.
Bringing a single, unified platform approach is the objective, he added:
Many companies today are embracing cloud strategies across multiple cloud vendors using the right cloud for the right workload. We can act as an independent third-party, an honest broker single platform to integrate all of their performance data coming from across cloud, as well as their on-premise workloads. We’ve talked about the importance of our partners to help bring our message to companies undergoing significant transformation.
Today, customers struggle to make sense of their performance by a collection of tactical tools. We see customers demonstrating a strong need for a unified platform, a single pane of glass, from a strategic partner like New Relic. We are early on our journey here but we are already seeing early signs of our success with our non-APM product adoption. We believe that a new category is emerging and we aim to become a dominant platform of choice.
My take
A good end to the year for New Relic and one that, as Cirne noted, leaves a lot of room for growth in the coming 12 months. If I have a grumble, it’s that I’d have liked the CEO to talk more about real world use cases, as has been the case in the past, rather than just outlining the theoretical business and tech drivers for adoption. New customers in Q4 were cited in the form of Blue Cross Blue Shield, Expedia, Porsche AG and SAP Concur. Show, not tell, is always our advice.
Image credit - New Relic Disclosure - At time of writing, New Relic is a premier partner of diginomica. Read more on: Cloud platforms - infrastructure and architecture 