
CEO of Marks & Spencer (M&S), Steve Rowe, who was appointed as chief executive of the leading British retailer last month, has said that data insights from the company’s tens of millions of customers and the use of personalization will be key to the company’s success going forward.
Rowe was brought in to replace Marc Bolland, who had held the position for six years, to try and turnaround the fortunes of parts of M&S.
Whilst the company reported an uptick in profit for the previous year, it has been struggling to grow certain divisions, such as it’s clothing business, and even its digital channels have started to show signs of slowing down.
M&S said today that underlying profits rose 4.3% to £689 million, but that future profits would be hit in the short term by improvements to the business.
However, the main message coming out of the company this week is that on top of improving the quality and uniqueness of the of the M&S product across all channels, it would also be seeking to improve customer service through the use of data insights.
M&S this year launched its loyalty programme, called Sparks, which like other retailers, will allow the company to get a better understanding of customer behaviour. M&S is quite late to the game with this, given that the likes of Tesco and Sainsbury’s have been doing it for years.
In the financial results report out today, M&S noted the challenges that lie ahead. It said:
We are operating in difficult and challenging times – consumer confidence has dipped, the clothing market is flat, online sales have slowed and there’s deflation in the food market. Our customers are changing too as they become increasingly style and health conscious, shop around and expect more.
Analysing the shopping habits and behaviours of the 32 million customers who shop with us has shown that they carry a deep rooted affection for M&S but, for some, M&S is no longer their first choice. We have been listening to them to understand why and we have heard some common themes.
This insight forms the basis of our plans for the business. We believe that M&S is a special brand and we are committed to making every moment special for our customers.
Work to be done
As M&S completes a six week “forensic review” of its business, it took the opportunity to update investors on it’s future strategic direction. And the new focus is customers and customer insights. CEO Steve Rowe said in a prerecorded interview:
There’s lots to do. We’ve got some great foundations, 32 million customers that fundamentally love us. We’ve managed to build a great brand from a great heritage. We’ve got more than 900 stores, a new .com platform and great international partnerships.
When we say we are going to put the customer at the heart of everything we do, we absolutely mean it. The first thing we are going to do is take all of the really good data that we have in the business and turn it into actionable insights. We know and awful lot about our 32 million customers and we’ve talked to more than a quarter of a million of those in the last four months alone.
It’s important to say that it’s not about age, it’s about behaviour and attitude. And those are the things that we are taking into account as we define our customer mission. We’ve got 22 million occasional customers and it’s these customers that if we can get them to shop more frequently will help us to grow our business.
A part of this, according to Rowe, is using the insights to get the product, price and promotional stance right. He admits that this hasn’t been effectively practiced to date and that the approach will be more refined going forward. Rowe said:
It’s about establishing our value credentials and making sure we get the right price as the first price. We are going to bring down the price of a number of lines throughout the range. And addition to that we are going to change our promotional stance.
Last year more than 40% of all the goods sold in Marks & Spencer were on some kind of discount. We are going to reduce the discounting, have fewer sales and when we do, make sure that they’re targeted to things that our customers really want.
The company also said today that it wants to use the data to enhance its customer experience across all channels, by delivering clearer ranges and “real choice” in order to making purchasing decisions simpler and quicker.
It said that M&S customers are faced with product duplication, which makes shopping with the company confusing, and that navigating through sub-brands requires too much effort. The data also shows that M&S struggles to deliver on availability, meaning customers can’t always find the product they want.
The financial report states:
Underpinning all of this will be an investment in service. Our employees are the lifeblood of
M&S and they can be the difference in converting footfall into customers. We will improve
standards and offer better service by investing in more employees in our stores and improving
our instore facilities. Some basic changes to the environment, coupled with great service, can
turn a shopping trip into an experience.
We will also continue to develop and improve our digital channels so that we stay up-to-date
and relevant and can respond intuitively online and on mobile.
The technology
Aside from the data piece, M&S made reference to a number of other technology pieces that had received investment over the previous year, including its online and digital platforms that, whilst slowing, are still seeing growth.
M&S said that it is continuing to invest in its supply chain and technology, pointing particularly to its strategic distribution network, where it recently opened a Bradford-based warehouse that is being used as an automated store for its clothing and home business.
Equally, M&S said that progress has been made on its general merchandising, clothing, home buying and
merchandising systems, all of which are operational within the business. However, following a review of the clothing and home business, a decision was made not to implement the final component, assortment planning, although no further detail was given as to why.
As for the recently launched online platform, M&S said:

M&S.com sales were up 23.4% year on year. We grew ahead of the market, increasing our share to become the second largest online UK clothing retailer. 7.4m customers shopped online with us this year, our highest number yet.
Mobile continues to be the fastest growing sales channel however we are increasingly seeing customers use multiple devices for their shopping. Our mobile site content is updated daily to ensure we have engaging, up to date content.
My take
M&S is lucky that it has such a strong brand to rely on whilst it figures out the nuts and bolts of its digital and data strategy. I think it’s fair to say that it has been fairly late to the game both in terms of launching its new and improved online platform, as well as its advanced loyalty programme.
These are vital components to any successful retailer, as well as ensuring the in-store elements are well orchestrated. Along with good products (which M&S has work to do too – particularly in clothing).
That being said, the company is making all the right noises and appears to be doing the right thing – putting the customer at the centre. This time next year will be very telling as to whether it has executed on the strategy effectively.
Image credit - Images sourced via M&SRead more on: Retail e-commerce and the omni-channel 