
Kevin Cunnington
The new Director General of the Government Digital Service (GDS), Kevin Cunnington, has made moves to quash speculation that his appointment to lead the organisation is an attempt by senior civil servants to break it up and divert power back to individual Whitehall departments.
In a blog post, Cunnington has said that GDS is an organisation that “matters” and that it is “here to stay”. Not only this, but he has said that he has the full backing of Civil Service CEO John Manzoni.
This follows our story earlier this week, where we suggested that Manzoni and his permanent secretary pals were attempting to dismantle GDS’s influence in the wake of the EU referendum vote and the disruption that followed.
We described last week’s events as a ‘purge’, as a number of senior digital leaders across Whitehall departments, as well as then GDS leader Stephen Foreshew-Cain, left their jobs.
Foreshew-Cain’s departure in particular came as a shock, as he was well liked and respected amongst his colleagues and peers, and had only been in the job for 9 months.
Foreshew-Cain was attempting to shift GDS’s approach in Whitehall to being more inclusive and collaborative with departments – but it wasn’t enough to save his job, unfortunately.
It’s staying
With tensions running high, it was a good idea for Cunnington to release his own version of events into the public domain and ease concerns around the future role of GDS.
In a blog post, entitled “Kevin says hello”, Cunnington wrote:
I want to strengthen and accelerate the pace of change. I’ve read many times about the end of GDS, but it has always come back stronger than before. I want to tackle one thing head on: GDS will not be broken up. We remain part of the Cabinet Office with a clear mandate to lead digital, technology and data across government.
I say this with the support and backing of John Manzoni, Chief Executive of the Civil Service and Permanent Secretary for Cabinet Office. By bringing me in as Director General for GDS, John is making it clear that this organisation matters, and is here to stay.
That’s a very clear commitment from Cunnington, which makes it difficult for him to back-track on. Not only has he said GDS is here to stay, but he includes the detail that it will not be broken up.
Many had been concerned that GDS would be decentralised, with resources absorbed by departments, at a time when those departments arguably don’t yet have the capability to pursue widespread change independently.
Cunnington said that his first priority upon joining the organisation is to listen to the team at GDS, to understand their plans and ideas, which he said would take a few weeks. He added that “everyone at GDS is carrying on with the work they’ve been doing”.
Interestingly, Cunnington also included a line in his post about “transforming government itself”. This is a bit vague at present, but it’s something that GDS has shied away from in the past, arguably because of the political ramifications.
If you understand Government-as-a-Platform, you probably realise that it could have a hugely disruptive impact on the traditional structures of Whitehall. Will Cunnington be looking to push this agenda more aggressively?
Why the change?
Stephen Foreshew-Cain speaking at Sprint 16
Cunnington also took the opportunity in his blog to thank outgoing GDS chief Foreshew-Cain. He said:
In the last few days, I’ve seen first-hand how well respected and admired Stephen was by the team here.
On behalf of everyone, I want to say: thank you Stephen. You achieved a great deal during your time in charge. You secured funding for GDS for the rest of this parliament. You put new emphasis on people and relationships.
You’ve left us in a great position. I want to continue the new ways of working you introduced. Thank you.”
Whilst these are kind words, what’s not clear is why Manzoni and those in charge felt the need to put Cunnington in place. When Cunnington was announced as the new chief of GDS, Manzoni said:
At DWP Kevin played a pivotal role in successfully introducing a range of digital services and products and growing the DWP digital academy. He combines that proven track record with a deep understanding of the business transformation necessary to ensure that the full benefits of digital investment are realised.
I don’t know a great deal about Cunnington, but he does seem to be well respected amongst his colleagues and peers at DWP. He received a lot of well wishes on Twitter from those he’d worked with at the department, which is a good sign for his future colleagues at GDS.
However, it will be interesting in the coming weeks and months to get greater insight into why Foreshew-Cain was ousted and why Cunnington is perceived to be the man for the job. That’s no reflection on either of their abilities, but as things develop it will be interesting to see why the change took place and for what purpose.
My take
It’s going to be an interesting few months. No one can say things are dull in Whitehall…
For more detail on Cunnington’s future challenges, read my post from earlier this week on what questions we believe the incoming director general should answer upon joining.
Image credit - Images sourced via authorRead more on: Digital government and public services

