
Ben Gummer
As the UK’s new administration continues to take shape, Prime Minister Theresa May has appointed a new Minister for the Cabinet Office, a role crucial to the ongoing digital transformation of government.
The new man in charge, with oversight of the work of the Government Digital Service (GDS), is Ben Gummer, previously a junior minister in the Department of Health. He replaces Matt Hancock, whose fate is likely to be determined later today as non-Cabinet-attending junior ministerial posts are announced.
(The future role of Ed Vaizey, Minister of State for the Digital Economy, hasn’t been confirmed yet. After his backing of two other leadership candidates before May, it’s potentially one to watch today as well.)
As GDS Chief Executive Stephen Foreshew-Cain welcomed the new minister via Twitter, Gummer seemed as taken aback as anyone about the move, saying:
This came as a total surprise, but it is very exciting and I am looking forward to it enormously. In one sense I am quite sorry to be leaving health because we had a good team there and things were starting to happen – but when a call like this comes you have to jump at it.

 
Hancock’s departure comes as something of a surprise. He had only been in situ for just over a year, following an extended tenure by his predecessor Francis Maude. While an arch-supporter of former Chancellor George Osborne, Hancock switched allegiance to May very early on in the post-Brexit vote period and has enthusiastically tweeted his support for her ever since.
Maude was a hard act to follow. His longevity in the post enabled him to push through many of the more-radical reforms around how the public sector buys and deploys IT, as well as being an ardent supporter of the rise of GDS, which falls under the Cabinet Office remit.
For his part, Hancock was not as high profile, but in recent months had been articulating an increasingly coherent longer-term vision for a digitally-enabled UK.
Last month he outlined three principles for digital government transformation, while earlier this week he pitched plans for civil service workforce reform.
He also spoke about the post-Brexit impact on digital priorities at a meeting of the Reform political think tank. As an ardent Remain campaigner, his stance was that “we are all Leavers now”, insisting:
All who believe in democracy, however they voted, must respect the result. And I’d say to those, including lawyers, now complaining about the result, you had your chance to make these arguments. Some of you did. Now the people have spoken. We live in a democracy. Respect the result.
The main post-Brexit challenge now is how to “thrive on Britain’s technology and talent,” he declared:
The goal must not be to try to recreate the economy of yesterday, as populists of the left and right have suggested. It is neither possible nor desirable to ignore the global economy, or the rise of the developing world.
How do we design an economy not only where wealth is created, but where the opportunity to create wealth is spread? An economy that’s dynamic, modern, open and digital, yet also secure and resilient.
One benefit of a Brexit could lie in shaking off cumbersome European Union procurement rules, he implied, allowing the UK to set its own competition rules:
For years any small business selling to Government has complained bitterly about the so-called OJEU rules for public procurement.
Bureaucratic and inflexible, they increase cost to taxpayers, and worse still put many small and innovative businesses off from serving the public altogether.
EU procurement law is designed to prevent brown paper envelopes in exchange for bridge-building contracts. It is not designed to give a fledgling technology company the break they need to take their firm to the next level.
Recently things have improved. We secured agreement for some improvements at EU level, and with the Digital Marketplace [G-Cloud] we found a way to ensure firms could do the bureaucracy once then sell in often, rather than repeat the forms each time. Outside the EU we could consider going much further.
It’s an interesting point. By co-incidence, as Hancock is ousted and after a mysterious two-month delay in publication, the latest spend data has just been made available for the Digital Marketplace. This shows total G-Cloud sales up until June have hit £1.26 billion. The last set of numbers ran up until the end of March, when the total was £1.14 billion.
My take
Gummer’s got some big challenges ahead.
The eighth iteration of G-Cloud is due to go live next month, while GDS is said to be urging a more substantial overhaul of the framework prior to work beginning on version 9. This review will be based on feedback from users and suppliers. One of the original champions of G-Cloud, Memset CEO Kate Craig-Wood, has been outspoken in her disappointment with the current framework.
Meanwhile, the civil service workforce changes are likely to remain a priority for Gummer as the Cabinet Office position is that the current siloed nature of the civil service is a barrier to genuine digital reform.
Then there are all the big-ticket outsourcing contracts that are starting to wind down over the next couple of years, not the least the Aspire mega-deal at HMRC and the tax agency’s work on a new digital service plan to allow for online applications.
In all this, it’s to be hoped that Gummer is able to take a lead from Maude’s example and keep himself behind the Cabinet Office desk for longer than Hancock. That continuity of approach was crucial to Maude pushing through much-needed reform. With the post-Brexit vote uncertainty adding to an already daunting to-do list for digital transformation, stability is badly needed now.
Image credit - Gov.UKRead more on: Digital government and public services

