
The Government Digital Service (GDS) in the UK is going through what a lot of popular organisations go through when they experience rapid success and growth – they reach a point where they hit a bump in the road, experience a downturn and then they have to convince the market that they’re here for the long-term.
It’s not been an easy couple of weeks for GDS, following the news that its director Mike Bracken would be stepping down from his position. Although leaders always leave, no-one saw the announcement coming. Not only this, but a number of other strong leaders within the organisation are following him (even though they currently have nowhere to go).
This resulted in us writing a story declaring that we have no confidence in current Civil Service CEO John Manzoni to undertake the institutional change required to carry out a digital transformation, as we understand that it is a lack of support on his part that has led to the derailing of the government-as-a-platform agenda, which has resulted in the GDS mass exodus.
And this past couple of weeks has resulted in a lot of people suggesting that government IT will go back to the way it was done in the past, whereby a few big suppliers will dominate, ‘digital’ will be outsourced, IT cock-ups will return and the oligopoly will rise again.
I even saw some vendor consultant tweet something along the lines of this being a good week because it means finally being “back in the game”.
You get the idea, there are a lot of interested parties that want to ensure that things go back to the way they were. Culture is a stubborn beast and unfortunately it is going to take a lot longer than four years to completely rid Whitehall of the mindset of days gone by.
 However, despite everything that has happened over the past fornight and despite what we have said on diginomica, I’m left feeling somewhat optimistic about the future. Why? Because in my mind GDS was always at its best when it was the underdog, when people underestimated it and when it deployed revolutionary tactics.
I’m also encouraged by the sentiments expressed by people working for, or closely with, the organisation that suggest that even though good leaders are leaving, there are still a bunch of good people there that are ready to step up and take the challenge head on.
Here’s a couple of my favourites:
— Steve Foreshew (@s_foreshew) August 11, 2015


.@rossjones No, it assumes that they will fight us every single day until we embarrass them in to not fucking it up. That’s why it’s hard. — Sym Roe (@symroe) August 11, 2015


And it’s that last tweet by Sym Roe that prompted me to write this story. If we look back at when GDS started, it didn’t have anywhere near the amount of recognition and respect that it garners nowadays. It was seen as a little start-up in the centre of Whitehall that was filled with people wearing jeans and plaid shirts playing around with code.
However, given the perfect storm of austerity, a growing discontent with how the big suppliers kept messing projects up and strong ministerial support, GDS was quickly able to prove its worth and it began to grow rapidly.
GDS was consistently able to prove that if you did things differently, by working in a highly agile way and by focusing on the user need, digital services could be successful in government. And they could cost a hell of a lot less than what was done previously.
Our code is being used by government’s across the world as a result and there are projects in Whitehall that are proving that the new way of doing things is better than the old.
And now we once again find ourselves in a place where the old way of doing things has a chance of prevailing. I even speak to a lot of journalists that are quick to criticise GDS and argue the case for the use of large suppliers.
But this could be good for GDS, as it’s territory that it is familiar with and has succeeded in previously. GDS has done well in the past when it has felt like it has a huge challenge on its hands. And there are good people within the organisation and there are good people that it has helped place within government departments.
If those people step up, as acting director of GDS Steve Foreshew urges, when the rest of Whitehall and the
Steve Foreshew, new leader of GDS
media is writing it off, then it might just do some great things again.
Government-as-a-Platform is the big win here (I’ve got a piece on that coming tomorrow) and everyone at GDS should be doing what they can to prove to the rest of government that there is very little benefit in going back to the way things were.
Policy making and the systems that support it need to change. It doesn’t work anymore in a world where things develop so rapidly. But the culture and processes that currently exist in Whitehall don’t allow for that change to happen, just yet.
GDS’ job is now to go back to its roots, stir things up, drive change and prove to the old guard every day why the old way of doing things is stupid and outdated.
Read more on: Digital government and public services

