
 
When last we looked at digital music business Pandora, it was a story of tough decisions, organizational restructures and the exiting of some international markets to focus on the homeland, not to mention falls in audience size.
Enter a new CEO with a mission to turnaround the fortunes of the firm. Now six weeks into his tenure, Roger Lynch is under no illusions about the “real issues” that need to be addressed – and addressed quickly:
Pandora is very much a business in transition, and there are tangible challenges. In particular, our user base has declined in recent quarters, our ad revenue has not grown as much as we would have liked and, as a result, our shareholders returns have been poor.
So, what’s to be done? There are two main goals, says Lynch:
First, it is essential that we stabilize and then grow our base of listeners. Secondly, we need to hold onto and build on our status as a best-in-class publisher of targeted digital advertising, which means a significant upgrade to our advertising technology and the capabilities we can offer advertisers.
Everything has to start with the customer, he adds:
At Pandora, these customers include both our listeners and our advertisers. We strive to be an irreplaceable and integral part of our listeners’ everyday lives and our advertisers’ evolving marketing needs. For listeners, that means being able to find the content they want, and also discovering new content on any connected device and in any setting, they desire. And for advertisers, it means being able to transact with us in the way they desire with the ability to target, verify and measure the success of their campaigns, and to reach their audiences in new and innovative ways.
There is no doubt we have a lot of work to do to better meet the full spectrum of both our listeners’ and advertisers’ needs.
Assets
But it’s not all doom and gloom, says Lynch, as Pandora has a lot of assets that make for a solid foundation for turnaround, starting with “unparalleled scale”. He argues:
We are the largest streaming audio service in the United States both for listeners and for advertisers. From a listener perspective, with 73.7 million active users, we touch more Americans than any other streaming music service. From an advertiser perspective, we represent roughly two-thirds of all digital audio inventory making us the largest publisher of digital audio advertising in the US.
Pandora also enjoys massive distribution across a host of smart devices in cars, connected speakers, and of course, mobile devices. In fact, Pandora is available today on over 2,000 unique devices, and growing; giving our listeners flexibility in how and where they listen, and advertisers the ability to reach their audience in myriad ways.
In addition, the firm has significant data science capabilities that can serve it well, says Lynch:
Pandora has more than 85 billion elements of feedback from our listeners and their musical tastes generated over 17 years and data is at the core of our proprietary Music Genome Project, it’s what fuels our ability to choose exactly the right next song for a listener. Increasingly, we see opportunity to use that data and our data science capabilities along with new ad technology to deliver the right ad to our listeners at just the right moment.
But the biggest single issue facing Lynch is that Pandora has more than 93 million users who visti on a quarterly basis, but only 73.7 million monthly active users. The priority is to find ways to get users to engage more frequently and more extensively.
Lynch has some ideas on this front, beginning with tapping into new forms of content, such as podcasts, spoken word, and traditional radio:
Now, by no means will non-music content become the majority of our listening, but we do expect, over time, that it will be material both in terms of driving usage and in normalizing and potentially lowering our overall effective content costs…I believe these new forms of content will help draw a broader audience into Pandora and to the core music service we offer.
From an advertising point of view, there’s a need for more competitive features to the revenue model. Lynch explains:
The industry has seen a big shift in listening towards ad-supported, or free, on-demand, as exhibited by the emergence and growth of YouTube, Vevo and others. When you look at the top reasons why listeners leave the Pandora experience, it’s because they cannot hear the song they want on-demand and this is particularly important to younger listeners.
We’ve taken some steps to find new, creative ways to unlock interactive features in our ad-supported tier with innovative products like Sponsored Listening an ad product that rewards listeners with more skips and replays when they complete an ad view. And we’re committed to finding more ways to add competitive features to our ad-supported tier, so we can participate in this market opportunity; and do so in a way that delights listeners and benefits artists and other rights holders. We know there is power in marrying rewards-based advertising to the features our listeners are seeking.
But this isn’t going to come without some investment, he cautions:
We know that we need to invest in our ad tech to make Pandora a more efficient advertising partner and to become more competitive with our digital peers. And we are continuing to bring more engineering resources to focus on improvements in this area. This includes expanding access to our data and engagement metrics, so advertisers can monitor and adjust their campaigns more quickly and increase their ROI. And increasing the number of ways partners can transact with us, both through programmatic capabilities which we recently made available in beta on video, and coming soon on audio and, eventually, with self-service tools.
Investing to shore up our ad tech gaps will take some time to develop and implement, but will provide returns in several ways. One, we expect to see a direct impact to our top line revenue by recapturing lost dollars. Two, the improvements will also help our bottom line by removing inefficiencies in the very manual way the team currently needs to work to fulfill orders and requests. Three, they will help unlock new revenue opportunities in markets we don’t currently serve making sure we’re able to capture all parts of the demand curve.
My take
Clear signs of some clear thinking. Whether Lynch can execute on the vision remains to be seen, but there’s a direction of travel now set down – and that’s a start.
 
 
 
Image credit - PandoraRead more on: Digital and content marketingMobileUX and application design 