
If you’re a couple of ambitious young entrepreneurs hoping to kickstart a new trend, then a disused shipping container converted into a shop at the Boxpark  pop-up mall in London’s Shoreditch district is a suitably hipster-ish place to start.
At Unit 8 on the Boxpark site, Daniela Pillhofer and Peter Honegger of Newcomer Wines are on a mission to make Austrian wines fashionable with a new, younger crowd.
It’s an interesting idea. Older drinkers, after all, may still remember the Austrian wine industry’s ‘antifreeze scandal’ of the mid-1980s, when it was revealed that wine had been tainted with diethylene glycol (otherwise known as engine coolant), in one of the biggest food and drink scandals of the last century. The Austrian wine industry all but collapsed as millions of bottles were withdrawn from shop shelves.
But for younger wine aficianados, that’s all ancient history. (In fact, it was before either Pillhofer or Honegger were even born.) Thirty years on, Austrian wine imports are on the rise again. According to figures from Statistik Austria, despite four harvest shortfalls over the past five years, 2014 wine export figures were up 6% in quantity and 5% in value.
Online measures
Newcomer Wines’ co-founders are determined to profit from the resurgence in interest, via their retail outlet, e-commerce site and a wholesale business, which currently sells to around 25 restaurants, mostly in London.
But opening a physical retail outlet raises some interesting payment-handling issues for a small independent trader. Every day, many are forced to turn customers away because the costs and complexity of signing up with a traditional card payment service means that they decide only to accept cash. But if cash is still king for these businesses, the same cannot be said for their customers, who much prefer to pay by credit or debit card. Says Pillhofer:
From the very start, we knew that being able to accept card payments without any issue was going to be really important to us. Particularly because of the product we sell: a bottle of our wine can be £20 and people just don’t carry much cash around with them these days.
And it turns out we were right, because around 80%  of our customers want to pay by card.
In order to handle these payments, Newcomer Wines uses iZettle which, along with competitors such as Payleven and SumUp, uses mobile technologies to deliver a low-cost alternative to traditional card payment services.
It works like this: an iZettle card reader connects directly via Bluetooth to any iPad or iPhone owned by Newcomer Wines. The iZettle app is downloaded onto these devices, providing retail staff with an entire point-of-sale (environment) to process and store a customer’s payment.
A receipt, meanwhile, may be emailed to the customer directly from the app or printed out on a nearby iZettle printer. In other words, with iZettle, a small-business owner’s tablet or smartphone becomes card terminal, electronic point of sale (EPOS) and retail management software package, combined.
Cheers!
The barriers to entry, meanwhile, are much lower than those associated with traditional card payment services, which can be costly to set up and come with long-term contracts involving high monthly fees. The iZettle reader, by contrast, is bought outright at a cost of £49 and the app is downloaded for free. There are no monthly fees involved in the service. Instead, retailers are charged on a per-transaction basis, starting at 2.75%  per transaction and dropping to 1.5%,  according to the total value of monthly sales.
In its first year of business, iZettle has made retail life a good deal easier for Newcomer’s co-founders and their small team, says Honegger:
We really liked the idea of making a point-of-sale system as easy to use as possible and that’s what this does for us. We can scan through pictures of our products on the display, click on them quickly to add to the transaction. Ease-of-use was the main selling point for us.”
Today, we run all our [retail] transactions through iZettle – even the cash payments can be manually entered into the app, to give us the full picture about sales. And when we hold pop-up events at other venues, which we do quite frequently, we can be flexible about accepting card payments without having to take a lot of equipment out of the store.
We just plug the  card reader into our smartphones, instead of the in-store tablets. Basically, we can take card payments anywhere and everywhere and that’s really convenient for us.
 

Read more on: CRM and customer experiencee-commerceMobile 