
Earlier in the week we took a look at the New York Times pivot from print to digital, noting that other news media companies were facing up to the same transformation. One case in point was the Wall Street Journal (WSJ), which has started a strategic review of how to reshape for a digital age. 
The WSJ’s owner, News Corp has wider digital interests in play already, but like the New York Times, is moving carefully through a period of uncertainty and transition. CEO Robert Thomson talks of the firm’s emphasis on what he calls “digital real estate” as enabling it to ride out economic turbulence in the US and the UK. 
Like the New York Times, News Corp is hoping that the shift to digital will end up compensating for a decline in revenues from traditional print activities. But to date, that’s just an aspiration. Thomson says: 

In using information across our masthead, we saw a more challenging print advertising marketplace as has already been articulated by other companies in the sector. While digital advertising increased that growth was not enough to offset the decline in print. 

Nonetheless there are encouraging signs, he adds, noting that while advertising at the WSJ was down 21% year-on-year in the most recent fiscal quarter, the newspaper has now passed  the one million paid digital subscribers mark: 

The transition at the WSJ was highlighted by the fact that digital accounted for a record 55% of revenues this quarter. Obviously, some of that change is due to the decline in print advertising, but it also reflects the emphasis on broadening the digital subscriber base and the long term strategy of up-selling higher yielding specialist products to those subscribers.

But Thomson is cautious about over-inflating expectations for digital advertising and about the over-use of ad tech: 

There is no doubt that the advertising market is in upheaval and that the renewed advertiser focus on view-ability and measure-ability to naturally benefit trusted brands with accurate metrics. Hype and hip are not alternatives to quality and integrity. In the middle of this commercial commotion, it is appropriate that ad agencies are under scrutiny as too much ad tech is bad tech. 

What is notable about News Corp’s approach to digital and subscription-based revenue models, is the pragmatism. News Corp owner Rupert Murdoch has famously been resentful and suspicious of internet companies and their ‘free to air’ delivery of content. 
The company shut all of its content behind paywalls, but over time has adapted this principle when and where appropriate. For example, News Corp Australia operates what Thomson calls a “premium hybrid model”, which essentially allows limited free access along with a paid for premium subscription.
The UK provides a good example of this opportunistic pragmatism in action. The Times remains behind a paywall, but The Sun reverted to be being free to air upon the return of Rebekah Brooks to News Corp following her acquital in a long-running phone hacking criminal trial. 
The re-opening of The Sun’s content is paying off, says Thomson:


While advertising revenues have fallen, the digital audience has expanded dramatically since the pay was lifted late last year. We are seeking to attract loyal readers with quality content and not digital ‘drive-bys’ distracted by vacuous contentious click back. In September, there were almost 46 million monthly visitors to The Sun compared to fifteen million units in September 2015 before the lifting of the paywall. 

Beyond the headlines
It’s not just in news media that News Corp has been expanding its digital footprint. The firm’s News America Marketing operation has been ramping up and last year acquired Checkout51, pitched as a “data-rich, digital and mobile coupon company’. The Checkout 51 mobile app enables consumers to browse weekly discount offers on a wide range of grocery items including fresh produce, household and personal care, and then redeem the offers post-purchase simply by taking a photo of their receipt.
This is all part of a wider digital strategy, explains Thomson:


Points of purchase persuasion is a powerful asset that we have at News America Marketing, which also has valuable direct links to advertisers who rely on a unique market intelligence.
In the past, digital has been a rather modest part of News America Marketing’s offering, but the acquisition of Checkout 51 has changed that outlook dramatically. We had targeted the acquisition of ten million members this calendar year for Checkout 51, but could top that total this month, if not this week. The larger the audience, the better quality offerings, the greater the experience. That virtuous cycle is clearly in motion at Checkout 51 where we’ve had an influx of new deals of companies such Proctor and Gamble, Mandalay, and General Mills.

Other notable digital acquisitions are also paying off, he adds, such as social media brand Storyful and the Unruly ad platform: 

News UK now brings Storyful and Unruly into joint pitches for digital advertising. Storyful which has a unique ability to define meaningful moments on social media has become a part of the pitch for our Dow Jones risk and compliance business. If the consumer has a problem with a product and uploads a video or a comment Storyful’s unique access to social platforms globally allows it to track the virility of the incident. It also remains the world’s leading authenticator of social video for news agencies and broadcasters around the world.

He concludes: 

News Corp is not just a news company. We are a digital real estate company and a global and information company. We are proud of our prominence, but also leading the way in defining a digital future for media, whether it be to the strengths of our mastheads, on mobile, or the rapid growth of innovative news and commercial apps, that focus on long term growth is complemented by a rigorous monitoring of costs in the here and now.

My take
Leaving Murdoch’s original digital antipathy aside, News Corp has ended up with a usefully pragmatic and diverse strategy that shows clear signs of delivering returns. On the news media side, squaring the circle between the decline of print advertising revenue and the rise of its digital successor remains a near to mid-term challenge. But the firm’s policy of expanding its digital footprint into other sectors is a canny one. And Thomson’s warning about the ‘hype and hip’ of new ad tech is a timely reminder not to chase every bandwagon.
Image credit - News CorpRead more on: Collaboration sharing and digital productivityDigital and content marketingDigital enterprise in the real worlde-commerceUX and application design 