
You want to create a great experience for your website visitors. But a great experience means different things to different people. Every organization faces the same challenges: what kind of experience do I want to provide and how do I know that what we are doing is achieving it?
Many companies look to CRO (conversion rate optimization) to measure digital experience. But talk to Ben Harris, CEO of Decibel, a provider of a digital experience intelligence solution, and he’ll tell CRO is not the right approach to understanding how good your digital experience is.
CRO is a persuasion strategy; it’s about figuring out how to get people to convert: download a paper, buy a product, sign up for the newsletter. What it doesn’t tell you is how happy your customers or visitors are when they are on your website trying to do something.
Would web analytics give you that information? Pieces of it. It will tell you what pages are the most popular, how visitors move through your website, how long they spend on pages, what they are searching for. The focus is on the click. It’s all useful information, but the picture is still incomplete.
You also have the option of using Net Promoter Score (NPS). NPS will tell how happy and loyal your customers are, but it relies on you asking them.
What if you didn’t have to ask them? What if you could measure how enjoyable your digital experience is by measuring what is happening between the clicks?
Decibel’s Digital Experience Intelligence Platform
Today, Decibel is officially launching its Digital Experience Intelligence Platform, and the cornerstone of the platform is the Digital Experience Score.
When you integrate the Digital Experience Intelligence Platform with your web or mobile app experience, you can track every session, including things such as how a visitor moves through the site, the distance they move the mouse, the speed they move it, if they’ve rotated their device, how they move about a page and so much more. Decibel has created algorithms that spot common behaviors, looking for trends by those who convert, versus those who don’t. It scales the information across customers and alerts you to problems in near real-time so you can fix them and thus fix the experience.
The Decibel Digital Experience Intelligence Platform (DXI) provides a number of forensic tools you can use to understand what’s happening on your website. Using dashboards, you can look at key metrics and dig deeper, replay recorded sessions and analyze heatmaps. Decibel’s heatmaps aren’t your traditional heatmaps either, there are several kind that make it easier to understand what’s happening, including attribution heatmaps, hybrid heatmaps combine click, hover, dot, and link attribution heatmaps, scroll and attention heatmaps and aggregate heatmaps.
Decibel also takes all the data it tracks and creates a score – the Digital Experience Score – analyzing the engagement, navigation, frustration, form and technical experience for every visitor. It’s not a replacement for everything else you do to analyze the digital experience; Harris said it’s complimentary. It is a net new score that can help you better understand at a glance what’s not working, and what is, on your website or mobile app.
The Platform also integrates with Digital Experience Platforms (DXPs) such as Adobe and Oracle. An API extracts data from the Decibel platform and loads it into a CMP or data lake for in-depth analytics. You can also surface key metrics like the DXS in dashboards in Adobe or other DXPs.
On GDPR, Facebook woes and the digital maturity curve
Decibel is headquartered in London with offices in the US, so it does fully support the upcoming GDPR which means all the data you are looking at does not identify any particular user or expose personally identifiable data.
However, if you are using the Decibel DXI Platform with a platform like a customer portal, you can map the data to a specific person. In this case, you would want, in some cases, to understand how specific customers are using your portal and identify any issues they are having. Fraud detection is another use case where you might want to track specific users.
We also talked about what Decibel does in the context of everything that is happening with Facebook and the sharing of personal information. Harris explained that situation is not the same. The DXI is tracking anonymous session data of people purposely coming to a website to look for something or perform some action, and it’s analyzing that data to help a brand improve the experience it provides on a website for everyone, or for defined audiences and segments.
If customer experience is a brand’s biggest differentiator, why do so many struggle with understanding how good the experience is today and how to improve it? The answer may lie in how they measure the experience. Decibel’s digital maturity curve outlines its view of the various stages organizations go through as they learn new strategies and adopt new technologies to support their ability measure and improve digital experiences.
The digital maturity curve is a combination of the visibility the brand has into digital customer experiences and their ability to act on these insights:

“The five maturity phases are representative of the data a company collects, its alignment around this data, buy-in of its stakeholders, and the optimization philosophy it uses.” – from Digital Experience Transformation: Beyond Conversion Optimization
According to Harris, most brands are still in stages 1 or 2:

Stage 1 – collecting quantitative data from sources such as basic analytics, heatmaps, and other reports, working in silos across the organization, little stakeholder buy-in, focused on CRO
Stage 2 – collecting quantitative data and adding in some qualitative data (voice of the customer, user testing, session replays), still fighting silos and stakeholder buy-in issues, and still focused on CRO

According to Decibel, when a brand reaches stage 3, this is where technology like the Digital Experience Intelligence Platform and the Digital Experience Score come into play.
Organizations focus on qualitative insights at quantitative scale leveraging machine language and automated behavioral analytics, a single view of the data across the organization, complete stakeholder buy-in and a focus not on conversion rate optimization but digital experience optimization.
Stage 4 is where real-time analytics come into play, but Harris said that while everyone wants this, most don’t know how to deal with it. It is a future state that we should be working towards.
My take
There are tools available for heat maps, recording sessions and possibly even for providing some of the metrics available through Decibel’s platform. But it’s not the individual parts that make this platform standout. It’s that with the use of machine learning, these metrics and individual tools can be tracked, analyzed for trends and combined to provide a single view of digital experience performance.
I assume this is why Decibel has also rebranded from Decibel Insights and has dropped the “analytics” term and taken on the deeper meaning term “intelligence.”
One thing that Harris pointed out that is interesting to think about is that of all the capabilities we expect to see in a Digital Experience Platform like Adobe, Sitecore, Oracle, and others; we don’t see any requirements for digital intelligence capabilities.
In Gartner’s recent Magic Quadrant for DXPs, the only analytics and optimization capabilities “required” are “Integration and contextualization of web analytics provided by third parties.” It seems like it’s not just brands who are behind the times with digital experience optimization.
Image credit - Feature image - Woman using tablet pc, pressing on virtual screen and selecting time for review. © WrightStudio - Fotolia.com. Decibel maturity curve figure credited and linked above. Disclosure - Diginomica has no financial ties to Decibel. Read more on: CRM and customer experienceDigital and content marketing 