
Last week I said that I was looking forward to Next: Economy. It has not disappointed. I’ll have plenty to say in the coming days as I digest what I am hearing but one sentence stood out from an early session:
Historically, Silicon Valley hasn’t wanted to have a political discussion. This is something that can no longer be avoided.
As those words sunk in I could but help think: ‘Yeah, and neither does the rest of the technology industry.’ Why?
Talking about anything that has a political element is hard. Who wants to be labeled as ‘that liberal,’ or ‘that conservative’ or any of the other pejorative labels that get applied whenever political thinking seeps into a discussion? I don’t and in conversations among attendees, I couldn’t find one other person who felt comfortable about the idea.
Instead, I believe we need a new framework for discussion even if I’m unconvinced we have figured out what words matter in this context and how those words can be used to foster a civil discourse on an already divisive topic.
When you look at the world’s most valuable companies as measured by stock market value, it is the technology giants that dominate the ‘rich list.’ These are the companies that are generating millionaires and billionaires on an unprecedented scale. These are the companies that are actively contributing to the steady automation of rote and not so routine jobs and, as a by product, contributing to the displacement of entire workforces on a global scale.
Douglas Rushkoff
When viewed through that lens, It is easy to assume that technology must be a societal destroyer. After all, technology’s impact underpins much discussion about the persistence and rise of income and wealth inequality, especially in North America. While that’s a shocking generalization in some people’s view, Douglas Rushkoff, author of Throwing rocks at the Google Bus said it well when he theorized that:
What happened at Google? They were supposed to be the good guys but it turns out that the business model they’re running is ultimately extractive and doesn’t add value.
Rushkoff argues that extractive business models where most of the benefits accrue to capital are, eventually, self destructive because they create conditions where consumption is no longer possible for the very people those businesses wish to attract. Using  Walmart as an example, he said:
Walmart had this incredible power to come into local communities and take out the competition but in doing so it would hire people, mostly on part time contracts so they end up on food stamps or other social aid and can’t really afford to shop so that eventually Walmart sales actually fall, even while they’re getting a massive government subsidy. How does that make sense?
It is a massively simplistic argument, as are many similar arguments because they largely ignore the impact that digital has had on bricks and mortar businesses like Walmart. Heck, Walmart is struggling to hire bright people even as it attempts to pivot towards a digital future.
Another flaw in Rushkoff’s argument is that he is not offering a sufficiently credible alternative to the ‘winner takes all’ network enabled digital businesses that are mushrooming at the moment and which benefit from the commodification of cloud services and the ability to apply aggregation theory to their business models. Uber is the obvious example.
My view is that while there is a distinctive whiff of conspiracy theorizing required to assemble an entertaining bit of theater, the bones of this argument are well made.
Flipped in another direction, the billionaires and millionaires in the economy cannot consume to the extent that a million or billion people can. Therefore, Rushkoff  argues, if you want growth, then you have to look at systems of redistribution and be prepared to consider alternatives to the models which concentrate power and wealth in the hands of the very few.
Any talk about redistribution draws gasps from those who view state aid or governmental intervention as an invitation to laziness in a world where job choice and abundance surely make up for those who are displaced. Even if you view the world of choice as an opportunity, just how do you get from here to there? It’s not as though there is a fair economy of learning, widespread support for retraining or central funding for the safety nets that are and will be needed.
Andy Stern
It is this last point where things get tricky. But then listening to Andy Stern author of Raising the Floor, I was captivated by his argument for a universal basic income (UBI) where he invoked Churchill’s expression that:

Democracy is the worst form of government, except for all the others. Well, when you’ve tried everything else to alleviate poverty and get people spending, the idea of putting hard cash into people’s hands makes the most obvious sense.

Colleagues will no doubt argue that the handout economy is the last thing any nation needs. But the fact remains that in America, the concept behind UBI is being taken seriously at a time when there is anticipated fallout at significant scale.
At Y Combinator, Elizabeth Rhodes is researching this topic. She says the idea has a lot of appeal but that we don’t yet know how it can be worked into the economic system, neither do we know what the tax status ought to look like along with a slew of other practical problems. She also cautions that it is not clear whether UBI would be enough to both stimulate spending while encouraging displaced people into finding alternative work. In short, it’s complicated.
These are all political problems that the tech industry may still choose to eschew but which, in reality, it will have to face in one shape or another. For example, the rush to robotization is creating a whole new set of headaches about what it means to have a workforce. Most recently, Phil Wainewright talked about the need to put people back into HR.
Faced with a complex and changing labor landscape, I’m left wondering what the new world of work is going to look like five or ten years from now, what are the alternatives and how the political dialog might include the technology industry. Next: Economy is a good start for those conversations but then we can take cues from business examples like LinkedIn, Shinola and Thumbtack.
I’ll discuss their approaches in my next story.
Image credit - Story image - © tiero - Fotolia.com, headshots via author, featured image via © Suchota - Fotolia.comRead more on: Analytics planning and data analysisFuture of workHCM and the digital future of work 