
Despite a rise in pre-tax profits and estimates that could continue to grow next year, UK retail business Next saw its shares fall nearly 10% this morning following a warning from the company that the next twelve months were going to be incredibly challenging.
Next said it was going to continue to invest in its online and multi-channel capabilities, with a particular focus on advanced marketing solutions and a personalised website, but also noted that its online/offline mix of solutions was going to have to be sophisticated to please consumers.
Pre-tax profit for the 12 months stood at £836.1 million, up from £782.2 million from the previous year. However, it downgraded its growth forecasts from between 1% and 6% to between -1% and 4%.
The company said:
The year ahead may well be the toughest we have faced since 2008. We are very clear on our
priorities going forward and whatever challenges we may face, it is important that we remain
focused on ensuring that the Company’s product, marketing, services and cost controls all improve in the year ahead.
In many ways we have more to do than ever before with complex challenges to our working
practices across product, marketing and systems. It may well feel like walking up the down
escalator, with a great deal of effort required to stand still.
It will not be the first time we have felt this way, and our experience is that the effort put into improving the business in tough times can pay handsome rewards when conditions improve.
Next Directory
 The retailer said that over the last five years its catalogue business, Next Directory, had “changed profoundly”, noting that sales had grown by 75% over this period.
However, it also said that growth was beginning to slow, for a number of reasons But Next said that the opportunity of online will continue to help it meet customer expectations. It said:
However, growth in the core UK Directory business has inevitably slowed as the business has matured. Partly this is as a result of competitors catching up with our delivery and warehousing capabilities; partly as a result of changes in the ways customers are shopping online. It is this last point that provides us with the opportunity to improve the business going forward.
To that point, Next outlined how it would improve Directory UK going forward, which would focus on the following four areas:

Improving user interfaces
Catalogues and marketing
Delivery service
Credit

Next noted that the way customers are trading with it are also changing in a number of ways. Namely the devices that they use now to purchase items have changed, their desire for catalogues has reduced, their propensity to take credit has diminished and their preference to collect deliveries from stores has increased.
With regard to user interfaces, for example, Next said that the conversation rate for shoppers on desktop had always been higher than on mobile (8.5% versus 4.2%). However, it believes that it can “narrow the difference”. Next said:
Until very recently, the vast majority of mobile phone users would have been presented with our normal desktop website on their phone screen. We have recently switched customers browsing on mobile phones (excluding iPhones) to a mobile version of the site (m.next.co.uk). The results have been encouraging with conversion rising significantly, from 4.2% to 5.8%. Over the course of the next few months we will also switch over iPhone users to the mobile site.
Equally, the company’s iPad app has had a facelift too.
In August last year we launched our new iPad App. The aim was to give customers the best of both worlds – the look and feel of a page-turning book alongside the search and filtering abilities of a website. The results have been encouraging and we have seen conversion rates improve from 8% to 10% for those customers using the App.
Over the course of the year we will focus on converting more iPad customers to the App. In May, we will release a new version of our iPhone App to mirror the improved functionality on the iPad. In July we will launch an Android version of our iPad App”
The catalogue business
What’s most interesting about the Next results is that it said that customers that continue to receive catalogues still value them. And as such, Next said that it does not intend to abandon its printed brochure. It said that for the 1.6 million that want catalogues, “providing a regular flow of new and exciting publications remains the most important way [to] engage”.
However, Next added that over the next year it will be rationalising and expanding the distribution of brochure and catalogues, with the aim to maximise the opportunity to profitably distribute printed materials to those customers that respond well to them.
As we see with many other retailers, it’s no longer a case of ‘online good’, ‘offline bad’. It’s about finding the right balance and the right blend of the two for the differing needs of your customers. Which is no easy task, by any stretch.
Next said for the customers that prefer online shopping, it is going to invest in new marketing technologies:
“However, there are a growing number of new customers who no longer require catalogues and we need to replace the interest they provide with other marketing methods. In particular we believe
that we can make much better use of online advertising and email marketing technologies.
Over the course of the coming year we will invest an additional £8m (UK and overseas combined) in various forms of targeted online advertising and email campaigns. This marketing will be aimed both at re-activating existing customers and recruiting new customers.
Online advertising campaigns must satisfy our internal investment hurdle rate of at least 30% Internal Rate of Return (IRR), which means that on average campaigns will achieve more than that and breakeven at around one year.
On the downside, this means that we will be adding costs in the current year that are unlikely to generate a profit until the following year.
In addition, Next said that from the Autumn it will begin the process of personalising its website and that this technology will facilitate more targeted advertising through third party websites to existing customers.
My take
A tough year ahead, but making all the right noises.
Read more on: Retail e-commerce and the omni-channel 