
Innovation is a word that gets bandied around a lot at sportswear firm Nike and increasingly that word is linked to another favorite: digital.
CEO Mark Parker explains:
At Nike, innovation comes in many forms and our growing digital ecosystem is the great example. Consumers are increasingly connected and utilizing premium personal digital services.
Digital is an accelerator of growth that is shaping everything we do. We are building deep connections to consumers with digital services and communities to driving rapid expansion of our ecommerce business.
This has had a significant impact on customer engagement for the firm:
Nike is one of the world’s most engaged brands online. It’s where we connect with the consumer one-to-one and it’s where we connect people to one another. And we’re constantly looking for new always to seamlessly connect social platforms to commerce.
He cites as examples a move by Nike Women to launch a shopfront on Instagram that allows users to click a photo and be taken directly to nike.com product pages. Nike was also announced as one of the first partners to offer curated product collections through Twitter.
Online and offline customer engagement are closely aligned, he adds:
We deepen our relationship with consumers through services like Nike+ run club and Nike+ Training Club that inspire and enable them to do more and to get better.
Our Nike+ Training Club app continues to build a motivated community of devoted athletes and now features 135 workouts and is available in 17 languages. Accessed through nike.com, the Nike+ Run Club training plans bring together the best Nike Expert running guidance to one place.
There is great potential here to connect more runners to the product they need to meet their goals. In April we unveiled a Nike trainers’ hub that unites the global network of elite trainers to help every athlete reach their peak potential.
We connect, motivate and inspire our community of members with great products and services, because ultimately what sets Nike apart is our innovative products and ecommerce is rapidly expanding our ability to serve consumers with products for any sport all over the world.
Digital demographics
Nike.com itself turned in 55% growth in fiscal 2015, states Parker, with an encouraging expansion of the firm’s mobile footprint:
We saw increases in both traffic and conversion, fuelled by our investments in critical infrastructure to improve the consumer experience on both desktop and mobile. Our traffic on mobile has exceeded traffic on desktop, making it a very sharp point for consumer engagement going forward.
Nike Woman
The digital investment has paid off in particular areas, such as the firm’s women-centred products, a business that’s worth around $6 billion to NIke:
One of the reasons we think we were able to drive the growth is, because we are putting the pieces together. This aspect of being able to communicate very well with[a female customer], at the same time making sure the products that we’re bringing to the market are really, really strong.
Nike.com has certainly been one of the really great hallmarks for us, because we’ve seen our ability to really invite the consumer into our communications, importantly engage with her and then serve her very specifically online.
That business is growing at a much faster rate, faster than our men’s business online and faster than the total brand online. So we believe that that really is providing a great window of opportunity for what we think is just going to continue to be a great growth area.
Overall Parker’s pleased with progress to date, but sees the firm’s ecommerce work as only beginning:
I’m proud to say our ecommerce business surpassed $1 billion in revenue this past year, a fantastic achievement from all of our teams. But really we’re just scratching the surface of our potential in this area. Global consumer spending through ecommerce exceeds $1 trillion, a significant portion of which is done on mobile devices, tremendous opportunity ahead for us in ecommerce.
My take
A powerful use case on the power of digital investment to enhance customer engagement.
Image credit - via NikeRead more on: Cloud ERP financials and supply chainCRM and customer experienceDigital and content marketinge-commerceMobileRetail e-commerce and the omni-channel 