
Sports apparel firm Nike has appointed its first Chief Digital Officer (CDO) in the form of Adam Sussman as the latest move in its ambition to pull in $7 billion in digital revenue by 2020. 
In his new role, Sussman will spearhead development of digital products and services across Nike.com, Nike+ and brand digital platforms, as well as driving Nike’s consumer engagement initiatives. 
Prior to joining Nike, Sussman had roles at various interactive gaming and entertainment industries, including EA Mobile and Disney Interactive, where he worked on digital product commercialisation.
Susanna will report directly to Trevor Edwards, Nike Brand President, who says: 

Digital offers a fundamental transformation of our business, as we create an industry-leading digital ecosystem that flows through all that we do. This is the leadership to which Nike is accustomed. Adam’s wealth of experience in digital, consumer technology and strategy leadership makes him the perfect person to tackle tomorrow’s challenges today. Adam is just as passionate about solving a problem for one athlete as he is introducing that innovation to a global community.

Edwards sees digital as key to Nike’s expansion: 

The digital business obviously provides a tremendous opportunity for us. It really touches all dimensions of the company. The growth rates we’re seeing really will come from all the different dimensions of the business. When you think about the under-served categories, as we look at the Women’s business, we look at the Young Athletes business, as we look at the Jordan business, all of those really provide great opportunity to growth from a category perspective, along with the big categories that are already growing. 
From a geographic perspective, while North America is currently one of the larger growing ones, China has a tremendous, tremendous growth opportunity. We can see that as being one of the most connected markets out there. Europe has continued growth opportunity. So, we really do see [digital] as an expansive opportunity across the board. It really is one of those cases where it’s a global footprint and we just see more and more opportunity the deeper we dive.

CEO vision
The firm has also been working on technology and manufacturing partnerships in pursuit of digital cloud. For example, it signed a deal with DreamWorks and its technology company, NOVA which CEO Mark Parker sees as combining: 

the expertise of two design leaders, Nike with the human body in motion and DreamWorks with the animated body in motion. I have been talking with our design teams and they see great potential in NOVA’s platforms to advance our creation process in capability, precision and speed.

It’s the kind of partnership which Parker sees as being at the ‘intersection of digital’ and innovation: 

At Nike, digital does more than just add capabilities for today. It defines how consumers will experience the NIKE Brand moving forward. It’s an accelerator across our business in product through the supply chain, in analytics and all the way to retail.

He adds that investment in digital Nike leads has cross-sell opportunities internally: 

When we expand our Nike.com footprint, it gives new consumers access to the best of Nike and it drives great energy for our business. We have focused our investments in digital and mobile over the last several years and they are paying off. Driving the connection of Nike.com to our broader digital strategy continues to be, without a doubt, one of our greatest opportunities as a company.
Digital, of course, also allows us to deepen the relationships we already have with consumers by tailoring every interaction to their specific needs. Through Nike+ we have created an ecosystem that gives athletes access to their fitness history, training programs, and their favorite gear every time they connect with Nike. 

Parker concludes: 

We started on this journey 10 years ago with Nike+ and we have continued to evolve the digital experience for consumers through multiple sports in the world’s most important markets in both men’s and women’s.
We are continuing our never ending quest to make the digital experience simple and personal. Simple, moving toward one access point for the best of Nike and personal more and more tailored to the individual. 

My take
Appointing a CDO is the latest step in a well-planned digital race. 
Read more on: Digital enterprise in the real worldDigital transformation - frictionless enterprise 