
Yesterday I commented that the one area of online retail that I hadn’t experimented with to date was in the footwear market, arguing that I feel the need to try on the shoes in store before making a purchase. That said, there is evidence that digital is impacting on the shoe sector just as it has in other areas of retail, as seen at DSW and Shoe Carnival.
That’s certainly been the case at sports footwear  and apparel giant NIKE, which has in fact been overtaken by the speed with which digital disruption has come round the bend. According to CEO Mark Parker, the past 90 days alone have taken it by surprise, leading him to conclude that the US retail landscape in particular is not in a steady state.
That’s going to lead to much more digital investment, he predicts, as he anticipates yet more significant shifts to come:
Those shifts really create some big opportunities and some challenges at the same time. I think the important thing to point out is that these changes are really being driven by the consumer, and consumer demand at the same time remains quite strong.
But we know that consumer expectations are quite high in terms of product, the type of product they want, the innovation, the style. They want the product fast, they want it easy, they want personal service.
They also want it direct it seems. For the most recent holiday season period, NIKE brand direct-to-consumer revenue increased 13%, driven by an 18% growth in digital commerce. Parker concludes from this:
The consumer has decided digital isn’t a just part of the shopping experience. Digital is the foundation of it.
That altered engagement with customers has implications for NIKE’s operational model, says Parker:
That’s why we’re focused on doubling the output or the cadence of innovation or speed to market, so we can be that much more responsive to consumer needs, deliver innovation more quickly, and then doubling our direct connection, to consumers in the marketplace, using or leveraging the power of digital.
What will really determine success is taking a long-term view, argues Parker. This is a marathon, not a sprint :
The brands that win are going to be the ones that have been out in front with digital and leading with service. While we don’t expect this transition to be simple, we are clear about what it will take to get there.
Customer focus
What it will take is a doubling down on the customer, says Parker.
We’re aligning all of our firepower against the consumer experience. To see consumers rising expectations, we’re driving fundamental change in three core areas of our business – through the innovation that inspires them, the supply chain that delivers it quickly and in the marketplace, where we connect personally, with consumers.
This, he says, is refered to internally at NIKE as the ‘triple double’, a catch-all term to cover a number of practical initiatives:
In products, we’re doubling our cadence and scale of innovation through performance and sports style. Throughout our supply chain, we are doubling our speed, from product insight to delivery to the consumer. And in the marketplace, we’re doubling our direct connections with consumers through digital membership and personalization.
To win now and create the future, we’re obsessing these three areas – 2X innovation, 2X speed and 2X direct.
That last point is the one where digital investment is going to make a major difference from the consumer pint of view. Parker explains:
This strategy doubles the business that is in direct service of the consumer, and we do this by leveraging this digital and membership to bring the NIKE brand closer to them, regardless of whether they are in our own DTC or with wholesale partners. We want to extend NIKE’s homeport advantage across all channels.
We are seeing the opportunity up close. Take NIKE Soho [in New York], for example. When consumer walks through that door, they get one to one personal shopping service, invitations to our running and training clubs with other members, the opportunity to trial our latest innovations, and seamless access to product to get them what they want quickly.
What we found is that NIKE+ members, who use our personnel shopping appointments, generate more than three times the average transaction size. We see the consumer shift within digital commerce as well, with a larger share of our growth coming through our apps. Its further confirmation that the consumer responds to a simpler, faster and more personal connection. And right now that level of service, that deeper experience with the NIKE brand, is driving growth in our own DTC.
That growth is worth pursuing as well – NIKE digital members already spend nearly two times what other NIKE consumers spend per transaction.
It’s not going to be an easy transition to make, admits Parker, but he stands firm on one core belief:
The more directly Nike engages with the consumer, the greater the return…More personal more mobile, more distinctive, these are the dimensions that will drive growth. And I’m convinced now is the time to rewrite the playbook of retail.
[This is] a market that’s undergoing a lot of shift and change, but again, I wouldn’t trade you our position with anybody.
My take
It’s an interesting/tough time to be NIKE. German rival Adidas is ramping up for a significant push into the US market in 2017 and beyond, so the competitive landscape is only going to get more turbulent. Parker is talking the right talk and NIKE has clearly gotten off the blocks on digital. The question now is whether it can go the distance.
Image credit - NIKERead more on: Retail e-commerce and the omni-channel 