
Nissan Qashqui
This week, the Nissan Qashqai scooped the Auto Express award for ‘Best Crossover’ for the second year running. Judges for the UK-based magazine praised the Qashqai for its space, efficiency, style and technology, with Editor-in-Chief Steve Fowler adding:
That it’s built in Britain is an added bonus.
Awards like this may influence prospective buyers, but it’s the level of service and support they get as owners from Nissan UK and its network of dealers that will turn them into loyal customers and, with any luck, ensure their repeat business. Says James Deacon, customer services manager at Nissan Motor GB:
For many customers, an automotive is one of the most complex products they’ll ever buy – and it’s something they use and rely on every day. They expect to have an ongoing relationship with that car or van’s manufacturer and it’s vital that we meet their expectations.
For British Nissan customers, simple queries – for example, ‘Where’s my nearest dealer?’ are handled by a European call center in Paris. But for more complex, vehicle-specific issues, they deal with a UK contact centre based in Middlesex. Says Deacon:
This is where we deal with more complex concerns, ones that involve a tripartite set of interactions between the customer, ourselves and a dealer. Here, we have to get more involved and make sure that each and every case is dealt with efficiently and handled right through to resolution.
For some years, that call centre was outsourced to a third-party provider – but when Nissan UK decided to bring it back in-house, it found that the legacy Alcatel PBX system it was using at its headquarters simply wasn’t up to the job of supporting the call centre’s needs. Hunt groups – a method of distributing calls to a single telephone number across a group of several phone lines – weren’t supported, nor were call re-routing capabilities.
Nissan quickly recognised that the efficiency of its customer service staff was being hampered by the system – but, at the same time, it also had little visibility into how the contact centre was actually performing.
Driving ahead
The Unify OpenScape Contact Center solution was recommended to Nissan by Midland Telecom, a reseller that was already working with West Way Nissan, the company’s largest dealership group in the UK. The implementation, handled by Midland Telecom, was completed in mid-2014.
The result has been that customers with issues or concerns with their vehicles can be more confident about getting through to the Nissan employee best placed to deal with it, as quickly as possible, says Deacon:
So if a call comes in regarding a commercial vehicle, it goes to one of our fleet vehicle specialists. If it’s about one of our high-performance sports cars, we have a GT-R specialist on hand. We also have agents ready to take calls relating to specific campaigns that we’re running, because a DDI [direct dial-in] can be set up for these. There’s also the capability to reroute calls to the managing director and their team.
Because the new Unify OpenScape system is closely integrated with Nissan’s Oracle Siebel CRM system, call centre agents are able to quickly bring up details of the case, using its unique case reference number, along with details of that customer’s service history. This, says Deacon, is leading to faster resolution times for customers complaints and issues.
The company can also see active callers and those waiting in queues, information that is displayed on screens in the contact center:
Call volumes can be very unpredictable. But either way, we can see who’s waiting, with informaiton on call queueing by agent or by different stream of the business. So we can see the fleet team’s busy, or the retail team, or the MD’s team, and reroute the calls wherever we want to. And I’ve got a remote screen, so I have that information, whenever I want it.
Read more on: Cloud ERP financials and supply chainCloud platforms - infrastructure and architectureCRM and customer experience 