
The perceived wisdom is that comments to stories are so 2009 in the context of other channels like Facebook, Twitter and LinkedIn. Not so fast. Comments are a cornerstone of engagement and unlike some media, we have no intention of switching off this important feature. Instead, we’ve enhanced how comments are added to stories here. First a little history.
Early on in diginomica’s history, we tried to provide alternative ways for readers to sign in for comment purposes. That largely failed. The service we used for most of last year was clunky and error prone. We believe it drove some people away and we know it drove some of our most vocal fans nuts. Eventually and after much hand wringing we gave up and turned the service off. We left comments using the bare bones system that WordPress provides. It ain’t elegant but it works. When we came around to the redesign, we took a slightly different approach. We decided it would be an interesting idea to try inline commenting. This is where you can drop a comment at the paragraph level. It allows readers to comment in context which we consider important to topic discussions that ask questions or which give rise to questions. Watch the video to understand why this matters.
It turns out this type of commenting is much harder to accomplish than you might think. Even so, we got it done and while it is far from perfect, it does offer a fresh way with which you can interact with content. The video below explains how it works and why we think it is an important addition.
You might ask why we didn’t use an alternative service like Disqus or Livefyre? Disqus is a pile of crap. I’ve tried using it over the years and ran into many problems, not least its appallingly glacial speed when trying to operate at scale along with import deficiencies. Livefyre could have fit the bill but it dropped development of its free service some time ago and its paid for service costs are in nosebleed territory with little room for negotiation. We believe that is a huge mistake. That didn’t leave many alternatives other than home coding. The benefit is that we get to say what we want and how it is implemented. And yes, we will continue to take this feature forward. We’re already responding to early feedback on topics like the appearance of the bubble.
Enjoy.



Read more on: Content marketingUX and application design 