

Sir Humphrey
It’s always been my contention that the primary barrier to a successful digital agenda lies in the attitude of ‘old guard’ officialdom, the conservative-with-a-small-c civil servants for whom change is an ugly word.
I’m not talking here about the new breed of public servant behind the likes of the Government Digital Service (GDS) or the Digital Marketplace, but about the real ‘Sir Humphreys’,  the mandarins who’ve been in situ for decades.
I think back to the debacle of the NHS National Programme for IT and the unedifying sight of Sir David Nicholson sitting before a House of Commons committee, seemingly not so much as Chief Executive of the NHS, but as an apologist for CSC, the vendor being under fire from all sides except it seemed the civil service.
Memories of this have been more recently stirred by the evasiveness and seeming reluctance on the part of responsible officials to let out too much information about the real state of the IT behind the controversial Universal Credit program.

Sir Humphrey shows how it should be done 
A big problem is that public sector IT has been seen for so long as ‘a problem’, not a solution. So many negative headlines have been written on the back of so many grillings from the Public Accounts Committee and reports from the National Audit Office, that it’s hardly surprising that non-tech savvy civil servants run scared of technology and handed over so much to the big systems integrators.
It’s still the case that there’s a leaning towards ‘big is better’. A study from TechUK this week of nearly 1000 civil servants found that nearly a third of them openly admit to not being keen on using more SME providers, this despite a commitment from the government to raise the level of SME engagement to one third of all providers.
But it all comes back to lack of  skills. Decision-making responsibility without appropriate knowledge of the subject is a dangerous mix. But as one well-informed civil servant lamented in Yes Minister once:
I will rise no higher [in the civil service ranks]. Alas, I am an expert.
The speed dial default
Of course the solution to this is to repatriate all those lost skills inside government and that is underway at last. The good works of the team at GDS should be flagged up here.
But it’s going to take a long time to right the wrongs of several decades of government departments having CSC, HP, Capgemini et al on speed dial whenever there was a need for an IT decision to made and vast amounts of public money to be spent.
I was reminded of this when perusing an interesting report from not-for-profit public sector provider Eduserv this week which came to the grim, but inevitable, conclusion that the current breed of civil servant has little or no faith in the ability of IT to transform government.
The report – Government, technology and the language of business change -finds that when it comes to key deliverables, there are clear strategic objectives identified, but a lack of confidence that an IT-enabled solution is going to be the best approach to executing on them.
The report identifies the top five priorities for government IT as:

Improved service delivery.
Reduced costs.
Increased collaboration with external agencies.
Remote working.
Increased security for data sharing.

On the top three of these, there is a lack of confidence that IT will deliver, with only the security priority managing to have any convincing support from decision makers.
Take increased collaboration for example. Some 67% of the 100 senior central government decision makers polled for the research say they’re not confident that the IT will deliver. When it comes to improving service delivery, that number’s only slightly less at 65%.
Source: Eduserv
Rather strangely – and, I strongly suspect, self-deceptively – lack of skills is not cited as the primary barrier to achieving success.
No, it’s down to lack of money again. The old ‘chuck more budget at it and it will go away’ mentality still reigns true it seems. But that’s the mind set that see you start a project with a set budget and end up over £10 billion later with the NHS IT nightmare.
What’s equally concerning to me is that where there has been proven innovation in areas such as procurement via the G-Cloud framework, the majority of respondents are still sceptical of the need for change. Taking G-Cloud as a case in point, 59% of decision makers don’t believe that IT can deliver on better procurement of services in this way.
That’s a hugely depressing conclusion and one that should set more alarm bells ringing among the powers-that-be at the G-Cloud, sorry, Digital Marketplace.
Separately -and with unfortunate timing – the G-Cloud stats for April have come in and they seem to show a slowing down of sales, although the total of all transactions is now heading towards to £600 million.
But despite a £32 million boost in April, sales across the board were down month-on-month. Large enterprises sales fell from £21 million in March to £17.8 million in April, while SME sales of £14.1 million were down £3 million on the March figures.
Central government continues to buy the most cloud services by sales value through G-Cloud, contributing £451 million in total sales to date, compared to £39 million to local government.
Part of this slowdown may well be attributable to the ‘purdah’ period of the run-up to the May General Election of course. The next couple of months figures will be interesting to observe.
Bridging the GaaP
But meanwhile there’s change needed, argues the Eduserv report, to counter what it reads as lack of confidence in the framework as it stands:
As cited by many, G-Cloud and the Digital Marketplace need to continuously improve to address this perception, particularly in the areas of search, more flexible contract lengths and supplier showcases. However, we believe a further step change improvement can be achieved by creating more innovative procurement models that align the interests of suppliers, government and citizens more closely.
Such models should embrace the idea of shared risk and reward (proportionate to the supplier’s balance sheet, of course).
It’s all very well having a great online shop front, but the real key to better government contracts is a spirit of true buyer/ supplier partnership that delivers public benefit.
The same lessons need to be learned as the next big push towards the idea of Government-as-a-Platform (GaaP), common, shareable technology platforms for government, takes shape. The report warns:
It’s not yet clear how GaaP will be delivered, but in our view the way to get this right is to not make the mistake of doing it DIY, or handing the build task over to a few big suppliers, but to publish the standards and processes that suppliers must meet and let the open market compete to build best-in-class solutions.
Unfortunately, the temptation to reach for the speed-dial seems all too apparent still from these findings. And that could yet prove fatal for many digital transformation ambitions.
My take
Not the most encouraging of studies ever conducted, but one that I fear has a horrible ring of truth to it.
It is to be hoped that the new regime at the Cabinet Office will step up to the mark and continue to push the reform and transformation mantra as enthusiastically as their predecessors.
As noted before, the next 18 months or so are going to be critical as the big legacy outsourcing contracts wind down. If they are to be replaced by more modern, transformation cloud-services-based alternatives, there’s going to need to be a lot of nerve held by ministers across government.
If there’s a wider endemic lack of confidence in IT as a whole from their civil servant advisors, that doesn’t bode well.
[mailmunch-form id=”14637″]
Read more on: Data privacyDigital government and public servicesG-Cloud and the Digital MarketplaceRegulation

