

Tim Cook
That is total political crap!
Tim Cook’s outburst on 60 Minutes grabbed the headlines when the Apple CEO was asked about allegations that the firm uses offshore status to avoid paying corporate tax in the US.
Cook was having none of this:
There’s no truth behind it. Apple pays every tax dollar we owe.
He added that the reason Apple doesn’t pay more tax in its homeland is because it’s just too expensive to do so:
It would cost me 40% to bring it home, and I don’t think that’s a reasonable thing to do. This is a tax code that was made for the industrial age, not the digital age. It’s backward. It’s awful for America. It should have been fixed many years ago. It’s past time to get it done.
Certainly this is an issue that reaches beyond Apple. An estimated $2 trillion is reportedly held in low-tax non-US jurisdictions where corporations can avoid the US corporate tax rate of 35%, which is the highest of the western economies.
This is something that’s likely to get increasing air time as the US election hots up. Hillary Clinton this week has been laying-in to Pfizer’s tax strategy:

I want the Treasury Department to do everything it can to stop that kind of behavior and call it for what it is – gaming the tax system.

From a European perspective, this situation has been a political hot potato for a long time, with firms such as Starbucks, Amazon and, yes, Apple coming under fire for paying low amounts of tax to the nations in which they do business.
For example, in 2014 Apple paid just £11 million ($16 million) in the UK, despite making over £1.9 billion in profit. That’s just £400,000 more than in 2013 and, according to some estimates, £400 million short of what would be owed if the full UK corporation tax rate was paid on the company’s UK-specific earnings.
We’ve been here before. Firms such as Google, Amazon and Facebook have all come under fire from UK legislators for their tax arrangements, all of which are entirely legal.
But when Facebook pays only £4,327 in UK corporation tax on UK revenues of £105 million, legality falls by the wayside in the face of public and political outrage. That’s less than the personal income tax paid by the average UK citizen.
There are various legistlative and regulatory loopholes that allow such situations to arise. What Facebook does – perfectly legally – is to pay out in a share bonus scheme to staff. So in 2014, it made a UK accounting loss of £28.5 million after paying out more than £35 million to its 362 staff through the bonus scheme, worth an average of more than £96,000 for each member of staff.
Netflix nada
Mind you, at least Apple and Facebook are paying something, which is more than appears to be the case over at Netflix.
The firm has 4.5 million subscribers in the UK, each paying at least £5.99 a month and generating around £200 million of UK-sourced revenue.
But, according to an investigation by The Sunday Times newspaper, profits for 2014 were booked overseas and no corporation tax at all found its way back into the UK government’s coffers.
Subscription fees paid by UK customers goes to Netflix International BV, which was based in Luxembourg until the end of 2014. The paper reported that latest accounts for Netflix International BV show a net turnover of £415 million and profits of £11.3 million.
Netflix paid income tax in Luxembourg of £573,396, equivalent to a corporate tax rate of about 5%. Meanwhile Netflix Services UK, the UK arm, received an “income tax credit” of about £35,000.
As The Sunday Times investigation broke, the political point scoring began with Labour’s shadow Treasury minister Richard Burgon complaining:
Many families will be paying to sit down together this Christmas to watch programmes on Netflix and won’t expect that the money they give may be undermining British businesses. It’s the businesses and taxpayers who pay their taxes who have to carry the burden for those who do not.
Action
More pragmatically, the Netflix revelations will undoubtedly be factored into the European Union’s investigation into international firms tax arrangements.
Apple is one of the firms on the front line here, with the Irish government accused of striking a tax arrangement with the company that Eurocrats complain was tantamount to state aid and as such went against international guidelines.
While the Irish government itself insists there’s no case to answer, if the EU comes down against Apple, the firm could be looking at a multi-billion Euro tax bill.
A ruling had been expected before the end of this month, but that has now been kicked into next year.
Meanwhile there are signs of action finally being taken to address the wider situation. UK Chancellor of the Exchequer George Osborne won political plaudits and beefed up his ‘tough guy’ image earlier this year with the introduction of a so-called Google Tax, although the effectiveness of this has yet to be tested.
Meanwhile the G20 countries, including the US, have bought into recommendations by the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) designed to prevent profits-shifting by global corporations.
Back in the US, the Senate Finance Committee will be focusing on the issue as it considers the OECD recommendations. Committee Chairman Orrin Hatch confirms:
In today’s global economy, many nations, including the United States, are facing tax-base erosion as multinational companies shift profits, activities and property from high-tax to low-tax jurisdictions.
My take
Political, yes? Crap? I’m afraid not. An unusually inept piece of PR from Tim Cook.
The US government may indeed need to re-examine its tax codes and the point that Cook makes about being based around a previous era of industry rather than a digital age is a fair one.
But to dismiss anger and criticism of Apple’s tax arrangements as nothing more than “political crap” is to insult its customers as well as to rage against the government establishment.
It galls me that in 2014, I as a sole trader in a limited company paid out considerably more corporation tax than Facebook did in the UK on massively lower revenues. Against that, Apple’s £11 million contribution looks positively generous.
As for this weekend’s news about Netflix’s zero contribution, maybe it’s time to look again at my content providers…
This is a situation that demands genuine action on an international scale. It’s to be hoped that the US election provides the platform for debate required. Cook is quite correct about the need for a digital age tax code, both in the US and around the world.
Read more on: Cloud platforms - infrastructure and architectureDigital and content marketinge-commerce 