
Data privacy and security are hot topics right now for CIOs working for non-profit organisations and charities. Many are painfully aware that even their best efforts to protect information on donors, volunteers and service users, achieved on the tightest of budgets, continue to fall painfully short.
In the US, almost 2,400 nonprofits accidentally disclosed 11,361 Social Security numbers, representing 7,255 people between 2012 and 2013, according to a 2014 study by security software company Identify Finder. And last year, Goodwill was forced to confess to a breach of customers’ payment card details, which seemingly went undetected for the best part of 18 months.
Similarly, the UK’s Information Commissioner’s Office (ICO) recently warned that charity data breaches were on the rise: 53 third-sector organisations suffered breaches between October 2014 and April 2015, compared to just 23 in the previous six months. Last year, the ICO fined the British Pregnancy Advisory Service (BPAS) a hefty £200,000 for a data breach that occurred back in 2012.
So it was good to see Salesforce.com’s vice president of strategic research Peter Coffee address the issue at a non-profit CIO panel held at Dreamforce.
Dreamforce, incidentally, is now the world’s biggest technology conference for non-profit organisations and charities, a point that was hammered home numerous times by Salesforce.com executives during the course of this week’s event.
Last year, Dreamforce 2014 attracted 7,000 attendees from non-profits, around 5 percent of the 135,000 total. This year’s figures have yet to be released, but 8,000 were expected and 120 breakout sessions were dedicated to the sector.
Data security is a major issue for the sector, Coffee pointed out, because if they lose the trust and confidence of donors, volunteers and the people they aim to help, much of their good will quickly grind to a halt. So how are non-profit CIOs using new technologies and improved IT practices, he asked, to cope in a climate:
of increased awareness and increased tension around this topic?
Action
First to respond was Welles Hatch, CIO of City Year, an educational charity that focuses on the problems that stop kids at school from reaching their full potential:
This is something we take to heart, it’s an incredibly serious issue for us. When it comes to security, the term we use is ‘sacred trust’. We work with kids, we work in schools and we need to collect data on them in order to measure our impact. So I feel we need to set the bar very, very high here. I won’t settle for minimal compliance – that’s what I mean by ‘sacred trust’.
Fellow panellist Chris Thomas, the chief innovation officer at environmental organisation Sierra Club, confirmed his own team was working hard:
to establish many new practices around how we handle and safeguard information. These focus on making it easier for use to do so. We absolutely cannot afford to mess up.
But for him, he added, the real challenge around data security doesn’t lie in implementing technology, but in pushing through the cultural change of attitudes needed to ensure that Sierra Club employees understand the risks and follow procedures that keep data safe.
At PATH, a health charity that works to save lives in the developing world, especially those of women and children, CIO Erik Arnold needs to protect data in some very challenging environments.
I agree with Chris that often, systems are well ahead of people in terms of how we treat data. The people we work with are in situations where records are still often paper-based. There’s a lack of standards and some nervousness around compliance. So one of the things we’re trying to figure out is what is our role in helping overseas governments and healthcare providers we work with to understand data security and compliance.
So the consensus, broadly, seems to be an awareness that problems exist – but an earnest desire and concrete plans to tackle them.
Read more on: Data privacyInternet of ThingsRegulationSecurityThird sector and non-profits

