
The paperless and paperlite revolution has been mooted for many years, but I’ve yet to come across an example of a large organisation that has truly managed to free itself from dead trees. Yet the UK government has set the National Health Service (NHS) a goal of going paperless by 2020 – at a cost of £4.2 billion for a project that has already been dubbed as “likely to fail”.
The deadline does move around a bit so it could well change again after the June General Election. Health secretary Jeremy Hunt initially talked about a rather ambitious 2018 deadline, which he wants everybody to forget. Professor Robert Wachter then carried out a review of healthcare IT, which called for a more sensible-sounding timeframe of 2023.
But irrespective of the moving deadline, sensible NHS organisations are pursuing digital records projects for the many benefits on offer, rather than waiting to be given a final date.
Neil Darvill, CIO and Director of Infomatics at North Bristol NHS Trust, is currently leading a scan-on-demand project at the trust to get rid of its paper libraries and introduce paperlite strategies.
The plan is to carry out a major record digitization project, and then roll out software that can provide hospital staff with a view into the electronic record before the patient comes to the hospital. As soon as an appointment is made, that will trigger a process where the record is digitized by the scanning system, and is put online for viewing.
The software will also support advanced searches, so hospital staff do not need to click through a hefty PDF in the hope of finding the one useful piece of information they were after, and better navigation will ensure each outpatient consultation does not take an hour. Darvill says:
I’m not really reinventing any wheels for this one. This project is very similar to the one I did quite a few years ago now back up at St Helens. I’m repeating much of that here, it all gets wrapped up in the patient electronic records category. All NHS organisations think they’re very special, but in fact you’ll find we all have very similar problems indeed. One solution is reasonably appropriate for many.
The reality is the cost saving and business benefits of taking your paper library and putting it online are quite significant on their own. Even if we didn’t have a wider transformation plan it’s just a good thing to do. It sorts out a lot of logistical and operational things, and reduces quite a lot of risk.
Track record
While North Bristol has yet to start the records digitization process yet, Darvill has form in this area. He joined North Bristol from St Helens & Knowsley NHS Foundation Trust, where as far back as 2009 as head of informatics, he introduced digital medical records using electronic document management software from CCube Solutions and an in-house scanning bureau.
The project saw impressive results: £1.4 million annual savings from a £1.2 million investment; 500 doctors and 130 secretaries trained after a staged 22-month rollout; and over 135,000 medical records digitized preventing 7,000 files per week from being hand delivered.
Darvill is hoping for even bigger benefits at North Bristol, noting that his new trust is a much larger organization than St Helens, and so the potential cost savings are greater.
North Bristol employs about 8,000 staff, compared to St Helens’ 4,500 employees. The health records library is also larger in Bristol, and because it is offsite and with rent being paid on the facility, there are more savings to be had. The overall project costs will not be that much different, but because it is on a larger scale, the benefits are likely to be bigger. However, the project encountered a rocky start, as Darvill explains:
When I started here – I’ve been here about 18 months – I inherited a project that had undertaken procurement that we failed to award, for both the software and digitization services. The project I inherited had been running for some time, but wasn’t in a position to be able to be delivered.
I’ve started over. I started it from scratch about 18 months ago. We entered into negotiations for the procurement for some software services, which we managed to do through our contract with DXC (formed from the merger of CSC and the Enterprise Services business of Hewlett Packard Enterprise). We just bought it through a framework that involved using our EPR supplier DXC, and they subcontracted it.
North Bristol chose scanning software from the same company Darvill worked with at St Helens, CCube, and the trust has a preferred bidder for the digitizing of its records. Darvill explained that it is now in the last throes of tweaking the contract to be signed, and hopes to be able to recommit to a go-live date imminently. It has had to push back the date as the contract procurement process took longer than anticipated. He adds,
We’re trying to do our digitization services with another NHS organization so it’s not quite as cut and dry as if it was solely through a commercial procurement.
I definitely believe it’s a really sound model that the NHS should be doing more of, to keep the money in the NHS. If you can find an NHS partner who needs to cover their costs but operates in a not-for-profit way, it means that every pound we spend doing this potentially has better value for money and a better impact for the NHS.
Going back to square one also allowed Darvill to overhaul the scope of the project.
The scope of the original project was to digitize our entire health records library, to scan everything. Obviously that was a fairly substantial undertaking with a lot of associated cost. If you go scan on demand, we can spend all the money we need on digitizing the records our clinicians will need, and those that are not requested we can provide a value-for-money storage option until they subsequently expire, in which case they’ll be securely destroyed as they would be. It saves us spending money on digitizing something that potentially won’t get looked at.
The trust has provisioned for around 350,000 records to be scanned, which it expects will take around two years – although Darvill expects the vast majority will be digitized within year one.
The trust’s current records library is housed in a warehouse on the outskirts of Bristol, and is designed to make every record easily available and obtained. Once it moves to the scan-on-demand system, it will be able to store them where they are much more difficult to retrieve, with significantly less cost.
Darvill said there is a time pressure on this factor, as the trust has a lease on the facility that expires in about 18 months to two years, and a key objective is to try and avoid renewing that lease to take advantage of the potential cost-savings. Security will also be improved via the move to a digital system, according to Darvill.
It’s much, much safer to have it online than to have one paper copy in a warehouse or being handed around an organization. You don’t have any backup with a paper copy, it can only be in one place at one time, and you only get it back into storage when people remember. Digitizing it and keeping it securely online – I don’t mean on the internet, I mean within our secure hospital network – and having copies for backup means that if you have a catastrophic failure of the infrastructure, we won’t lose records; if we had a fire in the library, we don’t have another version of that paper document.
National IT Programme legacy
Darvill cited the failure of the National Programme for IT (NPfIT) as part of the reason for North Bristol to lag almost a decade behind St Helens when it comes to digitizing medical records, explaining that the trust had to replace its EPR system, which only went live 18 months ago.
When NPfIT was around, lots of trusts were in lots of deals. When that ended, most trusts really needed to get out of that contract. So there was a timing thing. And when you’re implementing a new EPR and going back to basics with your patient administration system, that does tend to preoccupy you for a year or so.
If you take the NHS as a spectrum, some organizations are well ahead in one respect and not necessarily in others. I wouldn’t say that North Bristol is particularly behind. In terms of the priorities and other initiatives undertaken, it hasn’t chosen this one. It’s very right we catch up in this particular field, but there are so many different components. This organization has had some significant reorganisation to deal with, moving two hospitals into one, having a large PFI building, and all those logistical things had an impact.
Image credit - North Bristol NHS Trust Read more on: Digital government and public servicesHealth

