
Just when you thought it was safe to put technology topics aside for the festive season and Nutanix sneakily drops an S-1 filing on the doorstep of the SEC, seeking to raise $200 million in its IPO, at some undisclosed time in the future, at an as yet to be determined share price.
Nutanix has been in the news a-plenty during 2015 as it successively picked off business, staff and customers from VMWare. Nutanix operates in the so-called ‘hyper converged infrastructure’ business, a high faluting phrase for lowered data center storage and virtualization.
Some colleagues smell something fishy in the timing of this announcement. After all, most people are either in the festive spirit, doing last minute Christmas shopping or taking a well deserved break. I’m not so minded. Rather, I see this as a way for Nutanix to avoid much of the hoopla that surrounds an S-1.
As has become customary in such matters, the S-1 doesn’t tell us a great deal beyond the endless reworking of the share cap table but it does give us insight into the enterprise market hunger for lowering what customers consider commodity costs. Infrastructure is a good place to start as evidenced both here through market momentum and what we see in the explosive growth currently enjoyed by Amazon Web Services.
How much impact does Nutanix claim it can have? From the S-1:
We estimate, based on a model validated by IDC, that our solution can reduce total cost of ownership by up to 60% compared to traditional infrastructure for a broad set of workloads and up to 30% compared to public cloud offerings for predictable workloads.
According to an IDC study commissioned by us, the cost reduction realized from our solution can enable end-customers to achieve an average 5-year return on investment of up to 510%. We can deliver a significant reduction in operating expenses resulting from personnel, power, cooling and rack space savings and reduced unplanned downtime. According to the same commissioned IDC study, our solutions can reduce unplanned downtime by up to 98%.
OK – so the research is self-serving but even so those are big numbers.
Founded in 2009 with investment from my old buddy Anshu Sharma, Nutanix has raised a total of $312.2 million. At the time of its last taking funds in a Series E round of $140 million in August 2014, Nutanix was inducted into Silicon Valley’s so-called unicorn club at a valuation of $2 billion. Some think that by the time Nutanix goes public, that valuation could be as high as $3 billion. But let’s look at what Nutanix has achieved according to the filing. It’s impressive. At least from a growth perspective.

Although it is hard to see on the image above, (click to enlarge) Nutanix top line growth has been mind boggling. Starting in year ended 31st July, 2013 at $28.1 million, two years later revenue had ballooned to $200.8 million. If the numbers are giving us a firm indication, (they grew 91 percent year over year in the quarter ended 31st October, 2015) then Nutanix will likely hit something around $450 million by July 2016.
Sources say the pace of growth at Nutanix continues to be ‘mad.’ That’s despite the sometime vicious war of words that VMWare’s marketing attack dogs have put into the market. Not that Nutanix is afraid of biting back. Expect that to continue as Nutanix swings more firmly into the public gaze.
The cost of taking market share is clearly a drain. In the last full year, Nutanix blew 67 percent of revenue on sales and marketing. In the last quarter, that number eased back very slightly to 66.7 percent. The good news is that despite these nosebleed numbers, Nutanix is on a modest operational cash burn rate.
Peaking at $45.7 million in fiscal 2014, Nutanix has stemmed the outflow to around $5.6 million per quarter. With $136 million in cash on the balance sheet at 31st October, 2015,  Nutanix doesn’t really need an IPO any time soon to continue driving growth at the current numbers.
My guess is that a combination of a near $500 million revenue run rate and a CEO whose stake is hovering at a tad under 10 percent makes the timing right to come onto the public stage while at least partially rewarding the executives for five very hard working years.
How far can Nutanix go? The S-1 claims the market for its technology will be around $123 billion in 2016. At the current revenue rate, Nutanix is a minnow. On its face, Nutanix is only taking less than half of one percent of the addressable market. But ifs you are crushing costs as claimed then the addressable market shrinks dramatically. Combine those factors with whirlwind growth and you can easily see why the company is not only succeeding but poised to become a giant in its chosen segment.
There is plenty of competition out there, the most obvious and vocal being VMWare. But infrastructure is rapidly commoditizing with many new approaches to the cost problem on offer to the enterprise. While Nutanix opportunity may be large today, that may not be the case in the future as competitors ride in on its coat tails.
The good news is that Nutanix is in a very strong position compared to its competition. Visibility matters as does hyper growth. Having substantial numbers in front of it and a good story to tell make a significant difference in markets that have been relatively stable over the years but which are getting a lot more attention in the C-suite as companies look to drive out technology waste.
The timing of the S-1 filing may be viewed as odd but now that we have Nutanix in the public gaze then it is game on for 2016.
Disclosure: Nutanix is a premier partner at time of writing
Read more on: Infrastructure 