
 
The National Security Agency (NSA) begun switching off servers and shutting down databases after the Senate failed to reach an agreement on new surveillance powers for the agency, in what proved to be a dramatic clash of political forces over the future of the controversial US Patriot Act on a rare Sunday evening session.
The Republican party was in dispute over the mass-surveillance powers, after presidential hopeful Senator Rand Paul blocked an extension of the Bush-era Patriot Act – instead pushing for reform with the USA Freedom Act, which bans the NSA from collection phone records in bulk, introduces much greater controls over the collection of data and will force the agency to be more transparent in its activities.
However, whilst Paul’s efforts likely reflect growing concern amongst the US general public over the government’s surveillance techniques after Snowden’s revelations, he has ruffled many feathers within his own party. When Paul rose to speak in the chamber, fellow Republicans left the room.
John McCain, for example, said Paul was putting his own campaigning interests ahead of those of the United States and was undermining national security as a result. McCain said:

[Paul] obviously has a higher priority on his fundraising and political ambitions than securing the nation.

The Patriot Act has come under fresh scrutiny after whistleblower Edward Snowden exposed the NSA’s tactics when it comes to the mass collection of communications data in 2013. The public’s attitudes towards the government’s handling of communications data has significantly shifted since the Act was introduced by President George Bush after the 9/11 terrorist attacks, with many now wanting more transparency about how the data is collected and used.
Since the Patriot Act was introduced, it has always been subject to a ‘sunset’ review every five years. However, given the lack of public information available with regards to the NSA’s activities, it has never been given much debate and has always been granted a continuation.
Edward Snowden of course changed all of this, which has led to the conception of the USA Freedom Act.
And whilst the Freedom Act was popular and gained approval by the House of Representatives and the White House, the Senate rejected it by a vote of 57-42 last week.
Edward Snowden
However, following Rand Paul’s delay tactics and the showdown that ensued this weekend, it became clear that the alternative, an extension to the powers of the Patriot Act, wasn’t going to be possible. A Senate vote on the Freedom Act can come no later than 01:00 local time on Tuesday.
The White House has criticised the Senate for leaving the USA exposed and described the expiry of the Patriot Act as an “irresponsible lapse”. It said in a statement:

On a matter as critical as our national security, individual senators must put aside their partisan motivations and act swiftly. The American people deserve nothing less.

However, the delay will be seen as a great victory for presidential hopeful Paul, who argued that the Patriot Act was both illegal and unconstitutional, where he said that “this is what we fought the revolution over” and asked “are we going to so blithely give up our freedom?”.
Paul is both attracting new libertarians to the Republican party with his views, whilst equally isolating the old guard. Whether or not he will be able to gain the support of his own party in the run up to the presidential campaign, remains to be seen. Paul said:

Tonight begins the process of ending bulk collection. The bill will ultimately pass but we always look for silver linings. I think the bill may be replacing one form of bulk collection with another but the government after this bill passes will no longer collect your phone records.

Section 215 of the Patriot Act, whilst passing under the public’s radar for many years, has been the subject of great concern in the business community, particularly in the UK and Europe, as the popularity in cloud computing grew exponentially.
Section 215 states:

The Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation or a designee of the Director (whose rank shall be no lower than Assistant Special Agent in Charge) may make an application for an order requiring the production of any tangible things (including books, records, papers, documents, and other items) for an investigation to protect against international terrorism or clandestine intelligence activities.

There has been much debate in the business community about whether or not putting your data in a US-owned data centre is a sensible idea, given that the data could potentially end up in the hands of the US government without your knowledge.
Sceptics argue that if you want to know where your data is and who has it, don’t put it in a US-owned data centre. Whilst others argue that the Patriot Act won’t impact your business if you’re not involved with terrorist activities and the cloud companies will do whatever they can to protect your data.
The concern over the Act has played a big part in cloud vendors opening data centres on EU soil, in a bid to

allay concerns. Equally, it has led to the likes of Google and Facebook revealing how many requests they get each year from the US government for people’s data.
My take
If we leave the Republican party politics to one side, this is an incredibly profound moment in the NSA’s 63-year history. Say what you like about Edward Snowden, his revelations have led to a much needed discussion about how comfortable we are with the NSA’s surveillance powers.
For years we have been given little information about what went on and pretty much told that ‘the government knows best’. Snowden changed all that and it is evident that there is strong appetite for reform and greater transparency.
In addition, a recent Justice Department report cast doubt on whether the mass collection of data and surveillance was actually effective in fighting terrorism. The report stated “[the] agends we interviewed did not identify any major case developments that resulted from use of the records obtained in response to Section 215 orders”.
The results of the Senate vote and the following implications for how the US collects data will also be watched closely by lawmakers here in the UK, where new legislation is set to be passed for greater snooping powers.
All of this is an important part of finding the right balance. Yes, surveillance is necessary for anti-terrorism, but the general public also needs assurances that the correct controls are in place and transparency is key. Hopefully the ongoing debates will lead to a middle ground that works for most.

Read more on: Data privacyRegulation 