
Is there room, or indeed a need, for a new type of cloud service on the block? Well, according to Sunil Potti, the Chief Product and Development Officer at hyper-converged computing specialist, Nutanix, there most definitely is.
In most peoples’ minds there are already three types of cloud. There is the public cloud, the production model if you like, for smaller businesses, the highly elastic applications of enterprise users, and applications development, DevOps and the like.
Then there is the on-premises (perhaps with a bit of co-location thrown in) private cloud, where large enterprises try for the best of both worlds – on-premise elasticity. Indeed, Potti prefers to call private clouds on-premise public clouds, so in his view that is only two types of the same cloud.
The third cloud type – hybrid – is itself arguably just an amalgam of the other two, so maybe there is really only one cloud in the end. But Potti does see the need for a different, enterprise-specific – type of cloud that offers them a specific type of service. It is a service type for which a delivery vehicle – the Managed Service Provider (MSP) community is perfectly suited:
My opinion is that there is a new type of cloud, an ‘AWS Inside the enterprise’, coming through. Now the on-prem enterprise guys want to use the exact same tooling and environments wherever their applications run.
Even with established business critical legacy applications there is a growing need for some elasticity in the resources available.
There are two factors in play here. One, these applications continue to deliver value to the business, rather than be pensioned off and replaced by new alternatives; and two, developments such as hyperconverged architectures now offer the potential to allow such applications to move into faster, cloud-deliverable environments.
‘Just about the same’ architecture is not good enough
This is a bit like cloud-bursting applications, but with a significant difference. Bursting has not really taken off with users, largely because there can be real differences between one `commodity Intel architectured’ server and other. They are similar but……… And simply moving an application from an on-premise resource using one manufacturer’s implementation of a standard O/S to a cloud resource using a different implementation will usually mean that patches and optimisations will no longer work, and resource allocation may have to be hand-crafted, says Potti:
It is what I call ‘The Ops Issue’, and it is why common tooling is becoming very important. In practice, users are saying `this app does just the job we need, but it would be good to have 10 more nodes for the next three months. I have the money for the opex costs but not for the Capex, and I don’t know yet if I need to buy anything.’ But the one thing they do not want to happen is to be forced to re-engineer for a completely different cloud services stack to get access to that service.
So his view of the new cloud requirement is one where the on-premise resources do not burst to another cloud, but melds with a cloud-based analogue of itself. In other words, this works with a third party service provider that is using exactly the same stack as used on premise. So the effect for the user is that the application simply appears to be running on N-more racks than before.
This is a natural business opportunity for the MSP community for it maps closely to the type of work they have been doing for some time – working closely with businesses to provide both the resources and, more importantly, the day-to-day operational management capabilities that meet the needs of not just operation of the technology but also delivering the business services and results their customers require:
There are billions of dollars being spent on AWS and Azure but their market is everything below the apps stack – the infrastructure, compute, network, and storage. There will come a time when public IaaS will be some 20% – 30% of the total market, it makes sense where elasticity is required. But the remaining 70% will just get re-platformed. But if you did that, without this third type of cloud, users would just have to make do with the public IaaS. They would not have the option to elastically extend their datacentre while preserving their operational experience.
Avoiding the ‘make-do’ cloud
This does sum up a choice that large enterprise users are now facing. To go to the cloud has many operational advantages, but in practice, the degree of flexibility actually available to users will depend on the degree of commonality between their existing on-premise facilities and those available from the cloud service provider. History suggests the chances of this happening are not high.
One solution is that adopted by Oracle, which is to build its own stack – from hardware, through networking and on to applications and operations – as a full analogue of its well-established on-premise infrastructure, and then spread it across the world. Not many applications vendors, however, have that level of committed userbase, or can contemplate that level of investment.
Nutanix is now looking to offer enterprise users an alternative that is more agnostic in terms of applications. The company would seem to have a three-pronged model here. Firstly, its hardware, even that produced by third party partners, has a common detailed architecture aimed at ensuring that, as far as applications are concerned, they are always running on the same environment.
Secondly, its software has been certified as a platform on which a growing number of existing major enterprise business systems can be run, such as SAP and Oracle. This means not just raw applications but also existing production applications, with their optimisations and custom additions and patches kept intact.
Thirdly, the hyper-converged model makes it a far simpler task to add resources to an infrastucture as demand requires it. And those resources can then be added either on-premise, or at a third party service provider which can act as a more focused analogue of a public cloud operation such as AWS or Azure. That would seem to be the perfect role for members of the MSP community.
As an aside, it would also seem to be a good opportunity for the greater server density and workload possible with the Asperitas oil-cooled alternative to air-cooled rack systems. This could save MSPs on energy and floorspace requirements and seems ready made for use with Nutanix appliances. Potti says:
Logically, businesses want Amazon on premise, but physically Amazon cannot do this. That is what the Nutanix opportunity is. We are similar to Amazon, experience-wise, API-wise, economics-wise, architecture-wise and Amazon still has tens of millions to make in the public cloud market before it decides to try the enterprise market. That gives us time to grow in the enterprise market. And also, it allows the MSPs to become the third cloud, providing ‘Data Center as a Service’, with data centers that look just like your own data center.
My take
Arguably, this may be something of a gamble by Nutanix, for it will require the MSP community to catch on to the idea and invest up-front in building appropriate resource pools. But on the upside Nutanix already has a good deal of on-premise traction and market penetration with enterprise users. The other side of that coin is that, without something like this, MSPs could be left with just being another cloud service provider.
And with the overall dominance of AWS, Azure and Google as ‘vanilla’ cloud service providers, the rest face the need to provide specialised services of some kind. This where MSPs could have an advantage, because it maps closely to the markets they already know well. And it is likely many of the Nutanix user base know the MSPs well also.
Image credit - Rail track heading into blue sky with white clouds © Jürgen Fälchle - Fotolia.comRead more on: Cloud platforms - infrastructure and architecture 