
The mention of Software-Defined Data Centers (SDDCs) is usually associated with capabilities and services that are expected to appear in the future.
So having the ‘past’ appear as part of SDDCs in the here-and-now is at least a bit surprising. But that is the upshot of a new partnership formed between SAP and Nutanix.
Between them they are about to start bringing the `past’ of SAP’s huge legacy of on-premise ERP systems into the here and now of the Nutanix Xtreme hyper-converged server appliances, which are gaining significant traction in the new world of SDDC infrastructures.
This is thought to be the first time that SAP, indeed any major legacy application, has received the significant mid-life kicker of being made available on a new hyper-converged infrastructure.
According to Nutanix VP of marketing, Howard Ting, the target is to get others from this band of stalwart applications ready to move as soon as possible:
We are already working on the big applications, especially those used in healthcare and unified communications, to make sure they run on our new hypervisor, Acropolis.
There are only a few of them which have some dependency issues that need to be resolved, but in most cases any customisation that has been introduced has not affected the core code. This is certainly the case with SAP, so most users’ specific applications will port without problems.
Altered priorities
This does demonstrate that a significant change of thinking may be needed by CIOs, IT managers and business managers.
The divide that has been building up between what can be done with legacy applications, and what infrastructure is required to run them, versus new applications running on new, hyper-converged environments, does not have to be hard and fast.
If an established legacy application can be run on such an environment and run faster, plus being ported with relative ease, many of those applications will gain a useful extension to operating life and operating performance.
It also means that users will not be forced to make an upgrade to a vendor’s latest and greatest versions earlier than they really need or want to.
The specific SAP applications Nutanix can port include  ERP, business warehouse and CRM, and they can be ported to a wide range of high-performance platforms, including VMware vSphere.
The company claims that in the process, it can also simplify the deployment, management and scaling of data center infrastructure through the ability to natively integrate server, storage and virtualisation resources into a single scalable appliance.
This, in turn, should then reduce the cost and complexity of the hardware architectures needed to run legacy applications.
The company quotes a study validated by research company, IDC, which shows that customers using Nutanix XCP reduce their total cost of ownership by an average of 58%, deploy storage up to 85% faster and experience up to 98% fewer occurrences of unplanned downtime, when compared to traditional infrastructure products.
The two companies have also entered into a collaborative technical support agreement. The goal is to give a seamless support experience when optimising their environment and resolving issues.
My take
The idea that established and usually damned useful legacy business applications need not stay trapped by the old infrastructures on which they currently run just might prove rather attractive to a wide range of enterprise users
Disclosure – at time of writing SAP is a premier partner of diginomica.
Read more on: Cloud platforms - infrastructure and architectureInfrastructure 