
Nutanix continues to expand the number of hardware systems partners approved to run the hyper-converged system, But the latest clutch of recent partnership announcements show a determination to cover as many high systems vendor bases as possible.
The company already has a lengthy track record with x86-based systems, so there not much to be surprised about with the recent announcement of term-based licenses for deployment on Hewlett Packard Enterprises ProLiant rackmount servers and Cisco UCS B-series blade servers. This adds to the previously announced support for the Cisco UCS C-series platform, as well as the existing hardware partners such as Dell-EMC and Lenovo.
But the news that it now making its software available to run on IBM servers running that company’s Power family of processors does take it in a new and not just different but additional direction. Not least here is the fact that Power technology is at the heart of an IBM server range that has quite a spread of applications areas, including being the engine of IBM mainframes.
According to Nutanix Chief Marketing Officer, Howard Ting, neither partner is yet releasing information regarding specific servers or configurations:
This information will be made available closer to general product availability, which is planned for later this year.
Oooh look, a mainframe
He has, however, made it clear that IBM is currently only planning to support Nutanix Enterprise Cloud software on the LC series of Power Systems servers. There is no word yet its application to RS, AS, or mainframe systems running Power, but there has to be a certain intriguing potential about the latter.
For example, two years ago IBM announced its LinuxONE Emperor mainframe system, which is capable of running up to 8,000 simultaneous Linux Virtual Machines. Given the direction Nutanix is now taking into the world of Managed Service Providers, that many VMs in a single box, all running Nutanix Enterprise Cloud software, could prove to be an enticing combination.
Not surprisingly, Ting was not going to speculate on that one:
IBM and Nutanix will explore all possible partnership opportunities as they benefit our joint customers. At this time, the two companies are only announcing the signing of a multi-year agreement to build turnkey hyperconverged appliances that combine Nutanix software and IBM Power Systems servers.
That said, he did add:
The joint solution is focused on Linux based workloads, many of which are also supported on x86 platforms.
The possibility is, therefore, not ruled out.
The partnership is aimed at delivering the Nutanix Enterprise Cloud Platform software as a turnkey hyperconverged solution on Power 8-basede systems. The target market is critical workloads in large enterprises, with a full-stack combination running the Acropolis hypervisor to provide what the pair hope will be ‘a simple, public cloud-like experience within the data center’.
Riding a wave to acquisition?
The pair are hoping this will catch the wave of a private datacentre refresh cycle which is already helping to fuel the Nutanix growth rate. What is more, both have stated they are hoping for not just a technology refresh, but also one in architectural design philosophy. There is an argument that the old x86-based architectures are getting long in the tooth, and are being stretched pretty thin when it comes to large enterprise applications such as real time big data analytics. This is where they hope the combination of IBM Power Systems and Nutanix comes in.
The other side of that argument, of course, is that the x86 commodity server approach, coupled with the cloud, means that it becomes cost-effective to throw ever larger amounts of resources at such applications. And on that basis, it can also be observed that Nutanix, arguably, wins either way.
The types of applications being envisaged for the partnership include cognitive workloads, including big data, machine learning and AI, mission-critical workloads, such as databases, large scale data warehouses, web infrastructure, and mainstream enterprise apps, and cloud native workloads, including full stack open source middleware and enterprise databases.
The Power8 is a 12-core device running 8-way simultaneous multithreading (SMT) compared to the 4-Way SMT in Power7 processors. It also features a 16 Execution Pipeline followed with 64K data cache per-core and 32K instruction cache.
Power 8 is hugely important to IBM. It is just another player in the x86 server business, and much of its product has already moved to the Lenovo brand anyway. The preceding processor, Power 7, is generally seen as something of a damp squib, so getting real traction for Power 8 is arguably close to make or break point for the company in the server hardware business.
On that basis, it is possible to surmise that the Nutanix partnership, as one of the major contenders in the burgeoning hyper-converged systems marketplace, is liable to be reasonably important to IBM as well.
Indeed, there has been some speculation that Nutanix may become an acquisition target for IBM. It is hardly surprising that Ting’s response to this was the archetypal no comment on industry speculation, but faced with a probable $3 billion or more price tag, IBM will no doubt want good evidence that the combination works, and works on more than one of its Power-based server lines before any such decision is made.
Dheeraj Pandey, CEO at Nutanix, said in a statement:
With this partnership, IBM customers of Power-based systems will be able to realise a public cloud-like experience with their on-premise infrastructure.
To which the observation can be added that, following on from its announcement of an extension towards MSP-like service provision through third parties, the availability of remotely managed bare metal services based on Power 8 capabilities just may prove attractive enough for IBM to make such a move.
My take
There are obviously several ‘what if’ caveats to how this partnership develops: what if Power 8 doesn’t gain real market traction, plus of course, what if it really does blow users’ socks off? What if non-IBM users are not yet ready for such an architectural re-adjustment? What if everyone is really waiting to see what Power 9 (due next year) can offer? But as cloud architectures increasingly de-couple applications from underlying hardware architectures, having the same software run on different, appropriate, hardware may yet come to be seen as a `good thing’.
Image credit - Freeimages.com/Borbás KrisztiánRead more on: Infrastructure 