
Following on from the Nutanix announcements in Washington DC last week, some time spent with Sunil Potti, the company’s Chief Product and Development Officer, gave some interesting background as to why the company has pursued the path it is on, and how that can help enterprises get into the cloud as quickly and easily as possible.
While the goal for all – be they the largest enterprise or the humblest individual consumer – is to build and work with environments that follow the Apple model of ‘function first and only’,  the legacy and technological debt of every enterprise means that they have to approach the cloud from a very different start point to the average consumer as Potti, in an almost cryptic, riddle-some way, explained:
Microsoft is going at this [moving enterprises into the cloud] outside in, while Nutanix is approaching it inside out. At some point clouds will all go outside in, and Microsoft is the first to make that point, but enterprises are going inside out, they have existing investments. Those going outside in don’t have any investment in it – they are what I call the `West Coast False Positives’. That is not the mainstream enterprise position.
Here, inside out means from an enterprise-centric start point out to the cloud stack. And the one key idea idea where Microsoft has been really successful, in his opinion, is Office 365, where it has offered enterprise users an inside out approach.
While Windows 10 was the key enabler of the whole Microsoft cloud enterprise, it was not what the customers were asking for. Indeed, they weren’t even asking for Office 365 per se – they were asking for what they understood – email, Exchange or whatever. But wherever the customer start-point has been, Microsoft has been able to offer them Office 365, plus access to the family of server tools, as the best solution. And the enterprise gets what it needs, and also a lot more that it will certainly need in the near future.
Enterprises start from a different place
The key factor here is that in existing enterprise model applications are developed to meet the needs of the enterprise itself and the way it works. It is not in fact customer-centric, and that is a key poafrt of the technological debt. Indeed, it is not uncommon for some applications to be so applications-centric that they do not even fit the needs of an enterprise. Then, of course, if it needs to make use of the application, the enterprise has to change itself to meet the restrictions and operating modes of the application.
With the cloud, this approach is turned completely on its head and it is all about fulfilling the needs of the end user, which may even be the customers’ customer. That, ultimately, is an outside in approach, but enterprises cannot get there in one single bound. Yet this is, in Potti’s view, what the likes of Microsoft, Google and AWS are fundamentally offering them. The start point – even Microsoft with Azure – is outside the enterprises waving the Holy Grail at them, but with little clear path for how to get there. He argued:
The concept of Nutanix is that, when we enable a customer to go to the cloud it is from inside the business and out to the cloud. There is a lot of potential for friction with the outside in approach, for there I am taking a mass architecture, engineered for the mass of users, and trying to personalise it for my enterprise. It is also possible to argue there will be friction the other way round in taking a very personal, enterprise architecture and making it available to the mass world. But that is why Nutanix will never be under Amazon, Azure or Google. It will be an adjunct service.
That can be interpreted as Nutanix having a fundamental role as the gatekeeper to their future success of those cloud service providers. Potti suggested that eventually the inside out and outside in models will become the journey, the one river for all cloud enterprises and users to float on. But then the question will become which of the two streams that flow into that river will be the stronger, and will dictate the current of that river:
We think that being in the enterprise stream will put us in the stronger stream when it becomes the common river.
There is an argument that it has to be that way, because it will be the enterprises that have the strongest and most coherent reasons for wanting things to be done a certain way. And in his view, every established enterprise is now reaching the point where it needs the cloud even more than cloud-specific new businesses such as Uber.
Many of them are just based on providing an overall management structure for otherwise unfocussed resources that other people own. As such they are in as much danger of being `ubered’ themselves, or possibly `un-ubered’ as users start to realise that there are other benefits than just price to be had in more structured business models.
Potti acknowledged that at this year’s .Next conference Nutanix has essentially made an open pitch at being seen as that ‘stream’ along which enterprises can now launch their boats towards the cloud.
It is also a stream on which boats can be launched with low commitment and little risk of `betting the business’. According to Potti, up to 30% of Nutanix customers start with applications such as disaster recovery as the low-hanging first fruits.
Here, it can provide an observable business advantage but is not likely to cause any more damage to a business than might already occur:
But the majority of those users do then transition to using Nutanix in primary business roles:
As with Apple, the more I have iCloud, the more am likely to continue using the iPhone, and lots of other things that are supported on or by iCloud. And I won’t even need to know that they are supported by iCloud.
The second coming of SDKs and 4GLs
Towards the end of his own keynote presentation at the conference, Potti talked about the need to create deployment-friendly environments. This leads directly to the question as to whether there will be the equivalent of a Software Development Kit coming along, a Nutanix-compatible cloud service development kit aimed at both developers and the lower-code requirements of tech-savvy business managers.
The company does seem to have cracked the core issue of enterprises running business critical legacy applications, as is, on-premise, in private clouds either on-premise or remotely hosted, and in public cloud environments. That means a fundamental base-line requirement has been met. What follows is the need to meet the next question, which Potti, articulated as, ‘What else can we now achieve and how do we make it happen?’:
That is on the right track. At a very simplistic level I can tell you this. If you are on a platform, the definition of a platform is something you stand on, and that means there is some kind of interface to it. That means I need to be able to share the platform with others without breaking it, and I need to extend the platform, those are its characteristics. So we wrap all that stuff – openness, extensibility – into a cloud SDK. You’ll see more about that next time. But we think of it in two dimensions. One is an SDK for operators and the other is an SDK for developers.
The idea here is that operators can use their version to write simple stuff for tasks such as backing up specific data, or operating a specific application. The company already has tools available to allow operators to do many of these tasks. But as the wider implications of DevOps comes into play, which then includes the development work of the business developer as well as the classic, pure developer community, the need grows for tools that, while they do not write code for functions – most of them will be pre-written components, anyway – can help developers to stitch together the components to provide the business functions they see as necessary.
But that still doesn’t really provide an answer for the tech-savvy business managers looking to create the business functionality they need. Here Potti sees another parallel coming into play – the re-emergence of what he referred to as 3GL and 4GL applications development environments, such as the low code tools from the likes of Appian.
Potti sees plenty of scope for such tools to become part of the roster of partner tools which can then work with and through Nutanix:
That is where we are going. What we are doing is making more things invisible. Hypervisors have become invisible, now we are making operations invisible. Eventually we will keep moving up the stack so that apps themselves, and the way they are developed, will become invisible. And as with Apple, there is no `iCloud’, for it is built in to whatever function the user wants to perform.
My take
Even if an enterprise understands that the cloud is ultimately about working with customers, partners and suppliers on that outside in model, Nutanix understands that their legacy of technological debt cannot be wished away and has to be used as their collective start point. Only then will their customers stop being forced to look at and work that enterprise technological debt
Image credit - Free for useRead more on: Cloud platforms - infrastructure and architecture 