

Whilst the UK government’s digital ambitions are currently under scrutiny after a mass exodus of senior civil servants from the Government Digital Service last week, across the pond the White House appears to be making strides to drive change and is taking the necessary measures to cement innovation into the culture of federal government.
This week, for example, President Barack Obama has issued an executive order that formally establishes the Presidential Innovation Fellows (PIF) program and houses it within the walls of the US General Services Administration.
PIF was established by the White House in 2012 in an attempt to attract top innovators from the private sector to work in government, in an attempt to tackle issues “at the convergence of technology, policy and process”. The fellows, almost 200 of them, have since played a critical role in establishing some of the core mechanisms to drive digital change across government.
President Obama offered his endorsement to the fellows in a YouTube video posted online this week, where he said:
When I took office one of my top priorities was to apply lessons we learned in our innovative high-tech campaign in 2008 to make federal government innovative, smarter, more transparent and more responsive to the American people we serve.
One of the ways that we do that is by recruiting incredible talent from the private sector – engineers, start-up founders and developers for tours of duty, working alongside some of the best civil servants in government.
These fellows are helping us upgrade the way that Americans interact with their government online, which as anyone who has visited a government website will tell you, was sorely needed.
You can see the full video here:

It’s worth highlighting the importance of this level of endorsement from the very top of the political chain, something which has been lacking for the UK’s Government Digital Service and may eventually prove to be a huge barrier for civil servants hoping to drive digital change in Whitehall. I don’t recall many times that Prime Minister David Cameron told the British people that the digital agenda was of utmost importance in such a public way? Something to think about.
But in the US it is clear that the PIF program is going to remain a key feature of digital government for the foreseeable future. And the fellows involved have already proved to play a key role in making digital a permanent feature, which is unsurprising given the number of high-profile technology projects that have failed Stateside in recent years.
For example, the fellows played a role in establishing the US Digital Service, which focuses on the infrastructure needs of government and the user experience, and 18F, a consulting and agile delivery team – which together are viewed as the US government’s ‘digital design agency’.
 The fellows have also been instrumental in establishing a number of key procurement and delivery platforms, which are being used to get better technology into government in a quicker and more effective way. For example, the Agile Delivery Services Marketplace is a government-wide vehicle featuring vendors who specialize in agile software development, whilst the FBOpen is a simple search interface for finding opportunities to do business with the U.S. Government.
They have also been involved in some of the more innovative technology projects happening in government in recent years, including the Department of Health and Human Services’ Blue Button Initiative, which allows more than 150 million Americans across the country to gain online access to their own healthcare information.
In a release put out by US General Services Administration (GSA), Denise Turner Roth, GSA Administrator, and Garren Givens, Program Director for PIF, outlined the importance of the program going forward. They said:
In placing the Presidential Innovation Fellows program at GSA, the goal is to capitalize on the agency’s experience in delivering shared acquisition and IT services across the entire federal government and arm great innovators from inside and outside government with the tools needed to improve the lives of the people we serve. This work is never done.
And this, we hope, will be the true legacy of the Presidential Innovation Fellows program; that the notion of continuous improvement will not be limited to services we create and provide, but will extend to government itself; that we will continue to evolve to meet the challenges and opportunities relevant to our time, and that we will strive to always represent our best self – built on the most innovative thinking, in service to the needs of the people.
My take
Whilst things appear to be up in the are in the UK at the moment, it’s interesting to note the speed at which the US government is adopting some of our ideas and are pursuing them at pace. And as I highlighted previously, the Presidential endorsement from Obama should signify just how important these people and projects are.
Read more on: Digital government and public services

