
When we last looked at the digital transformation progress of US retail brand Lands End, new CEO Jerome Griffith was only weeks into his new role and facing up to the challenge of trying to put together an omni-channel strategy for the firm.
Three months on – and with the retailer’s losses widening and revenues falling – it’s still a work in progress on that front. Griffith says:
The senior management team and I are in the process of putting together a longer term strategic plan for Lands’ End that will capitalize on our brand strength. As part of this, we are working to implement a comprehensive brand vision that is reflected consistently in every aspect of our business, our products, our e-commerce site, stores, catalogs, and our marketing messages.
But with time of the essence here, there does appear to be some additional clarity taking shape about at least some of the essentials that need to be in the mix here:
One of the most important initiatives will be to create a philosophy that’s centered on using data to inform decisions across the organization. We have established this practice in our catalog business over the last several years, and believe we can successfully apply these principles to various functions, including product development, merchandizing, e-commerce, marketing, and real estate planning.
We are in the early stages of this digital transformation for Lands’ End, and we believe that this is a critical component of our overall business. For example, we will focus on getting better at testing and reacting using Data Analytics to evaluate product performance and determine where we see the biggest opportunities based on selling trends, customer data, and Web site metrics. To achieve this, we have begun to implement data analytic tools and processes within these businesses, and we expect these to be fully up and running some time during fiscal 2017.
Increasing levels of customer engagement with the brand is also a priority and this requires a hard look at marketing tools and practices, says Griffith:
We are starting to make progress in our social media efforts, and while these are still in the development phase, we are excited to continue to build momentum over time.
There have been some recent successes on the engagement front, not least a National Swimsuit Day promotion last month. This saw Lands End staffers sharing swimsuit tips and advice through social channels, along with a six hour Twitter event, #NationalSwimsuitDay. Griffith says:
[This] was an innovative engagement driver. The promotion drove both existing and new customers to Lands End.
This is not to say that the tried-and-tested practices are being put entirely to one side, he adds:
We have also seen some of our more traditional marketing such as catalogs and non-branded search produce strong results leading to vast improvements in our lapsed and new customer buyer files, as well as growth in our active customer base. Similar to the way we will take a more analytic approach to product we will also use data to inform our marketing decisions enabling us to make deeper and more personalized connections with our customers.
Balance
But the main objective is that which has challenged so many retailers. Griffiths pitches this as:
We also plan to strengthen our omni-channel capabilities and promote a seamless shopping experience for our customers, whether they are visiting us online, from the mobile devices, enjoying our catalogs, or shopping in our stores. As an e-commerce-lead business with over 80% of our revenue transacted online, we are starting from a position of strength, and we will look to better leverage our powerful online platform. We will continue to enhance this business by making additional technology upgrades to our platform during the year.
Again as seen at so many ‘legacy’ retailers, there’s the additional challenge of hitting the right balance between online and offline activity. Many Lands’ End stores are actually still concessions within Sears outlets. With Sears itself in deep, deep trouble, that’s not a great association to have. Griffith still sees real world stores as playing a role moving forward:
In today’s omni-channel world, we believe stores are an integral part of building and maintaining brand awareness as they give us a bigger marketing platform. Importantly, they put our retail destiny firmly in our own control. We are still in the evaluation phase and working to develop a concept that best addresses what our customers are looking for from our brand. Our preliminary plan is to open a handful of our own stores in fiscal 2018, and we will keep you updated on the process as we work through our planning phase.
My take
Lands End faces a massive challenge, but its history as a catalog-based business should make it a viable candidate for long term online reinvention. More interesting will be how the online/offline mix ends up and how far the company will want to invest in its own real estate. It’s still early days for the Griffith regime. One to keep an eye on.
Image credit - Lands End Read more on: Retail e-commerce and the omni-channel 