
It’s certainly not uncommon for mergers and acquisitions to take place in the digital experience industry, and we’ve seen a few of them lately. The reasons for acquiring or merging with another company are typically based on complementary solutions that together provide a bigger piece of the overall puzzle we like to call digital experience. That’s the case with the merger between SaaS DXM provider CrownPeak and ActiveStandards.
But I find this merger interesting because ActiveStandards is not a marketing automation company, it isn’t a web experience company, or a CRM company, or an analytics company. It brings some unique capabilities around compliance and governance to Crown Peak that have the potential to shift it forward in the enterprise market.
I spoke with the new CEO of CrownPeak (the former COO) Jim Yares about the merger and what it means for CrownPeak.
What ActiveStandards brings to CrownPeak
Maybe the merger shouldn’t be a surprise. ActiveStandards and CrownPeak have known each other for a long time and have a number of joint customers. Integration already existed that has ActiveStandards capabilities surfaced in the CrownPeak Dashboard.
Before I go further, maybe I should remind you what ActiveStandards offers. Known as Digital Quality Management (DQM), ActiveStandards provides website optimization and compliance management/analytics capabilities. ActiveStandards’ platform can help you monitor and ensure your brand is consistently presented and in compliance with any rules and regulations necessary.
Yares spoke about how CMOs intuitively understand better than anyone else in the company how a persistent brand digital presentation pays off over time. The consistent experience isn’t just meant for marketing, but for any part of the organization with a client-facing role.
CrownPeak works with a number of large global 2000 companies that are looking for the right balance between centralized control and decentralized freedom. I remember having this conversation a long time ago with someone from CrownPeak, about how organizations with multiple offices across the globe need to give their offices some freedom with how they present information to customers, but still need to follow certain guidelines and policies. This is true in highly regulated environments where guidelines are strict, and the penalties are high, but oy applies to virtually any company. This is ActiveStandards’ sweet spot.
Because there was an existing integration, all CrownPeak customers will have immediate access to DQM for their CrownPeak sites, and we can expect deeper integration to happen moving forward (such as advanced notice of compliance issues). Yares also says that the DQM platform, which is also a SaaS solution, will continue to be sold standalone. It will be renamed CrownPeak Digital Quality Management, and Yares says it gives CrownPeak one more thing to provide to the digital experience market.
There’s also a changing of the guard, with Yares stepping up as CEO and Jim Howard and Simon Lande stepping down as CEOs of CrownPeak and ActiveStandards, respectively. It’s not a bad thing though,  Yares notes. Neither former CEO has gone far, both serving as advisors to the company and board of directors.
With big money comes big opportunities
CrownPeak was able to do this deal with ActiveStandards thanks to a $50 million K1 investment. Yares indicated that CrownPeak had proven itself the solution for a growing marketing whose time has come. To move to the next stage and do more in the market, it needed funding and K1 have provided it.
Much of the funds will go to marketing and sales. One thing CrownPeak has not been able to do well in the past is to get its name out there and clearly demonstrate how it differentiates in a crowded digital experience market. My experiences with covering the vendor over the years have positioned it as mid-market SaaS service, but it has a number of enterprise customers with global footprints.
Yares said the funding also positions CrownPeak to make additional acquisitions, but he didn’t allude to who or type of functionality. It would certainly make sense though to see more digital marketing capabilities or mobile development. It already provides a headless CMS capability and a large number of integrations with complementary technology.
Three trends driving CrownPeak’s forward momentum
Yares talked about three trends that underlying CrownPeak’s view of the industry and where it fits.
1. Taking the digital out of digital marketing
The first is the overall push to digital marketing. He points to where the market was with eBusiness a number of years ago and how the “e” eventually dropped and now it’s simply business as usual. The same will hold for digital marketing (and in fact many say it already has).
The fundamental truth, Yares said is that the source of competitive differentiation today is the ability to gain insights quickly and turn them into action quickly. Every organization can do digital marketing, but it’s capacity to access the data the comes from customers who use it to create more personalized, relevant experiences that make a company stand out.
2. On clouds and digital experience
Cloud, of course, is the second trend. CrownPeak is and always was a cloud-based platform. But it wasn’t for everyone. Now the cloud is disrupting the software market everywhere, Yares said. He said businesses want to invest their resources into core activities, not in things like servers and software. Cloud helps them do just that, taking away the complexities of owning and managing complex environments.
With digital experience management, almost all the vendors are getting in the cloud mix, but they aren’t all creating multi-tenant SaaS solutions. Most are creating fully managed solutions where they host the environment for the company. Is this a better way? Yares wouldn’t agree with that, but there are instances where managed is the best option for an organization over multitenant. However, multi-tenancy brings a lot of benefits in terms of costs, and continuous innovation that you don’t necessarily get with a managed service.
I think this is an area for digital experience that has plenty of room to grow; the question is how that growth will map out.
3. Web content management is growing in importance, but not in the traditional sense
We’ve made the shift from talking about web content management to talking about digital experience management. Most of the WCM vendors are there already and organizations are well on their way. But that doesn’t mean web content management doesn’t play a vital role; it only means its role has shifted. This is the third trend.
According to Gartner (paper free with site registration), web content management will continue to take on a bigger role in digital experience:
More commonly, however, WCM is being regarded in a different light — as a mission-critical priority to help drive the overall digital strategy. In fact, by year-end 2017, Gartner estimates that over 90% of organizations claiming success at digitalization will regard their WCM software as a mission-critical component of that success.
Yares agrees with this line of thinking, saying that WCM is no longer just about managing web content, it’s about managing experiences. This where the WCM becomes a digital experience layer where it supports a consistent experience across all kinds of solutions in the company.
He also believes that the CMO is the steward of this complete customer experience. Who better understands the relationship an organization needs to build with its customers across the entire customer lifecycle?
But there’s a question there as well. Because when I asked Yares who the primary buyer is of CrownPeak, it’s not always the CMO. He said it could be IT on marketing’s behalf; it could be a separate digital marketing team or a marketing technology group. There are still many different stakeholders involved in the decision to purchase digital experience software (like web content management). This is a fact that I’ve heard from a number of digital experience platform providers. We may all think marketing should take the lead, but it’s not exactly happening in full force yet.
My take
The biggest reason I wanted to talk to CrownPeak was the ActiveStandards merger. ActiveStandards has a robust set of capabilities for website optimization, but even more importantly, governance and compliance. You won’t see this degree of ability in another digital experience management platform.
Why is this important? Well, if you are trying to build consistent experiences across the entire customer lifecycle, then you are going to need some rules and guidelines in place to ensure that consistency happens. If you are a highly regulated industry, this is even more critical. Relying on humans isn’t wise (no offense to people).
The ability to know you are going to say something wrong or that you aren’t supposed to say at all, even before you do it, would be great. The ability to standardize on certain aspects of the experience, but allow different parts of the organization (whether we’re talking division or office or some other breakdown) to have some creative freedom is kind of like the icing on the cake and can take an experience from good to great.
I’m not saying go out and buy CrownPeak because it now has built in compliance and governance. CrownPeak still doesn’t have all the things that the bigger more well-known DX platforms offer.
But as Yares pointed out, there is still an enormous untapped market for digital experience. And every vendor who wants to be successful needs to figure out what all the most important pieces are to have. CrownPeak adds an important one with this merger.
Image credit - Business teamwork - puzzle pieces © bas121 - Fotolia.comRead more on: CRM and customer experienceDigital and content marketing 