
Elon Musk, CEO Tesla
As a long time observer of the enterprise software market, I am a huge fan of ensuring that buyers spend at least 10% of their buying decision time on due diligence and that as they are going through the decision process, they check in on the points raised during their journeys of discovery. I recommend that buyers apply this discipline to every buying decision, regardless of brand. Tesla and Palantir provide excellent examples of what this should mean in any rational buying scenario.
Before getting into that, it’s useful to remind readers of a somewhat ironic observation by those talking the ‘D’ word (disruption.) As if to ensure that we are all checking sphincter muscle strength, you can be (almost certain) to see a slide or hear a pitch that includes something like this:

Depressing isn’t it. But then when you think about the powerhouse technology companies of today; Facebook and Google spring immediately to mind; neither existed 20 years ago. Even now, some believe that Facebook is on a path to world domination and that Google’s time is over. I’m not going to argue that point. Acres of verbiage have been wasted on that topic. Instead I want to discuss the impact of fast moving technology and the difficulties those present for any buyer, using Tesla and Palantir as examples for different but related reasons.
Right now, I would argue strongly against buying into either company’s products. Let’s look at Tesla first.
The Tesla delusion
This week, the financial media has been awash with stories about Tesla’s proposed friendly acquisition of SolarCity. I counted 16 on SeekingAlpha alone as of the time of this writing. For those that don’t know, Elon Musk, CEO of Tesla is the largest stakeholder in both companies at roughly a fifth of the total stock outstanding in each. Both company’s stock prices are insanely high by any measure, based as they are on a combination of factors, but mostly around (almost always missed) growth projections and the charismatic siren sound of anything Musk has to say. It is a classic example of a Pied Piper personality leading the gullible into the abyss.
Market analysts have had plenty to say with some bears being especially vociferous. This from UncleBrian Research was especially touching:

As I mentioned before, I have been skeptical of Tesla’s valuation for quite some time. That said, most of me has hoped for them to succeed. They are no less than an innovative American company that employs thousands of American workers, and their success would be nothing short of story-book material.
The fairytale ending becomes far less likely should this unholy union occur.
I have also been overly generous in my thoughts about Elon Musk. Despite the accounting opacity at Tesla (and SolarCity); the off-the-hook projections for growth, production, sales, and financial metric improvements; and the intentional obfuscations of truth relating to operational details; I always wanted to believe Elon felt he was doing what he thought was right.
This proposed merger however, benefits few other than Elon himself. With the exception of a few lucky investors who may have purchased SCTY recently or below its current price, most are going to lose. They are just going to lose less than they would have otherwise.

The reason for this assessment is that Musk makes money purely by opening his mouth and watching how the markets respond. In this case, he hasn’t had to do anything other than make a statement of implied intent.
I’ve spent a good amount of time poring over Tesla and SolarCity’s financials. Neither make much sense. As UncleBrian and others who look closely at SolarCity point out, the basic problems of massive cash burn and complex capital structures that are almost wholly dependent upon Musk’s ability to pump the stock price, make for two massive red flags. Taking a 2013 to 2016 view of combined operations under very generous operational synergy scenarios suggest that the combined outfit would be burning something like $1.3 billion a year in today’s terms. If you look at SolarCity alone, I don’t see any  way it can support much more than another six months’ operations without going back to raise more capital. The only place that will come from today will be from securitized debt out of Tesla and Musk’s holdings in particular.
So to me, it doesn’t matter that Musk’s personal brand of hoopla, which allowed it to take record deposits on the as yet to be built Model 3, have worked wonders in the past. This deal just doesn’t make sense from a public standpoint other than to feed Musk’s ego and, if anything, puts the whole Musk empire at risk. Couple that with the fact Tesla itself now faces stronger competition than at any time in its storied history from automotive companies with far deeper pockets, and you have to wonder – what next?
The bull case just doesn’t seem strong enough and, in any event, the almost complete lack of any substantive facts behind the acquisition announcement other than a non-sensical vertical integration ‘story’ suggest a very weak buy case. Check this rationale from Musk in the latest investor call:

But I think as you look ahead to say Model 3, a $35,000 car, well that same person at the same moment, we could sell them roughly an equivalent amount value of solar panels and Powerwall effectively doubling, or almost doubling the sale at that time and then putting all in at the same time.
I think the word synergy, it’s like almost sort of dirty word but I think these synergies are really just common sense, like obviously it’s more efficient to do this as an integrated system at the sale and at the installation and in terms of just general maintenance and managing customer relationships.

Get it? Me neither. If this was a software company we’d be checking for pulse readings. On to Palantir.
The secretive Palantir conundrum
We’ve talked briefly about Palantir before and, if truth be told, I’d rather give the company a wide berth. Why?
My natural inclination when faced with obfuscation is to go digging around as many sources as I can find. I learned that during the CA fraud days of 2004 that ended up with Sanjay Kumar being sentenced to 12 years at Club Fed and ordered to fork over around $800 million in restitution. The CA case was relatively simple but a nightmare to fathom. CA kept moving the earnings goalposts until it was almost impossible to reconcile one earnings period with another. It was a $2.2 billion disaster in the making.
I’m not suggesting for one moment that Palantir is doing anything of the sort but I do get very wary when I hear that stock based liquidity events are subject to onerous terms. From Buzzfeed:
It is requiring former employees who want to sell their shares to renew their non-disclosure agreements, agree not to poach Palantir employees for 12 months, and promise not to sue the company or its executives, a confidential contract reviewed by BuzzFeed News shows.
The terms also dictate how former staff can talk to the press. If they get any inquiries about Palantir from reporters, the contract says, they must immediately notify Palantir and then email the company a copy of the inquiry within three business days.
These provisions, which haven’t previously been reported, show one way Palantir stands to benefit from the stock purchase offer, known as a “liquidity event.” Pay at Palantir is weighted heavily toward stock options, meaning current and former employees own a lot of equity, but these shares are not publicly traded and can be tricky to sell. Until recently, Palantir capped salaries at levels far below what top engineers could command at other Silicon Valley companies.
The deadline to agree to sell shares in the offer was Friday, four weeks after Palantir announced it internally, BuzzFeed News reported last month. Employees were invited to sell 12.5% of their equity, or $500,000 worth, whichever was lower. While former employees could also sell shares through outside brokers, Palantir offered a price that was above where some large investors valued their preferred shares. The company also said it might introduce policies to discourage share sales done outside of its official channels.
There are a bunch of problems attached to these conditions:

When is a ransom not a ransom? In this case, former employees are basically being told: ‘You want liquidity? Sure, but we’re moving the goalposts and muzzling you completely. That’s your get out of jail card.’ Could that be construed as anti-competitive?
I am not seeing any definition of ‘press’ or ‘reporters’ here but the fact Buzzfeed got hold of the Palantir contract goes to show just how hard it is to keep a lid on hot or unsavory news. If anything I’d argue the more you try and hide, the more likely you are to be exposed in the least favorable light. There are just too many random people willing to yap over a coffee to anyone who will listen.
The pricing of the shares is suspicious. Pricing above the leverage that preferred shareholders normally have in Silicon Valley startups is a sure sign the capital structure is in need of a refresh and/or that the employee comp terms are not working out. I can only assume that employees are looking at their holdings and calculating that they will likely be diluted to nothing in the long haul. This is not uncommon but it still makes for a very difficult talent retention scenario and Palantir needs the best talent it can find.

When you know these things about how a company is likely operating as regards its existing and former employees, then as a buyer, my first questions are always going to be:

What are they not telling me and how can I get my questions answered?
What can I genuinely learn from earlier adopters? Will I find they are muzzled?
Is the solution they’re pitching genuinely sustainable as to the outcome I am looking to secure?

If I can’t hit the spot on those three questions then thanks, but no thanks.
Final words
Poring over financial documents is a sport best reserved for those with a financial agenda and lots of time on their hands. The bulls and bears are the most striking examples but then they are almost always looking for specific signals that will trigger a share price movement. Fundamental balance sheet analysis plus attention to SEC filings and anything else you can find ought to be a starting point for any due diligence. If there are whiffs in and amongst, or your advisors can’t make sense of whatever they’re looking at, then you could be on a path to your own financial pain.
Due diligence doesn’t stop the moment you’ve come up with a scenario with which you’re comfortable. Facts are always emerging and, as we have seen this last week, a sharp turn or two is never far away.
Image credit - Angry grumpy pissed off senior mature man gray background © pathdoc - Fotolia.comRead more on: Analytics planning and data analysis 