
Some of you know that as part of diginomica’s spring facelift, we organized our content into 18 cornerstone topics. This isn’t a cynical tag-and-spray routine; each of our content areas has a real-life, human curator responsible for its well being.
It’s the curator’s job to ensure the editors haven’t gone off the reservation and tagged the content improperly. The curator also picks the standout articles that appear in the feature slider. You can subscribe to the topic areas by RSS/newsreader, and also indicate your preference for that topic in our email sign up on that page.
18 cornerstone topics – all curated by actual people who (usually) know their stuff
You can browse all the topics by clicking on the menu items directly above. The eighteen topics stem from these three areas:

Digital enterprise – which includes real world use cases, and vertical focus in digital government, health care, retail and more.
Cloud apps & processes – goodness like HCM and the digital future of work, CRM and customer experience, Analytics planning and data analysis, and several more.
Technology disruptions – tech through the lens of business outcomes, from IoT robotics and AI to DevOps, NoSQL and the open source stack, And more…

One of the cornerstone topics I curate is the UX and application design section, which is part of tech disruptions. Here we feature content with a mobile, design, and enterprise UX theme. For this preview, I’ll share some of diginomica’s best Enterprise UX and mobile pieces, and why I picked them. I’ll also give you a few bonus links of terrific UX pieces I’ve discovered across the web.
But first, about the UX and app design page. Here’s our criteria:
Pressured by the mobile imperative, the enterprise user experience (UX), is undergoing a massive change. Once an afterthought, application design is now an enterprise priority. Apps that are not embraced by business users translate to project failure. But how do companies form effective design teams? Which skills are necessary to incorporate design thinking into app rollouts? At diginomica, we’re knee deep in UX design trends, mobile app projects, and experience design. This page is your starting point to join enterprise UX debates, learn from design use cases, and read up on what customers are doing to raise their UX game.
The envelope, please – recent UX and mobile standouts
Mobile first, mobile optimized, mobile only – mobile confused?
by: Barb Mosher Zinck
quotage: “I’ve yet to have a mobile experience that made me only want to use mobile. Advanced brands may be there or well on their way. The rest are pushing slowing into mobile first experiences and trying to ensure the cross-channel experiences is as good as it can be. Personally, I’d be happy if they were able just to get this right. And I suspect most consumers feel the same.”
why I picked it: Because “mobile first” is a lot easier than it sounds. Barb makes key distinctions between mobile first, mobile optimized, and mobile only that should help.

Adobe’s Phil Clevenger – the essence of Enterprise UX design is collaboration
by: me
quotage: “I see a rosy future, if a mutable one, for design and for designers. Our skills will have to evolve – we will need to be more data literate, code literate, more well-rounded as product designers, and so on. And we will grow into all of that. But bottom line, humans who design – who configure experiences with intention – will be needed and valuable for a very long time to come. Robots be damned.” – Phil Clevenger
why I picked it: For my enterprise UX series, I try to learn from the best practitioners. Clevenger has been doing user experience design long before it had industry cred and cool-sounding designer job titles.

Carlson Wagonlit Travel has a ticket to ride on mobile app journey
by: Jessica Twentyman
quotage: “At present, CWT’s mobile app development team is releasing new software every eight to ten weeks – faster than it’s ever done before – using Agile methodologies. A long list of candidate features are prioritised according to customer feedback and the results of usability studies and then handed to the development team. They then work through the sprint, aiming to get as many of those features into the next release as possible.”
why I picked it: Customer use cases are diginomica’s bread-and-butter. As per the quote above, use cases provide us with the specifics on what’s actually working – in this case, a more iterative approach to incorporating feedback.

Why UX has fundamentally changed content’s winners and losers
by: me
quotage: “Six years ago, content was on a (more) level UX playing field. If you had great content on your web page, people blogged about it and shared it, whether it was a WordPress blog or a major news site… As long as the content mattered, the presentation was an afterthought. Today, UX plays a huge role in which content is consumed, and which dies on the vine.”
why I picked it: UX has had a profound impact on content strategy in the last few years, changing content’s winners and losers in the process. This piece gets into why – and what to do about it.

A couple more picks:

Bank of America – pushing mobile banking to turn around an industry – Stuart contrasts Bank of America’s financial struggles with its mobile/digital push.
Eight ways enterprise UX is different – with Uday Gajendar – This piece from my enterprise UX series is a good foundation piece for rethinking enterprise UX.

Check the UX and app design page for plenty more…
Enterprise UX standouts from across the web

Enterprise UX: Past, present and future – A thorough piece from ZDNet that does a good job exploring the issue of UX in a “post-app world” that includes wearables, IoT devices, and virtual reality.
Why designing for delight doesn’t always work – A counter-intuitive position from one of the better UX resources, usertesting.com. “Delight” can be a narrow criteria, especially when it’s divorced from a deep understanding of customer variance in preferences (example: The Economist ends up offending some female readers with a promotion supposedly designed with women in mind).
UX in Action: Q&A with Frank Yoo, Director of Product Design at Lyft – Another good ‘un from usertesting.com, this one a deeper look at how Lyft does design. Several pals insist that Lyft’s user experience is better than Uber’s; this piece provides a bread crumb trail as to why.
IBM’s design thinking philosophy – this interactive page doesn’t work that well for me on desktop, but it’s nice on mobile. I’m not sure it works 100 percent but it’s a creative way of presenting a design philosophy.
Designing for consent, and AI chatbot myths – live with Caroline Sinders (podcast) – This podcast from me was taped at Collision 2016. I’ll write about this in an upcoming piece, but if you want to dig in now, or prefer audio, check this one out. Sinders is a very incisive and creative thinking and her views on designing for consent to reduce online harassment is a potent topic. I’ll embed the podcast below also.


Image credit - Beautiful clouds in the sunset -  © igor - Fotolia.comRead more on: MobileUser experience 