
It’s been almost a year since Indian IT services giant Wipro announced its acquisition of cloud integrator Appirio. Last week, I caught up with Appirio co-founder and CEO Chris Barbin during a visit to London to find out how it’s all going.
Wipro is the third largest global IT services company with headquarters in India, and like all its peers, it’s in a race to transform its business for the digital era. Acquisitions have been instrumental in Wipro’s digital transformation strategy, not only buying Appirio for $500 million last year, but also design consultancy Designit a year prior for $85 million. Appirio brings a significant presence as one of the earliest pureplay specialists in the Salesforce ecosystem, with practices also in Workday, Google and Amazon.
The acquisition has gone well in terms of Appirio’s existing business, Barbin tells me. Going into the acquisition, he had two big areas of concern — talent and customers. But staff attrition is now at historical lows and customer numbers and deal sizes are growing, he says.
Transform, not run
The one area where there’s been less progress to date has been in penetrating the Wipro customer base. There have been few opportunities for Appirio to come in and work on cloud implementation projects. That’s largely due to the nature of the existing contracts, he believes:
If you look at the nature of the Wipro installed base, generally speaking, they’ve been bigger, outsourcing-based contracts, a lot of BPO. These are multi-year, in some cases five- to ten-year deals, that often times are FTE or cost-based deals.
Appirio brings a different value proposition, which requires a different approach when selling into these accounts, he says.
Our value prop, from the beginning, has been much more project — transformation, implementation. It’s transform, not run.
So on one hand, it’s an amazing opportunity for Wipro and for us to take all these run relationships and to turn them into transform. [But] getting the customer that’s a run customer, to see and to realize and to value a transform service — where [for example] you bring in a Salesforce — that’s taken longer and has been harder than expected.
I think the customer buying pattern is cost-driven, procurement-driven, in a lot of cases. That’s not been a channel that Appirio has historically sold into. We’ve sold to the VP of sales, VP of service, VP of marketing, the CHRO, those are not typically the most deep relationships that Wipro will have.
So we have to go in both ways — you go in with that CIO procurement and pull in the business buyers.
That’s probably been the hardest part. It’s not an ‘or’, it’s not the Wipro way or the Appirio way, it’s the ‘and’ — how do you marry two different selling motions and value propositions into one?
That’s not to say it won’t happen eventually, it’s simply a recognition that it will take longer to get there. Wipro’s management certainly backs the transformation model, says Barbin.
They’re all smart, they’re very smart. They recognize what has to happen and, I think, are pragmatic about how to make it happen.
There is acute recognition that there is a transformation going on within Wipro, within the industry.
One of the things I like about the Wipro team is that [CEO] Abid [Neemuchwala] was brought in also to transform. He has a very transformation-based mindset, in how he thinks about us in consulting, and digital, and how he’s aligning the company.
Working with Salesforce, Workday
Meanwhile, Appirio is still bringing in customers on its own account, pursuing its established model of working closely with vendors as channel partners. Those close relationships with the likes of Salesforce and Workday are different from traditional SI relationships, notes Barbin.
We look at those partners as a bit at the center of the universe. We have to treat them just like we have to treat a great customer.
I think in the Wipro world, a lot of the big SIs, it’s actually not that way, their customers are the center of the universe, they bring the partners along.
On the other hand, being part of Wipro does help Appirio land larger deals through that route.
Even though in the last year, we were the number three Salesforce partner worldwide, because we did walk them into a couple of very big transactions, it was harder to do systemically … That is a big opportunity for us and there are accounts now that we can bring to Salesforce, that are differentiating from where we were.
What we bring as Appirio within Wipro, I still think we bring a lot of love, innovation, agility, speed, we’re willing to do smaller projects, we don’t just have to do the large transformation. But when required, and we need to pull in global scale and transformation and digital, Designit, now we can.
So we can offer both, not just the transformation, but the big, large scale transformation.
Emerging tech and AI
Alongside Appirio’s long-established Salesforce and Workday practices, ServiceNow is also growing strongly, says Barbin. Other emerging names that are appearing a lot more in engagements include integration platform MuleSoft and Salesforce-native PSA and financials vendor FinancialForce. Enterprise CRM player Pega Systems, which Wipro has a practice in, also shows up more often as a platform for highly custom CRM processes.
Appirio is also talking to some vendors in the conversational computing field, looking at the use of chatbots and messaging as a way of automating call center and helpdesk processes in both CRM and HCM space.
There’s been real customer interest in AI, says Barbin. At a recent customer advisory board meeting on the topic, two thirds had some form of AI initiative under way, investigating use cases in call center automation and elsewhere. But AI is only really useful when an organization already has access to large volumes of data that can feed the algorithms, he notes.
For me, it’s real, it’s early and it’s all about the use case.
The companies that are interesting to partner with on this stuff are obviously ones that have a tremendous amount of data, where the artificial intelligence can be derived by deep analysis of a bunch of historical data or real-time data that’s coming in, and being able to come up with something that’s more predictive.
Not all of our customers have vast amounts of data that are mineable in real-time or otherwise. As people are thinking about it to qualify what a cool use case could be, that’s a huge factor.
With Workday Rising coming up in a couple of weeks’ time, the other development that’s on Barbin’s radar is the recent announcement of the HCM and finance vendor’s platform-as-a-service (PaaS) initiative. This opens up an interesting opportunity for Appirio, given its longstanding experience with the Salesforce platform, he believes.
Clearly it plays to our strength, our historic strength, as a platform partner of Salesforce, our roots from the app dev, with the DNA that we have. With Salesforce it’s always been 50+% of our business has been Force.com and platform-based.
Right now we’re in the mode of talking to our existing customer base who are big in HCM, that are maybe going down the financials path or already are, and then what are the use cases that we can explore on the platform.
My take
Appirio seems to have done a good job of keeping up its momentum while going through the upheaval of acquisition. The bigger goal of transforming Wipro is still a work in progress, though. It’s not merely the challenges of introducing new technology skills and the new mindset that goes with them with Wipro. Customers must also be ready to embark on their own transformation journey, and that requires a different mindset on the customer’s part too.
Image credit - Composite of Appirio logo with computer mouse on misty road © alphaspirit - Fotolia.comDisclosure - FinancialForce, Salesforce and Workday are diginomica premier partners at time of writing. Read more on: CRM and customer experienceDigital transformation - frictionless enterpriseProfessional services 