
We recently outlined how some forward thinkers in Whitehall are doing what they can to bring together the two disciplines of policy making and digital design – a movement which has been branded One Team Government. And the movement is now heading north of the border to Scotland (click on link to sign up).
The idea being that instead of policy makers coming up with ideas, which are theoretical in approach and tested via consultation with a select few, and have multi-year pipelines; policy will be closely linked to service delivery, where services are created, tested and even destroyed at negligible cost through the use of ‘platforms’.
Too often civil servants spend their time coming up with interesting policy ideas, only to chuck them over the wall to the design and digital teams, with little clue how the policy will work in reality, with little testing done and with little room for failure or change.
I’ve said previously that I believe that fixing this is going to be crucial to creating a more modern government. It’s the way that government has operated for decades, because that’s what the technology allowed; but things are different now and that no longer has to be the case.
However, none of this is easy. Changing the way that people work, especially within a rigid institution that has operated in silos for generations, which feels tied to the way that government has historically delivered services, is going to be incredibly hard.
This has implications for politics too. If you’re creating and testing policy iteratively through the use of digital tools, where small changes rather than big ideas are the way to successful services – what does this mean for Ministers that traditionally create a name for themselves with big budget policies?
As with anything to do with government, there will be a lot of political resistance behind this, despite the benefits that could be delivered to citizens.
However, the One Team Government unconference (no set agenda) recently wrapped up in London, being headed up by Kit Collingwood-Richardson, which brought together a broad set of people from a number of different disciplines across government, to figure out how to do create better policies and services.
Gaining momentum
And it seems the unconference has inspired some to take One Team Government to Scotland. In a blog post written by Sarah Drummond, co-founder and MD of design agency We are Snook, but who has also previously worked for the Scottish government, she said that having attended the event, there is now motivation to do something similar north of the border. Drummond wrote:
I’m seeing from both the inside and outside a movement in some of the principles that brought #oneteamgov together. I went, it was great, it will grow, it is growing. I said we should try it in Scotland. Lots of you reached out. So, here we are, One Team Gov Scotland.
We’re going to try this — there’s enough interest growing do this and create a platform for people working across different areas in and around Government.
There are lots of interesting groups forming across Government (and local) in Scotland having these kinds of discussions, and it isn’t just big Government, its health, education, third sector and more.
The point of #OneTeamGov is to bring all of us together in a format that’s flexible for us all to make it what it needs to be for us.
Drummond said that One Team Government Scotland “truly is about inclusivity”. She said that whilst other events sometimes cater specifically for digital types, or design types, or policy types, this will be about bringing everyone together and making sure that everyone is welcoming. In her words, if you work in the interest of making public services better, then you are welcome.
Some of the topics covered at the One Team Gov unconference in London, to give you an idea of the discussions being had and the challenges facing integrated service delivery, included:

creating the right team structure for a ‘one team’ approach
how to advise ministers when you’re working iteratively
what is policy making? what is digital? what is service design?
how to ‘do governance’ better
how we build cross-profession networks so we all get better together
bringing policy making, digital and delivery into an end to end approach
who is doing ‘the agile thing’ at scale, and how?
practical ways of bringing policy and delivery together

Drummond and the people she is working with to organise the event are aiming for end of November to host the first One Team Government Scotland. However, Drummond is calling on others to get involved and help. She said:
If you are interested in any of the following options from helping organise to just being notified about it, please sign up using this form, it will help us keep on top of the growing interest.
We need help. We have a very small mixed organising committee of 5 people from both Scottish Government and external agencies who work with Government so we’d like to open it up wider. We want to ensure we get a balance of policy, design and digital across our team. If you’re interested in joining please let us know, we expect to have a call around every 2 weeks with some support work.
If you can volunteer on the day to run, help serve food, document sessions, take photographs, film it that would be greatly appreciated, just let us know. If you can help promote, that is volunteering, get in touch.
We need to cover venue, food, branded goods and covering all the sessions that will run with people. If you can support to either fund it, provide an in-kind resource or free up your staff time to get involved, let us know.
You can be notified of when tickets become available by filling in this form.
A manifesto
Paul Maltby, the government’s director of data projects, communities and local government, also recently published a prototype of a One Team Government manifesto, for what digital policy making could look like in practice and is definitely worth a read.
The manifesto centres around six key principles:

Be curious, practical, reforming
Have a deep regard for the citizen experience of a policy or service
Harness the power of boundless horizontal communication
Embrace the tools and working practices of the internet era
Use data to inform decisions
Pursue an iterative, agile approach to delivery

Importantly, the manifesto also urges digital policy makers to think about the ‘wider system – acknowledging that citizens and service users don’t experience government as an individual piece of legislation, service or department. Again, this is the greatest challenge for Whitehall, which has traditionally operates in silos, and may need to rethink the fundamental structures of how it delivers services (e.g. data sharing, cross government collaboration).
My take
This is important. If you work in policy or design in government, get involved.
Image credit - Creative businesswoman writing on adhesive note by colleagues @ WavebreakmediaMicro - Fotolia.comRead more on: CentralDigital government and public services

