
Etsy, an online marketplace for independent buyers and sellers trading unique goods, has reported strong revenue growth in its second quarter, which has prompted a +5% bump in the company’s share price in after hours trading.
However, whilst in the past we have noted Etsy for it’s admirable approach to social corporate responsibility, today’s results are more interesting for the insights the executive team gave into the company’s quickly developing technology platform.
For example, CEO Chad Dickerson spoke to the importance of conversion rates across all device types, the company’s focus on user experience and how it is implementing machine learning technology to help international buyers and sellers more easily trade with each other.
Dickerson said:
Our vibrant community expanded almost 1.7 million active sellers and 26.1 million active buyers. Based on our strong performance to date and our expectations for the reminder of the year, we’re raising our 2016 guidance.
Despite a loss of $7.3 million for the quarter, revenue rose 39% to $85.3 million, beating analyst projections and market expectations.
A different kind of online retailer
Dickerson used the results as an opportunity to highlight Etsy’s mission of differentiating itself from other online retailers, which he believes are competing to provide commodity goods at the lowest price with the fastest shipping (e.g. Amazon). However, Dickerson believes Etsy’s focus on unique inventory and the company’s “vision for a more human, personal and global approach to commerce” helps it stand apart.
Part of this, and a contributing factor in Etsy’s growth, is down to its focus on providing sellers with services that they can purchase to make selling on the platform easier. Dickerson describes this as a “seller services platform”, one that helps Etsy’s “community of creative entrepreneurs” make money. He said:
We now offer a robust suite of high impact seller services tools and other features that address our sellers pain points.
In the second quarter, eight seller services represented 55% of Etsy’s revenue and the company said it sees opportunities to introduce additional services to support sellers in new ways. Currently seller services include things such as direct checkout, promoted listings and shipping labels. Dickerson said:
Let’s turn now to seller services, which delivered 58% revenue growth in the second quarter. As we’ve discussed before, our strategy for growth in seller services involved expanding the geographic reach and functionality of existing services and launching new ones that help our sellers address their most critical business pinpoint.
In the second quarter, we made enhancement to promotive listings and shipping labels, which we believe will make our sellers more successful. We added new inventory to promotive listings on mobile web and desktop and paid more opportunities for sellers to advertize their items. And we also added FedEx as our newest shipping label carrier, so that U.S. sellers have another option for purchasing and printing labels directly from Etsy.
Early in the second quarter and as we discussed in our first quarter call, we launched a new paid seller service called Pattern by Etsy. Pattern enabled Etsy sellers to create their own custom websites in just minutes, leveraging all the work that they’ve already put into their Etsy shop. Pattern has the same marketplace business model as etsy.com and its supported by our Direct Checkout and shipping label services.
Going global
Etsy’s offices: A different way of working
As is the nature of the internet, global trading should be made significantly easier, given the ability to connect with and interact with people all over the world. However, this is often not the case given that online retailers often still operate in geographical silos.
Etsy is looking to tackle this and it has introduced a new machine translation mechanism, whereby, for example, a French seller could sell to someone in an English speaking country and the underlying platform translates any postings or messages between the two traders. This is facilitated by a machine learning platform that updates the dictionary to use Etsy specific terms.
Dickerson said:
Turning to our international strategy, we believe we just scratched the service when it comes to realizing our global potential. Our ability to scale internationally is driven in part by our powerful technology platform. One example of this is our innovative use of machine translation, which helps localize the Etsy experience and making it easier for Etsy sellers and Etsy buyers to transact when they don’t share the same native language.
With this advanced technology, we support Etsy sellers and Etsy buyers from different parts of the world, who would normally be separated by language, as they message each other, search and browse listings and reviews. Machine translating listings in particular dramatically increases the items available to non-English speakers.
In the second quarter we applied this technology to promotive listing searches, we used proprietary data in our machine marine technique to optimize and fine tune the quality of translations across our site on an ongoing basis to help enhance the overall experience for our global community.
We also continue to foster local communities and marketplaces in five key geographies, Australia, Canada, France, Germany and the UK. Over the long-term, our goal is to grow international to represent 50% of our GMS (Global Merchandise Sales).
User experience
Finally, Dickerson was keen to highlight Etsy’s investments in user experience across all form factors and how these investments are improving conversion rates across all platforms. He said:
As we work on driving growth in our marketplaces, one of our most important initiatives is Etsy every day, our focus on making Etsy a daily habit. Over the past 18 months, you’ve heard me talk about mobile and how mobile is integrated into everything we do.
Over the past several months, we launched several products that made it easier for buyers to come to Etsy, sign in, search, connect and transact across all devices. We continue to optimize the buyer experience on etsy.com across mobile and desktop and in doing so, we’ve been able to drive conversion rate gains across the board over the past year.
We believe that this work has helped us achieve sustained active buyer growth and will remain an important focus for Etsy.
We have seen conversion increases across the board, on all platforms, desktop, mobile web and mobile apps. And it is really our success there as really just varies focus product development and improving the core experience, everything from sign in to browse to search we talked about exploratory search a couple of quarters ago but that is still going quite well and finally with Checkout.
So the mobile experience as well as the desktop on the mobile apps and mobile web, have all improved and we continue to improve that day after day after day. It is really in baseball term it is really about having a lot of basics consistently and that’s what we have been doing over the past year.
My take
I like what I’m hearing.
Image credit - Images sourced via EtsyRead more on: Retail e-commerce and the omni-channel 