
Not so busy now
If anyone still doubted the need for digital transformation investment in the retail sector, data out of the UK should add weight to the urgency.
The UK sector had a mixed Christmas, with online sales benefiting as the rainy weather put consumers off the idea of walking the high streets in search of bargains in the sales.
According to today’s British Retail Consortium-KPMG Retail Sales Monitor for December 2015, online sales of Non-Food products in the UK grew 15.1% that month versus a year earlier growth rate of 7.0%. December’s online penetration rate was the second highest of 2015, at 19.7%, up from 17.3% the same time last year.
Helen Dickinson, chief executive, British Retail Consortium, says:
This was very much an online Christmas with this channel playing a vital role in driving retail sales in December.
Over the three months to December, online contributed 2.5 percentage points to UK non-food growth overall, confirming this channel as the key driver of growth. In fact, store sales were in reverse.
Online performed strongly as consumers embraced the convenience and flexibility that more sophisticated retailers offered. Nevertheless, the boost from online was not enough to make this a Christmas to remember for most retailers.
Perhaps not, but for a number of retail firms getting some good news at Christmas was a welcome gift. For example, Debenhams this morning saw its share price soar 15% on news that the run-up to Christmas had seen a 1.8% rise in overall sales. But the good news was in online, where sales grew 12.1%.
Michael Sharp, outgoing chief executive of Debenhams, cites:
strong online sales supported by robust systems, an ever improving supply chain and an imaginative and joined up marketing campaign.
This performance is evidence that our strategy is working with our customers finding our mix of products and brands both compelling and great value for money. The further improvements to our service proposition and our online presentation have delivered strong multi-channel sales growth, building on the progress we saw last year.
It’s a similar story over at House of Fraser which has seen a surge in online sales with 22% of Christmas period sales made via the retailer’s website. Nigel Oddy, Chief Executive of House of Fraser, says:
This has been a very strong Christmas for online.
Certainly the stats are impressive. In the week before Christmas online orders ramped up 61.8%. At the same time, offline sales only rose 2.2%. Meanwhile Black Friday 2015 was the retailer’s biggest online day ever, with e-commerce sales up by 40% year-on-year.
The rise in online activity is having an up-sell impact offline as well, with 25% of shoppers purchasing additional items in store when they ‘click-and-collect’ goods. For its part, the firm’s ‘click-and-collect’ service has seen a 22% bump year-on-year.
Oddy says:
This year, we saw a very strong start to the key Christmas season, with Black Friday being particularly strong online, with sales up 40% on the year – our biggest online day ever. Our stores have also performed well over the festive period, in particular our recently refurbished stores which showed strong growth in the final week before Christmas.
The performance demonstrates the success of our ongoing strategy: to continuously improve our online proposition, to develop our house brands and premium brand proposition and work closely with our concession partners and to invest in our stores to provide our customers with the best possible shopping experience.
Always an exception
Rival high-end retailer John Lewis also saw a decline in offline visitors balanced out by increased online traffic. Shoppers coming through the doors were down 3% year on year, while online consumers were up 21.4%.
Online shopping at John Lewis now accounts for 40% of all sales, despite the firm controversially introducing a charge for click-and-collect customers last year.
Andy Street, Managing Director at John Lewis, argues:
The obvious online strategy was right and helped with the growth. But you can’t look at each part of the business in isolation because half of all orders are click and collect, so we still need our stores, which should be cherished.
The exception to all this was Marks & Spencer (M&S). Christmas 2014 saw the firm crippled by problems at the distribution center which serves its online business, so top of the company’s wish-list to Santa was to avoid a repeat of that.
In the event, M&S’s online sales were up 20.9%, but the headlines were dominated by the most disappointing clothing sales for any Christmas period, down 5% year-on-year. That was the final nail in the coffin for Chief Executive Marc Bolland, who will retire in April.
Robert Swannell, Chairman of Marks & Spencer Group, praised Bolland’s investment in digital transformation of the high street giant’s business model:
It is now positioned for a digital age, with its own on-line platform and dedicated e-commerce distribution centre, improved design and sourcing capabilities in general merchandise and an industry-leading track record of growth and innovation in the food business.
There was one spark of good news. Despite the bad publicity around the firing for gross misconduct of Suzanna Broer, head of M&S’ new Sparks reward card loyalty scheme, the card itself is gaining traction with some 3.3 million people signing up since its launched 11 weeks ago.
My take
Four sets of numbers that indicate just how deeply digital transformation is embedded at the heart of the retail sector, albeit with varying degrees of success.
Read more on: CRM and customer experienceDigital and content marketinge-commerceRetail e-commerce and the omni-channel 