
As some of the world’s largest technology companies increasingly come under fire in the UK for their tax arrangements, HMRC has said that it is building a task force to gather intelligence on VAT evasion that is being carried out by online retailers.
Amazon and eBay are in the line of fire, following a Guardian investigation that found hundreds of non-EU sellers on their platforms were stocking their goods in the UK, but were not registering for VAT with the tax office.
Most retail businesses with stock in the UK and selling goods to British customers are required to register for VAT with HMRC – which typically stands at 20%. All businesses making more than £82,000 a year in sales, no matter where they are incorporated, are required to register for VAT.
However, according to the Guardian, many of the VAT-avoiders on Amazon and eBay have virtual offices in China, Hong-Kong and the US, and HMRC is said to know little about them.
For example, high value products, such as Apple goods, are currently being sold on Amazon at a £30 discount via Chinese sellers that are not collecting VAT.
It is estimated that over the Christmas period the UK could be losing out on tens of millions of pounds as a result.
Amazon and eBay have said that whilst they do what they can to help their sellers understand their tax obligations, they insist that they are not responsible for enforcing the law with their traders.
 Once again this comes down to the challenges around using archaic legal structures in an internet-dominated world. Platforms have got every reason to not want to take on additional responsibilities – just look at Uber and the problems it is facing with worker’s rights – whilst the platform approach could is effectively a barrier for law enforcers.
However, it’s interesting that HMRC is taking this seriously enough to put together a team to gather information. It suggests that the evasions are large enough for it to invest in chasing down the culprits.
Earlier this week, Lord Lucas, a Conservative party peer, accused the UK tax office of not acting quickly to tackle the problem. During a debate he said:
As HMRC knows, for some long while Amazon and eBay have been collaborating with hundreds of overseas retailers to defraud the taxman of millions of pounds every day. It seems that HMRC has been very slow in its response.
Does HMRC realise the importance of effective and speedy enforcement for the fairness of the tax system and for the protection of honest internet retailers, and why has it been so reluctant to work openly and actively with UK businesses that know this part of the internet backwards and are in a position to help it make its enforcement effective and speedy?
Lord Ashton, a Treasury spokesperson in the House of Lords, replied and told peers that HMRC has established a “task force to undertake operational and intelligence-gathering activity to investigate this form of VAT evasion by online retailers”. He said that joint investigations with other government agencies are already under way and further targets are being identified.
Ashton added that contacts have been established with key commercial players in the sector and that meetings had already taken place. He added:
My Lords, HMRC certainly engages with other businesses, in particular with online businesses, and has dedicated customer relationship managers. A meeting with the top online retailers at a very senior level took place only last month.
HMRC has dedicated 25% of its customs and international trade operational resource to this problem and has set up a national task force to deal with it.
In related news, HMRC earlier this month announced draft legislation that would allow it to gather bulk data from platforms such as Amazon and eBay, which could include information such as names of sellers and tax identification numbers. If it goes ahead, this could in turn raise hundreds of millions of pounds for the tax office.
My take
Platforms are a problem for the authorities. Not an easy thing to tackle given that most of the companies not paying VAT will actually be registered abroad, which will likely trump the fact that they have stock here in the UK.
But he fact that HMRC has dedicated significant resource to this suggests that it is taking it seriously. However, I’m not getting my hopes up that this will be resolved anytime soon…
Read more on: Regulation 