
The transformation program is more than just focusing on costs. It’s about ensuring that we’re doing the right things in the right way across all areas of the business to deliver the best possible customer experience.
That’s a coherent summation by CEO Phillip Bowcock of the current situation at bookmakers William Hill, where the firm is seeing increasing numbers of punters turning to mobile and online platforms to place a flutter rather than actively coming into offline branches.
Half year figures released this week paint the picture. Betting shops, which represents 55% of overall revenues, saw a two percent rise to £1.2 billion but adjusted operating profits fell 14% to £80.9 million. Meanwhile online revenues, currently 35% of the total, were up 11% to £2.49 billion while adjusted operating profits were up 32% to £57.2 million.
That leaves Bowcock, who took over as CEO in March, happy to points to “signs of positive momentum” across the firm’s portfolio:
In gaming, we’ve gone from minus 8% in the first half of 2016 to plus 9% now. Within that, our 2 main verticals, the Vegas product suite and Playtech Casino, are up 12%. There’s no one silver bullet here. It’s about the combined benefit of what we’ve delivered. Those things include further product improvements for both Sportsbook and gaming, further UX enhancements that are increasing conversion rates and making marketing more efficient, growth in actives and new accounts, excluding the 2016 period.
William Hill is seeing more customers coming on board across its various online platforms. Bowcock points to its Sportsbook offering as a case in point:
Our actives started growing again in April. Android actives have grown steadily since we launched the new app in April, and we’re eager to see what will happen now that the Google Play Store is opening up for gambling apps. We’re in the first tranche of companies submitting their apps to Google today.
We continue to develop the iOS app as well. #YourOdds is proving very popular, attracting more than 2 million bets so far. You can now tweet directly from within the app, and we’ve added features like quickly building an acca from top bets. As you would expect, there is more to come as we get into the new football season.
Bowock adds that he’s encouraged to see new customers being more inclined to use both Sportsbook and Gaming apps:
What customers are getting is a much better experience. All the casino verticals have been redesigned, and bingo is next. We’ve delivered strong campaigns around marquee events like Cheltenham, and we’ve accelerated our new game schedule, including doubling the number of new Vegas releases. Our original goal was to see Gaming achieve market growth rates by the year-end. We’re clearly getting there sooner than planned.
Offline upgrades
As for the betting shops, there’s a need here to upgrade the user experience as well and that work is underway, says Bowcock:
We’re also making good progress on joining up the digital and shop experiences. First, we’re bringing our expanded product range to shop customers. In the SSBTs (Self Service Betting Terminals), we’ve added horse racing for Ascot and cricket for the first test, plus our customers’ favorite football coupons and, of course, #YourOdds. We’re replacing the original 800 BGT (BEst Gaming Technology) units with our SSBTs right now, and rolling out around 270 more so every shop has at least one William Hill SSBT by the year-and.
That supports the second part, bringing Online’s most popular experiences to shop customers through the Plus app and card. SSBT customers can track their bets, receive live score updates and cash in from their mobile. We’re now able to use push messaging to send offers to them, which have got very positive responses from our first campaigns. It’s early days, but more than 80,000 customers have already signed up to Plus, as in just 6 weeks and in just 60% of the estate that currently have a William Hill SSBT.
Another key objecive is to make it easier for customers to make payments and complete transactions. Bowcock explains:
We’re joining Online and retailer with a single wallet. The first iteration will make it quicker and easier for existing online customers to deposit, withdraw and use their funds to bet in the shops and give a single view of transactions across shops and digital. And we’re on track to launch that in the second half of this year.
There’s also work going on behind the scenes to reduce costs and increase efficiencies, he adds, helped by the improvements to the user experience:
The user experience changes we’ve made are reducing the volume of incoming queries for customer services. We’re reducing the number of locations that service Online and the UK to become more efficient by co-locating key teams and to tap into the right talent pools to support our marketing and technology expansion. Tel Aviv will close in quarter two next year. Krakow is being built out as our development center, with an additional 87 heads already recruited there. And we’re bringing marketing and technology together in one London office over the next 6 months.
My take
All of this is postive, but there is one set of uncertain odds facing William Hill in the shape of the UK government’s triennial review into fixed odds betting terminals, a lucrative source of revenue. There are calls from anti-gambling lobbyists to reduce the maximum stake to £2 and to limit the promotion of the terminals through advertising and indeed the number of terminals that can be sited in each bricks-and-mortar location. The outcome of that review has been pushed back, but if it takes a tough stance then that could easily make going in-store less appealing – which makes it all the more important to get the online and mobile strategies right!
Image credit - William Hill Read more on: MobileRetail e-commerce and the omni-channelUser experience 