

Some years and some shows are simply more monumental for a company and its customers than others. Oracle OpenWorld 2017 (OOW17) is starting off like it will be one of the monumental types.
It can be puzzling why in 2017 we’re still fixated on data even when what we’re talking about in many cases is not data but its progeny, information upon which we make business decisions but there is ample reason to be fixated. Data is, after all what gets stolen, sold on the dark web, and used to make your life and credit history a dog’s breakfast. So data and preserving it intact was the subject of Larry Ellison’s keynote and much of what this show will be about. As Ellison succinctly said at one point:
People are going to get better at stealing data, we have to get better at protecting it.
Getting better at protection is Ellison’s mission these days and although he has a whole keynote dedicated to it on Tuesday, he couldn’t resist teasing out most of his message about the latest iteration of the company’s database, Oracle 18c, last night.
The big news is that the database is fully autonomous and the cyber security it enables is nearly so. Over the next few cycles, Oracle will be working to make security fully autonomous too. The news value however, is in what autonomy brings and not simply the fact of its existence.
Oracle’s autonomous database is designed to be self-tuning, self-provisioning, and even self-patching so that it can deal with attempts to hack into it in real time rather than human time. As Ellison said in the keynote, the system has to be able to react during hacking reconnaissance and not much later when the bad guys are rooting around in a business’s systems and feasting on private data.
As Ellison said,
Cyber security detects a threat, determines the next step, which may include patching DB, and that must be done automatically, no human scheduling downtime for the work.
In taking this approach, Oracle and the industry can change the dynamic from treating data breeches as acute incidents to treating them as chronic ones and this is a big deal.
It is a strategy that is often used in other fields to manage, if not cure, a big problem. The problem never goes away but treating it as a chronic issue enables us to stay on top of it. Not to get too far afield, but it’s an approach often used in medicine.. For example, the current control medical science has over the HIV virus comes not from having found a cure but from using multiple drugs in concert that change a person’s defenses faster than the virus’s ability to mutate and deal with them. What’s provided is the appearance of a cure, but it is really prevention of worse consequences. The same goes for Type 2 diabetes treatments.
So too with database and if that was all the news about Oracle 18c, it would be enough, but consider what this means economically and competitively for Oracle. First, full disclosure, getting all of the benefits of 18c requires some of Oracle’s best hardware like Xadata, rack, disaster recovery, and multitenancy, so the DB features are heavily hardware dependent. For most businesses, this means not buying all of that gear but using it by becoming a cloud customer, a strong incentive for moving to the cloud.
Even at the level of infrastructure or IaaS, Oracle can now provide customers of its legacy systems more than a modicum of advanced security. So suddenly this means that provisioning infrastructure is not the commodity business it was a little while ago. Infrastructure is now a competitive and differentiated business again. At least for the time being.
This was seen explicitly in the brief demos that Ellison conducted on stage. Choosing AWS as his foil, Ellison demonstrated in a variety of use cases how the Oracle database could provide greater security and still be much faster than the competition. His demonstrations didn’t focus on time to complete tasks but instead used cost of the task. Cost is what customers pay attention to when they’re renting infrastructure even though storage and speed are still important, cost brings the message home by showing that even though Oracle might be more expensive on some bases, its ability to deliver job completions faster can mean lower costs overall.
My take
A few months ago I had written off infrastructure as a service (IaaS) as a backwater, a place where Oracle had to compete to protect its legacy customer base in the hope of converting it to its cloud vision. But it would be a loss leader because there were so many other vendors selling more or less the same products and the competition would revolve around price. That vision no longer makes sense.
Oracle has decided to compete on infrastructure with its autonomous database AND to compete on price. Moreover the advances previewed by Ellison also have a benefit for the company’s rivals further up the stack and in the cloud. Big commercial users can deploy the same database and hardware to produce similar gains in security and all the rest. This will no doubt make for an interesting decision point at companies like Salesforce and SAP that use the Oracle database but who may also partner with other infrastructure vendors.
Image credit - via OOW17 live feedDisclosure - Oracle is a prmier partner at time of writingRead more on: Cloud platforms - infrastructure and architectureInfrastructureMachine intelligence and AI 