
Despite the fact that the UK is consistently ranked in the top three countries that have made progress towards creating an open data government, there is still an incredible amount of work to do before the benefits can truly be realised.
A year on since the release of the ‘Open data roadmap for the UK’, which was penned by the Open Data Institute (ODI), a government-backed organisation that was set up by founder of the world wide web Tim Berners-Lee, the British government is still not doing enough to strengthen the UK’s data infrastructure and maximise the benefits of open data.
The ODI has this week warned that silos remain, privatisation of organisations threatens the open data agenda and that there is not enough strong leadership on the issue in Whitehall.
I’d also argue that whilst the government often pays lip service to the open data agenda, it still likes to conceal information or details when it doesn’t suit whatever political play is happening at the time. You only have to look at the attempts to crack down on Freedom of Information requests as evidence of that.
However, the ODI has released a blog that gives us a clearer idea of where gaps remain and what needs to be achieved over the coming 12 months.
The ODI’s head of policy, Ellen Broad wrote:
One year on, there are recommendations set out in the roadmap that are more urgent than ever; there are some that seem blindingly obvious in retrospect; and there are needs we have now that weren’t mentioned in the roadmap at all.
While the UK’s Government Data Programme – coordinated by Government Digital Service – is accelerating work on data-sharing, ethics and registers, open data remains frustratingly siloed.
The challenges
The ODI’s initial roadmap highlighted the need to refine and formalise the UK’s National Information Infrastructure. It argued that a static list of public sector datasets probably wasn’t going to be much use to anybody.
However, since the general election last year, the ODI states that the government’s work on “defining and setting rules for essential data infrastructure – inside and outside of government- has stalled”.
It adds, rightly so, that the government needs to recognise that data IS infrastructure – not just for the public sector, but for the private sector too. Broad says:
It underpins public service transformation, business innovation and democratic engagement. The UK Government Data Programme espouses the importance of data infrastructure, but while a National Infrastructure Commission has been established by government, data isn’t a part of it.
Equally, the ODI picks up on the Government Digital Service’s work on data registers (which we have covered extensively). It believes that it is good that Whitehall is investing in core reference data, which will underpin a lot of services, but adds that registers aren’t the only kind of data in our data infrastructure.
The Government Digital Service’s rhetoric has largely focused on these data registers, but the ODI was keen to point out that they need to act as a supplement, rather than replace, the existing mechanisms for publishing core data.
It also highlights the potential sale of the Land Registry as a concern (as did we), stating that the openness of such public organisations is at risk if these bodies are privatised.
The ODI points to the Government Data Programme, which has a team working on progressing open data, but argues that the programme is “fragmented” and is concerned that because targets and metrics for its initiatives aren’t made public, it’s hard to “meaningfully evaluate progress”.
It is also rather concerned about the leadership. Broad states:
Responsibility for open data is now generally split across two departments: GDS and the Government Data Programme, who are exploring data use inside government which will feed into the Government Digital Strategy, and the Department for Business, Innovation and Skills (BIS), who are asking questions about open data and its use by businesses and third-sector organisations in the National Innovation Plan.
The split between departments may make sense if it weaves open data into the natural perspectives and scope for policy interventions within the two departments. But joining up efforts will take strong leadership.

And to that point, last year’s roadmap recommended the appointment of a Chief Data Officer for government. But the ODI notes that “it still seems there’s a lack of senior leadership and championing of data across government” and that “no new Chief Data Officer has been appointed”.
Broad continues:
As the Government Data Programme ramps up, and more departments begin to invest in data science, open data and data infrastructure projects, that authoritative voice becomes essential to champion and communicate the big picture for data in the UK; to hold government to account when things go wrong.
It’s worth highlighting that the government has appointed a Director of Data – Paul Maltby – who has been quite vocal on the issue of registers and organising data for the support of Government-as-a-Platform. I’m not entirely sure if there is much of a difference between a Chief Data Officer and a Director of Data, but maybe if Maltby was more vocal about open data this would satisfy the ODI’s recommendation.
Missing parts
The ODI also took the opportunity to highlight areas it felt it missed off the original roadmap for the UK and put them forward as additional recommendations for the open data agenda.
For example, it recommends that more needs to be done to engage with the wider data community, highlighting that whilst open data organisations exist in the UK, they all either have an element of self interest or focus on a small sub-section of the data community. The ODI believes that “other voices and perspectives need to be taken into account”.
Equally, the ODI recognises that there is work to be done to “address the data trust deficit between citizens and organisations managing and using our personal data”, pointing to how data projects need to seriously consider what is ‘ethical’ when it comes to data use and have adaptive frameworks in place to guide.
Finally, since the general election, the ODI has been working with members to ensure that as devolution deals are finalised across the UK, that city data infrastructure is as open as possible for future use.
My take
Lots to consider here. And it is good that the ODI is continuing to put pressure on the government. Open data isn’t an easy thing to get right – it’s not just about releasing a shed load of datasets and saying ‘job done’. That data has to be workable and easy to interact with and there has to be a culture of constantly using open data throughout government.
And as I said above, the government likes to pay lip service to the agenda, because it sounds nice, but they sometimes don’t like what it actually means. It will be interesting to see if much progress has been made one year from now.
Image credit - Image via the Open Data Institute Read more on: Data privacyDigital government and public services

