
The private cloud is not past its sell-by date, but it is in the process of changing significantly in order to stay alive. And the OpenStack Foundation sees its favourite child playing an important role in bringing that change to fruition.
Speaking at the annual OpenStack Summit, this time held in Boston’s Hynes Convention Center, the Foundation’s Executive Director, Jonathan Bryce, said that the organisation was now seeing significant growth in private cloud deployments of what he called a second generation of private cloud infrastructures:
The first generation of private clouds were mainly large scale implementations, such as at PayPal. Now, the addressable market has broadened, with factors such as data sovereignty now pushing a lot of private cloud growth. And the OpenStack community has come together to innovate to meet such needs.
These innovations include rolling in a growing range of other technologies, such as Kubernetes, Openshift, and CloudFoundry. He reckoned that OpenStack technology is really starting to mature and improve, while also achieving cost savings when working at a much smaller scale. It is now not just suitable for big companies, but works just as effectively for SME users as well, he said.
One of the major changes in private cloud deployment now occurring is entirely physical – the move away from deployment on-premise as a re-working of the internal datacentre so that it can deliver cloud-like services. Instead the big tendency now is for user to deploy cloud based service, delivered by third party service providers, that are specifically provisioned and configured to the needs and requirements of a single customer.
These are often referred to as remotely managed services. According to Bryce, the more obvious name for for this approach – Private Cloud as a Service – is now often avoided as the two words `private’ and `cloud’ are still felt to scare the bejesus out of many enterprise users. Yet in practice those enterprise users are facing a growing diversity of computing platforms that are in play and of growing potential value to them:
Now more starting to realise they will need to move into the cloud and will need a mixed environment. This has already led to the rise of the hosted private cloud, and now we are seeing the managed private cloud service coming through. This obviously leads users to face questions on where any specific workload should run.
These questions, he suggested, fall into three areas. There are compliance issues, the cost implications and the capabilities required to deliver. Yet addressing them can bring dramatic benefits. Bryce said that one OpenStack user moved from a public cloud service to a remote private cloud and made a 75% saving.
Helping GE in healthcare
One company that has set off down the managed service/private cloud route is GE Healthcare, and its Senior Director of Digital Operations, Patrick Weeks was on-hand to tell the OpenStack audience about the experience. One of the key problems the company faced was that it had grown a huge IT infrastructure, to the point where it was becoming more of an infrastructure business than its primary goal of healthcare:
To make the change needed we had to get everyone at the table. This was a major change and it needed good innovators for whom the word ‘no’ was not an answer. We realised we needed to target the impossible, which in our case was to get 126 cloud-delivered applications up a running in the first year, from a standing start. We did get the pigs to actually fly.
The company now has 530 applications migrated to the hosted service – some having been ported from a public cloud operation, 608 old applications retired, and annualised savings on its operations currently running at around $30m. in all, some 42% of its applications portfolio is now in the cloud, with the remainder lined up in the target:
We decided we needed to go the private hosted cloud route because we need to access the internal apps, secure the platform, and reuse code where necessary. We decided to run this on OpenStack hosted by Rackspace. The first production app went live on the eighth day, and we had a totally seamless interaction with Rackspace. OpenStack gave us the required flexibility, and going the open source route has meant that we face no vendor lock in.
Weeks was followed by a number of other OpenStack users outlining where it had contributed to the development of new projects and services. For example, Beth Cohen, a Distinguished Member of the Technical Staff at mobile services provider, Verizon, highlighted how the company was pushing the traditional datacentre focus of OpenStack out to the edge of its extensive network.
This is an increasingly important area for companies such as Verizon because the edge networks are where the real workload pressure and demand is coming from as new service requirements – such as increasingly autonomous and self-driving cars start to make their presence felt. Here, real-time collaboration of services is not just vital but potentially a matter of life and death, said Cohen:
Our users are now looking for security, and a whole portfolio of network services. We went with OpenStack to help us deliver them for its unified management tools, the ability to move workloads between the edge and the core with real flexibility.
This has also led Verizon to develop a new appliance designed to operate as a self-contained piece of customer-premises equipment. Known as the Universal CPE, Cohen and her team define it as `Openstack cloud in a box’. It is a generic x86-based system, which she claimed is both simple to use and highly reliable, giving Verizon a global, massively-distributed cloud service capability.  It also provides rapid scaling using automation and orchestration tools, including automated provisioning and virtual network services.
Here comes the 5th Cavalry
The user-base of OpenStack is also spreading into markets that are, well, unusual, especially when it comes to them making an appearance in a technology keynote presentation. But that did not stop Major Julianna M Rodriguez and Captain Christopher W Apsey, respectively Director and Deputy Director of the US Army Cyber School, from doing just that.
Teaching in the cyber defence arena (and one assumes attack as well) has some significant differences to normal teaching processes, where the need is often to get students to the point where they can `make bread from instructions’. This is still such a new, uncharted area that the key factor is getting students to think much deeper into the subject and become in effect self-starters. Without that cyber defences will always be well-behind the curve.
This means coming up with new, fast ways of developing courseware that can even then exploit the real-life experiences of past students now out in the field. Such an approach – and especially the need for speed of development – run counter to standard military practice (and practice in many large enterprises for that matter). So the pair had to develop an entirely new approach to courseware development that eschewed the old ways of document preparation, approvals, rewrites and the rest.
Starting out on a few ‘liberated’ old servers running OpenStack (getting new kit in the army can take a bit of time), they opted for an open source community approach where courseware is communally developed between instructors, past students and others, using GitHub as the communications and collaboration environment.
The authorities seem to hve seen the sense behind this approach, however, as it now runs on a 2000 core, 36TB environment and is training some 500 students a year.
Boris Renski co-founder of Mirantis, a service provider aiming squarely at the new managed service market, outlined what users can expect:
Managed open cloud services must be built following a public cloud model. They must also be continuously delivered in a synchronised cycle, and must be delivered as a service that can solve the right customer problems. We see Mirantis as not just a managed service, it is a managed and directed public cloud service.
It is an approach that is also gaining traction across the vendor community that has service the enterprise private cloud marketplace. For example, Renski used the keynote to announce a new partnership with Fujitsu to provide managed open cloud services to its customer base. He suggested that this made Fujitsu one of the first major system service vendor to offer it.
My take
This shift of the private cloud model out of the on-premise datacentre and out into the cloud service delivery model makes good sense and should make good economics for many enterprise users. The one downside, however, is that instead of biting the bullet of starting to call it all just cloud, regardless of whether it is public, private or hybrid, the OpenStack Foundation has inadvertently introduced yet one more variation into the cloud mix. With OpenStack able to play an integral part in any and all of the existing variants of cloud, it is ideally placed to just holler – let’s just call it all cloud and have done with it’.
Image credit - OpenStack Foundation Read more on: Cloud platforms - infrastructure and architectureOpen source 