
It’s safe to say that like many technology leaders, Julian Bond, head of ICT at UK-based made-to-measure window dressings business Hillarys Blinds, is no big fan of ERP upgrades. An ERP upgrade, he says,

…is a painful interruption to the normal scheme of things. They cost quite a bit of money and they cost quite a bit of time and involve a lot of what I call ‘opportunity cost’, too, because while we in IT are focusing on this one thing, which isn’t seen as particularly value-adding, we’re not doing the other projects and pursuing the other opportunities that could add value. Plus, they’re not the sort of thing that the business is chomping at the bit to get done, so the business tends not to be very tolerant of any disruption. It’s a big, big deal to take something like this on.

So it’s to his credit that when Bond decided last year to upgrade Hillarys’ core ERP from SAP ECC 5 to SAP ECC 6, he didn’t just stop there. The project, he decided, should involve a wholesale refresh of the entire software stack. Hillarys would also move its SAP implementation from the HPUX operating system to Suse Linux and from the Oracle database to SAP HANA. 
At the same time, the company’s SAP Business Warehouse set-up would also migrate to HANA, as would its SAP CRM 7 implementation. Oh, and while Bond was about it, he’d need to chuck a complete hardware refresh into the mix, because he’d need servers with plenty of in-memory capability to make the move to HANA. 
Tools
Given the scale and scope of these changes, it’s remarkable that, less than a year from getting sign-off on the project from the executive team at Hillarys in August 2015, the company has been up and running on its upgraded systems for several months now, with only minor hitches in between. 
Bond credits two key contributors to the project’s success: the skills of the company’s SAP partner Birchman Group and the decision to use Panaya, a SaaS-based tool for identifying code breaks in SAP upgrades that was acquired by Infosys in February 2015. It’s this tool, says Bond, that enabled he and his team to track down and prioritise customisations that would require rework in the shift from ECC 5 to ECC 6:

I first came across Panaya a few years ago when I was trying to do some planning around a possible ERP upgrade. We did a bit of work with the company, running a small analysis of our system and, just from that, I could see it could be valuable. But when we finally came to engage on this upgrade, I found that the company’s CloudQuality Suite had been very much fleshed out to help users much more on testing. It was now a much bigger suite. But it’s real value was risk reduction – helping us to understand how big a deal our upgrade was going to be and where we needed to focus our resources.
For me, it was about crunching a huge challenge into something completely manageable. By providing us with a snapshot of our system as it stood and where it needed to get to in order to upgrade, Panaya allowed us to see where we should focus our testing time and resources, saying to us, ‘Here are the things that need changing and this is how we rate them in terms of importance, as high, medium or low priorities.’ We were never going to be in the position of being able to test left to right, top to bottom, every line of code, so being able to crunch through that was huge.

That’s not to say that the project went without a hitch, or within the Christmas-to-New-Year window that Bond had set aside for it. But when hit by delays, due to technical issues with Suse Linux and the DMO [database migration option] tools provided by SAP, Bond and his team found that they had so successfully honed their upgrade operations, that it would be possible to squeeze the upgrades into much smaller windows during the first few months of 2016. Business Warehouse was, in fact, live before Christmas. CRM went live at the end of January and the ERP upgrade went live during the third weekend of February:

When it came to going live, our rationale for using Panaya was absolutely validated by the embarrassingly few issues we needed to resolve. One of the ways we used Panaya – which not all customer do, I think – is to start using it as early as we could, before we even got project sign-off, to find bits of code we needed to change, changing them and then changing them in the current live system. So in that way, we were decreasing the delta of changes all the time, prior to upgrade. That process really helped us out.

Hardware
While software takes the lead role in this story, the hardware changes involved were not insubstantial, either. Here, Bond took the decision to replace the company’s HP servers with servers from Huawei. It was a big decision at a company that has used HP technology for decades, and Bond concedes that, at the start of the selection process, Huawei was very much an “also-ran”, lagging far behind the other contenders, HP and IBM. But hardware evaluations and performance testing, along with Birchman Group’s recommendation, proved Huawei’s worth, resulting in a hardware saving in “double digits”. 
Today, with all systems up and running, what stands out for Bond is the speed at which Hillarys Blinds employees are able to get work done, he says:

ECC is faster on HANA. BW is a lot faster. CRM is unbelievably faster – and in the past, it’s been sluggish at best. In my 30 years in IT, I’ve never encountered the kind of [positive] feedback that we got from users after CRM went live. They were asking us, ‘What have you done to this system? It’s fantastic now!’ Across the board, we expected some speed improvements, but we never expected the kinds of leaps forward in performance that we’ve seen.
That has allowed us to look at the traditional constraints on performance with fresh eyes and rethink some processes. For example, we always struggled to fit our overnight batch uploads into BW into the available time – and that time has now halved. Our MRP runs are performed weekly, because they’ve always taken a long time, but now, they’re remarkably quick, so we could run them daily if we thought it added value. Now the speed is there, the inherited wisdom of what we can fit into a working week has entirely changed.


Image credit - Hillarys Blinds Disclosure - At time of writing, Infosys and SAP are premier partners of diginomica. Read more on: Cloud ERP financials and supply chainCloud platforms - infrastructure and architectureCRM and customer experienceDigital enterprise in the real worldUse cases 