
Although it’s a given that business today is heavily seasoned with digital disruption, there’s evidence that we may have conflated the digital variety with something older and statelier, or at least slower moving. Disruptive innovation first brought to our attention by Clay Christensen in his seminal work, “The Innovator’s Dilemma” is a cousin to digital disruption but different enough to cause some re-examination—at least because the old prescriptions seem not to be working so well.
Digital disruption is much faster and less forgiving than the disruption described by Christensen. It’s also easier to do, one reason that executives have a hard time coming to terms with it.
Digital disruption – current thinking
A recent article by Maxwell Wessel of Stanford’s Graduate School of Business makes the point. Writing in Harvard Business Review with the title Why Preventing Disruption in 2017 Is Harder Than It Was When Christensen Coined the Term Wessel says that,
 When Christensen conducted the research for The Innovator’s Dilemma, he looked at industries that were asset-heavy. Construction equipment and disk-drive manufacturing required heavy machinery, distribution facilities, and immense amounts of working capital. In today’s world the most pointed disruptive threats look different. They are not asset-heavy. They are asset-light.
This asset lightness makes disruption by upstarts and competitors easier than ever. Instead of spending months designing a product, building or at least configuring a manufacturing line, and aligning a supply chain, digital disruption often simply integrates existing technology in new ways.
Moreover, Wessel says that where an established business once used its financial reputation to borrow at reasonable rates to support product development, today’s disruptors simply rely on equity to build products as well as their companies placing established businesses at somewhat of a disadvantage.
Asset lightness enables greater speed in getting to market because making software and innovating around business processes is not as intensive as making durable goods (just don’t mention this to your favorite programmer). Coupled with how organizations fund disruptions, the need for assets can explain a lot about today’s business climate and why it continues to accelerate. But this is no time to play Chicken Little, the sky is not falling on established business but it is raining and at least some are finding ways to stay dry.
When first realized, disruptive innovation was a relatively slow process by which upstart new products would take over a market from the grass roots up. It was unnerving for marketplace incumbents because they might easily dismiss the upstarts as ineffective, underpowered, or in many other ways lacking the elements that successful market leaders offered. But with great regularity and, in surprisingly short time, the upstarts gained market share, improved their offerings and became competitors to the establishment. Worse, the new kids, whose products were initially rebuffed, could run circles around the market leaders with their new and improved products and business processes.
It was a lesson learned repeatedly and nowhere better than in Silicon Valley where disruption is practically a product in its own right. Another lesson was to disrupt yourself and so steal a march on a competitor intent on the same. But that’s hard to do; it’s expensive and risky, two things that established businesses avoid. One favored approach to disruption inside of established businesses has been to spin up a new business unit to compete on the level of disruption with the outside world. While there have been many success stories using this approach, it has the effect of bringing the established business down to the level of the upstart delivering an upstart-level product.
Oracle – a case in point
Consumers are always, sooner or later, focused on whole product or the constellation of products, services, and community driven by a popular product’s ubiquity. For those buyers, especially in the enterprise, building and maintaining bonds with established vendors is serious business. Vendors may be learning how to meet their customers half-way using a combination of self-disruption and targeted teams. Oracle’s recent IoT Cloud announcements may be a case in point.
In the span of a year and a half Oracle has gone from introducing its IoT cloud to introducing customized applications based on cultivated feature sets. In earlier times, we might have expected a chasm crossing in which end customers bought the original product and experimented with it to develop something useful for their businesses. From those early experiments, standard products would arise.
In this case, just the opposite happened. Oracle spent the year-and-a-half post IoT Cloud announcement, working with its partners to develop business cases and applications leveraging the three IoT products it announced last month. One example will suffice. Digital Twin for Supply Chain Management is technology that enables a business to operate a digital representation of a physical asset or equipment. Having a twin enables a bit of modeling and what-if analysis and it also enables field service to more quickly and accurately diagnose a problem and implement a solution. As luck, or Oracle, would have it, the improved Digital Field Service application leverages the Digital Twin technology.
My take
The Oracle story is a concise vignette of how the company used its heavy assets to build foundation technology and then leveraged its lighter assets, including business partners, to make a practical whole product for the market. In Christensen’s day, it may have been enough to deliver raw technology but today digital disruption is increasingly requiring the additional step. Of course, to be successful, the product has to end up in the hands of real end customers, the same people who might be obsessing about digital disruption in their businesses. For them this only highlights the importance of getting to the cloud with deliberate speed.
Image credit - © Andy Dean - Fotolia.comDisclosure - Oracle is a premier partner at time of writing and a client of the author. Read more on: Digital enterprise in the real worldDigital transformation - frictionless enterprise 