
Not content with having got a jury verdict that slaps Rimini Street with a $50 million damages result, Oracle comes back with a clear expression that it wants to kill off Rimini Street via an injunction. This is what Oracle says:
Before the trial began, a federal judge determined that Rimini Street and Seth Ravin infringed Oracle’s intellectual property rights in the PeopleSoft and Oracle database product lines. After two weeks of trial, a federal jury found that Rimini also infringed Oracle intellectual property rights in the JD Edwards and Seibel product lines. That same jury awarded Oracle more than $50 million in damages for that infringement and violations of laws protecting computer systems. Oracle further intends to seek an injunction barring Rimini from continuing to operate its business based on massive infringement. This case certainly was not about an honest dispute over licensing terms, as Rimini pretends. It was about IP theft, pure and simple. Rimini and Seth Ravin got caught, and now they have to pay.  Oracle will aggressively pursue its claims in the second lawsuit pending against Rimini for the infringement and other misconduct that occurred after the dates at issue in the first trial.” – via Deborah Hellinger, Oracle.
For its part, Rimini Street says:
Rimini Street, not Oracle, filed the second case, suing Oracle and asking the court to legally confirm that Rimini Street’s new processes for PeopleSoft update development do not infringe Oracle’s copyrights.
With regard to any ‘injunction’ sought by Oracle, the jury found legally ‘innocent infringement,’ and not ‘willful infringement,’ and awarded Oracle a license fee as compensation. Once Rimini Street had the benefit of a judicial interpretation of disputed Oracle software license terms, we stopped all processes challenged by Oracle in this case and completed our transition to an all-remote support model in 2014. Therefore, Oracle’s request for injunction for processes no longer in use at Rimini Street is meaningless, as Rimini Street will explain in its forthcoming court filings.
When I heard the back and forth I was conflicted. How do you parse this in the best interests of buyers? Actually – it is very easy. Golden rule no.1: who is screwing who in this argument? It doesn’t take a rocket scientist to realize that it is Oracle giving its core customers the butt shaft.
I do though give credit to Oracle for Grade A marketing bullshit, slugger style, even though it has zero credence in law. It’s crude and almost classy — but not quite. I give Rimini Street full marks for delivering a slapshot that anticipated this torpedo (sic) across the bows.
For our part, I hoped that both parties would step aside from proceedings. My colleague Vinnie Mirchandani thought the same. Clearly we misjudged the testosterone levels operating in the Nevada desert.
Oracle needs to understand that a certain class of customer has already voted with their wallets. Attempting to re-introduce this case as something that sullies the whole third party maintenance issue is marginally short of idiotic.  Especially so given the most recent verdict.
Let’s be clear, customers are not so dumb as to be bitten twice. Rimini Street, along with other third party maintenance providers offer a safe haven to which customers will gravitate.  Oracle (and SAP)? Get over yourelves or come up with a more compelling offer.
Oracle’s tactics at this stage look dangerous to its revenue opportunities. The signal they send to buyers is clear: buy our stuff or get screwed in the long term. Except that’s not working for a good number of clients who might easily amount to $150 million in net  Rimini Street value this coming year. Is that the message Oracle really wants its customers to know?
Larry Dignan of ZDNet posits this latest move puts Rimini Street in mortal danger. Dignan is flat out wrong to think that, though I get it makes a great headline. Rimini Street always knew that Oracle would come after them and planned accordingly.
Both Oracle and Rimini Street are premier partners at time of writing. That said, we cannot condone Oracle’s legalese as anything better than FUD and bullshit.
Oracle makes outlandish statements and then shuts its PR doors with ‘no comment.’ That has worked well in the past but I reckon it’s a broken strategy in this context.
As I said, customers vote with their wallets. It is already happening. Attempting to resurrect an argument that on its face destroys the third party maintenance model through the back door of an injunction sounds, quite frankly, desperate.
To be clear – both Rimini Street and Oracle are premier partners. As we always make clear to partners, we care about the buyer community and their needs. That might mean it is better for a customer to stay with Oracle. But it might equally be right for that same customer to consider alternatives. Both companies should make their cases – but not in the law courts or through brickbats.
For all its fiscal might, my guess is that Oracle is playing a bad hand. But then I’m not a lawyer and I have no insight into legal thinking. Does that matter? Customer responses suggest no but there does needs to be a clearly established legal framework around which everyone can comfortably operate.
Rimini Street will argue that has been achieved, ergo Oracle’s current tactics are thinly veiled examples of what they really want to achieve – kill off third party maintenance.
If I had to bet, I’d say Oracle is on a legal hiding to nothing. In fact, if I was standing on the other side I’d be inclined to say: Knock yourselves out. the judge has decided. you wanna go up against that? Good luck.”
Update: Seth Ravin has offered me an update from Rimini Street perspective. We will report that in due course. Oracle has not made the same offer.
Read more on: Customer service management 