
The global bee population is declining at a rapid rate. Bees are responsible for pollinating approximately one third of the global food supplies and of the 100 crop species that feed 90% of the world’s population, bees pollinate 70.
However, research is showing that increasingly inhospitable conditions – including the loss of flower habitats, intensified farming methods, climate change and the increased use of pesticides – is leading to a fall in the global bee population.
For example, England’s honey bees are vanishing at a faster rate than anywhere in Europe, with a 54% decline between 1985 and 2005. This trend poses a serious threat to the world’s global food security.
Which is why, the World Bee Project is undertaking a number of initiatives to address biodiversity loss, through ecological intensification and pollinator restoration programmes.
One key initiative is the World Bee Project’s relationship with Oracle, which has seen it adopt a data-first approach to understanding the decline of honey bee populations.
The World Bee Project Hive Network will remotely collect data using a network of connected beehives. This data will then be fed into Oracle’s Cloud, which will use analytics, artificial intelligence (AI) and data visualisation to give researchers better insights into the relationships between bees and their environments.
The Network will allow researchers to effectively ‘listen’ to the honey bees – analysing acoustic data captured inside the smart hives, including the movement of bees’ wings and feet. This data, combined with other precise measurements – including temperature, humidity and honey yield – will allow researchers to be able to better monitor bee colonies, with the aim of detecting patterns and predicting behaviours.
Sabiha Rumani Malik, Founder and Executive President at The World Bee Project, said:
Our lives are intrinsically connected to the bees. By protecting bees and other pollinators we can help solve problems with global food supply and poverty and reduce further loss of biodiversity and damage of ecosystems. Our partnership with Oracle Cloud is an extraordinary marriage between nature and technology.
It will engage the public into caring more and more for pollinators, it will enable advanced research and, crucially, action on a scale previously impossible to achieve. The more we understand the relationships between pollination, food and human wellbeing, the more we can do to protect bees and pollinators – and help protect our planet and ourselves.
The impact
I got the chance to speak to Caroline Apsey, Oracle’s Innovation Design Director, who explained how the Network will hopefully work going forward. She said that whilst the aim of the project is to impact global policy around bee protection, the Network will also have a practical impact at a local level. She Apsey said:
Whilst also global, if you go down to the singular farmer or the singular beekeeper – we are seeing trends within this data, where bees are leaving the hive 21 days in advance. Effectively the audio data that we are collecting as one of the streams of data, allows you to basically see the chat amongst the bees that they are unhappy with their surrounding.
That indication that we can give a beekeeper – 21 days in advance of their bees talking about leaving the hive – is incredible. The beekeeper can then look at the other sets of data. We are pulling that data into a really clear visualisation for a beekeeper and we are not asking the beekeeper data scientists.
The Oracle analytics are translating the data for them. The future will allow us to send an alert to them, telling them that their bees are talking about leaving them, and inform them of the other outliers that we can see.
Inspiring the younger generation
It is hoped that the data will allow conservationists and beekeepers to take action to protect colonies, such as preventing swarming at the wrong time of year or removing predators, like the Asian Hornet.
Apsey said that part of her job will be to use this data to go into schools across the country to educate students on how they can better help protect the bees. She said:
I’m a STEAM ambassador. I go on behalf of Oracle to speak to kids, around the UK, about the importance of Science, Technology, Engineering, Arts and Maths. We are going to be using this data to teach kids about the importance of those subjects in a really fun and interactive way.
Teach them what they can do in their own back garden to help promote the ecosystem – whether that’s just planting some pollinated friendly flowers, that’s contributing to the ecosystem and to the welfare of bees.
The data and insights gained by using Oracle Cloud will be made available to research and conservation projects working to protect bees around the world. By sharing resources and fostering collaboration, The World Bee Project Hive Network hopes to multiply its impact and enable greater action to save bees.
Image credit - Image via pixabay Disclosure - Oracle is a diginomica premier partner at time of writing. Read more on: Analytics planning and data analysisCloud platforms - infrastructure and architectureIoT robotics and AIMachine intelligence and AIUse cases 