
Dermot O’Kelly, SVP Oracle UK
OpenWorld 2016 will be remembered as the year that Oracle went for Amazon Web Service’s jugular, taking aim at the Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS) market. This has been met with amusement, curiosity and disbelief by commenters observing the event.
CTO Larry Ellison went as far to say that Amazon’s “lead is over” – which is bold, considering that it is the market leader by a significant amount. However, Oracle’s retort to this is that only 6% of production workloads are currently in the cloud, and as a result, this is a market that is still for the taking.
As I’ve noted in my previous posts, it would be silly to underestimate Oracle. It has a stronghold on many of the world’s largest enterprises and it has huge sway with these customers. And this is where I think Oracle’s IaaS offering will have the most impact – it may not necessarily win against AWS in direct competition with a buyer that doesn’t have a relationship with either, but it doesn’t want to lose its current on-premise customers to AWS at the infrastructure level.
I’ve asked every Oracle executive I’ve met this week: why are you so keen to win the IaaS market? It’s a low margins business and seen as a commodity by most buyers. Why not focus on your value further up the stack?
I’ve had varying responses, some better than others. One spokesperson that I was able to have a more valuable engagement with on the topic was Oracle’s SVP for UK, Dermot O’Kelly. He gave me a clearer understanding about Oracle’s strategy on this and as to why it has been so aggressive this week about the infrastructure layer.
Essentially it comes down to the idea that Oracle believes that it can convince customers that if they operate their entire stack with Oracle – from IaaS all the way up to the application layer – then they will operate more efficiently and effectively. O’Kelly said:
It’s better for the customer for a couple of reasons. One, if you are going to make the move, the same rules apply that always have. You need reliability, you need scalability and you need security. We deliver that. I’m not saying that nobody else does, but that’s our DNA.
The other thing is that’s not where all the money is being spent. It’s the step one that you have to make – get your workloads out of your data centre and into the cloud. And then you can really start doing the heavy lifting work of, why don’t we standardise your platform? That’s a project in itself. You don’t just switch it on one day. We’ve got to move your data, we’ve got to look at it, we’ve got to get you to a standard version of the database, so there’s work involved. But it’s much easier if we’ve done it on our platform to start with.
I don’t see it as being all about IaaS. It’s about everything. It’s about the whole stack. It’s just that that’s the easiest place to jump in for our customers. We are trying to service a huge customer base of legacy Oracle on-premise workloads. And that’s been our focus. For most of our customers it’s the balance of this legacy workload, in league with the new stuff they want to do as well. I think what IaaS added to the stack does is give customers huge choice, huge ability to finally move their production workloads to the cloud, and a journey of constant improvement.
Going all in with Oracle
O’Kelly said that customers will see much better performance and run more efficiently if Oracle owns the whole stack – he said that the databases will run far more efficiently, which he said stands to reason given that Oracle owns all the IP. O’Kelly said:
There’s no right or wrong answer for the customer. What I would pose to them is, if you can buy more things that are already pre-integrated that look and feel the same, get patched at the same time, that’s probably going to be more efficient and better value than lots and lots of different bits.
However, I suggested to O’Kelly that in my experience, enterprise buyers that are operating successful digital organisations don’t typically go all in with one vendor anymore. What I’m seeing is that buyers are far more modular in their approach than they ever have been – not often do they say that they’re an ‘Oracle shop’ or an ‘SAP shop’, for example. They will typically be using AWS for test and dev, they will be buying cloud applications from a variety of sources and they will have a fairly sophisticated in-house digital team.
I wanted to understand why O’Kelly thought that Oracle convince buyers to go all in with one vendor again. He said that buyers should learn from their past mistakes on premise and recognise that complex integrations are a challenge to manage and lead to problems down the line. He said:
I used to go and look at companies with their legacy systems. And if you really want embarrass a company, you go and look at their legacy stuff and ask: did somebody design this? The answer is no, we just bought loads of bits of stuff, then we had to cable it all together, then we had to make sure the data flowed, then have all the security protocols.
It was really, really hard work. What I would say to customers is, you understand that that wasn’t your finest moment? Don’t do it again in the cloud. Don’t buy a bit of something here and bit of something there. If you can get a single supplier to give you your systems…
I think there will be a significant proportion of people that think that looks like a better, cleaner, purer architecture.
I pointed out to O’Kelly that even if we assume this to be accurate, that buyers may still be wary given Oracle’s – and most other technology vendors’ – history of locking buyers into a platform. However, he wanted to clarify that Oracle is now using open standards that ensure it’s much easier for customers to switch out in the cloud. He said:
I think that’s really fascinating that that’s the leap of logic that people make. I think it’s the opposite. Especially in cloud. We are the one vendor that are building it to standards, so that actually you can get your data back. You can choose another vendor, it’s cloud, it’s meant to be easy to move around.
I don’t think it is that easy to move your cloud vendor in certain cases. But because we built to open standards and because we own the platform, and by the way it’s the same platform that most other cloud vendors use, actually we are making it as easy as possible for customers to have a choice.
Brexit
Separate from the madness of Oracle OpenWorld, I also wanted to get O’Kelly’s take on the outcome of the EU referendum and the potential impact for Oracle and its customers. Most of the US technology vendors have been pretty silent on the issue, so I didn’t expect too much from O’Kelly. However, he did say that the area of interest is around data sovereignty and that those with more physical in-country infrastructure will be better prepared. He said:
I don’t know if it’s a factor in decision making. We’ve got data centres, we’ve got data centres in Europe. We are opening new data centres everywhere. My short answer is that I expect we will deal with it. I’m not quite sure what we are being asked to deal with yet. But the key question is about data sovereignty – where will the data be allowed to reside?
That’s not decided yet, but I’m pretty confident that it will be, and whatever it is I’m pretty confident that we will deal with it. Politics aside, somebody tell us what we need to do with the data.
My take
One of the more useful discussions this week. O’Kelly’s argument about tighter integration throughout the cloud stack makes sense – it’s basically the same argument Oracle used to make selling its products on premise. And I think where this will work well is with its existing customer base. It’s familiar territory and will likely make sense for many. That being said, I still think Oracle may struggle where buyers are looking to democratise their IT estate. For all Oracle’s work on designing with open standards, some still won’t feel comfortable going all in with one vendor.
Image credit - UK flag Brexit stormclouds from EU balloons below © meatbull - Fotolia.comDisclosure - Oracle is a diginomica partner at time of writing.Read more on: Cloud platforms - infrastructure and architectureInfrastructure 