
It’s a common problem for manufacturers of all sizes. Asset monitoring is simply not up to scratch, so when a piece of equipment on the factory floor goes wrong, it’s hard for staff to figure out what’s happened and how the issue might get fixed as quickly as possible. In these situations, the concept of the smart factory can seem a long way off in the future.
At Noble Plastics, a small, family-owned manufacturer of injection-moulded plastic parts based in Louisiana, technology director Scott Rogers is working to address the blind spots that hamper productivity and can lead to defective parts being produced, as he explained to attendees at this week’s Oracle OpenWorld in San Francisco. The plastic parts made by Noble range from smart munitions used by the US military to the paddles you see in margherita machines. Said Rogers:
Sometimes our equipment doesn’t run when we want it to. Sometimes, when it is running, it doesn’t make the parts in the way that we want it to. It would be great if things always went like we planned, but sometimes they don’t. And I know we’re not alone in that.
That’s not to say, however, that Noble has been slacking on asset monitoring. In fact, it’s had a system in place to keep an eye on plant-floor machinery for the best part of a decade. The trouble is, said Rogers, that there’s a lot of complexity involved.
A lot of our machines are proprietary and come from a range of different companies. These systems don’t talk well to each other, and sometimes not at all. Some are difficult to get information from, and some are just impossible.
On top of this, Noble’s asset monitoring system was based on on-premise systems, so any server downtime really threw a spanner into the works, causing the company to lose monitoring capabilities at its two manufacturing facilities, based in Grand Coteau and Opelousas. The system simply wasn’t sufficiently trustworthy, Rogers said:
Our asset monitoring was not reliable and it wasn’t centralised. It certainly wasn’t helping us to pursue our vision of Industry 4.0 and get to where we want to go in the future.
Robots at the ready
Rogers decided that the place to start on Industry 4.0 was with the robots, made by Fanuc, which supervise Noble’s machines and handle finished parts.
We’re not a huge company, but we’ve consistently been an early implementer in our industry of technology. That includes things like analysis, simulation, process instrumentation and control and also automation with these robots.
These robots are pretty sophisticated. For example, Noble Plastics can run its manufacturing cells overnight unattended, in a lights-out third shift, when big work projects come in and staff have all gone home. It made sense, said Rogers, to use monitoring data from these robots – along with data relating to moulding machine temperature and pressure – as the foundation for the company’s Internet of Things (IoT) project.
That data is pulled into the Oracle IoT Asset Monitoring Cloud, a software-as-a-service application that then uses anomaly-detection algorithms to spot any issues with machines and keep tabs on their maintenance requirements. This is achieved via a connection between each robot’s controller, an edge device located on each robot and the cloud service.
Alerting capabilities, meanwhile, are provided using the Oracle Mobile Cloud Service, so that engineers are immediately notified in the event of a problem.
So not only can we pull data to the cloud, but we can also make decisions and take actions, sending commands to a robot or, through the mobile application, passing information to the right person to figure out what to do.
We can monitor manufacturing cycle data, we can analyse part metrics, we can look at error statuses, send alerts. All of this provides us with a level of visibility that we’ve never had before, so we know what’s going on in our plants and have a good measure of remote control, when it’s needed. Instead of being reactive, we’re becoming much more adaptive.
Noble Plastics was not previously an Oracle customer, but being able to use a SaaS offering has made an IoT approach much more accessible to a small company like his, Rogers said. The results have been fewer episodes of machine downtime, less wastage due to defective parts and a better understanding of machine health and part quality. Said Rogers:
This has provided us a solid platform on which to expand our Industry 4.0 journey. And while it’s taken a little time, it’s been relatively pain-free process for us.
Image credit - Image sourced via author. Disclosure - Oracle is a diginomica premier partner at time of writing. Read more on: Analytics planning and data analysisCloud ERP financials and supply chainDigital enterprise in the real worldInternet of ThingsIoT robotics and AIUse cases 