
Larry Ellison exits – stage right
It’s Sunday 25th October which means two things: British Summer Time has ended and it is the opening day of Oracle Open World 2015.
Oracle’s coming out of the cloud startup phase, emphasizing its suite of products and extending its reach into previously neglected sectors are the key themes of this week’s Open World conference in San Francisco. So says Bob Evans, Oracle’s Chief Communications Officer, at a media briefing ahead of the opening keynotes today.
Evans kicked off the session by citing an unnamed consulting company’s survey that identified growth, speed and the digital transformation of their business as being the key concerns of C-level execs — themes that are familiar to anyone who has attended a tech vendor’s conference in the last two years.
For all these tech vendors, including Oracle, the rise of cloud computing and declining on-premises enterprise IT spend is challenging business models. Evans quotes his boss’ Larry Ellison’s statement:
The cardinal sin of the computing industry is the creation of complexity.
Hmmm…I wonder if the folk managing database licensing got that memo…or the folks attempting to stitch together Oracle’s many acquisitions?
One of the key themes for Open World is that Oracle’s coming out of its ‘startup phase’ is the opening up of opportunities for the company.
Are all cloud vendors created equal? We certainly don’t think so. A lot of Oracle’s strategy is driven around this idea Larry Ellison posted a couple of years ago.
This complexity that was created in the traditional model of IT where a business would have to go out and buy pieces from three hundred or five hundred or a thousand technology vendors then hire hundreds of thousand of people to make all that stuff to work together.
Larry’s point here is that complexity is the problem for the tech vendors to solve. It’s no longer a job to be pushed out to our customers and we believe at Oracle that cloud computing as the best way to do that.
Evans also flagged that Oracle will be using its cloud services to chase the mid-market and departmental sectors, a space that has been previously neglected by the enterprise giant. This is not something especially new. Den Howlett saw evidence of this at least year’s Open World:
I wondered whether Oracle is readying for a mid-market play. This was a topic I brought up with Steve Miranda. He told me that while Oracle plays best with large customers, he’d like to see a stronger presence in the sub-$1 billion market.
Separately, Debra Lilley said she believes that Oracle’s cloud offerings now mean that tier 2 SIs can work with companies of around 500 employees. That will serve as a warning shot to the likes of Infor, which wants to serve what it sees as an underserved market, and Workday, that routinely picks off those sizes of organization.
Moving on, Evans said:
We think the cloud will extend our relationship with existing customers because it’s simpler, it’s quicker and it’s less expensive but it will also open up opportunities for Oracle to connect with mid-size and smaller businesses that traditionally have not always been to engage with Oracle. We think this is going to be a big, big shift in our business.
One key product sector that Evans kept returning to was Oracle’s Human Capital Management offerings with the CCO continually referring to Millennials in a changing, mobile workplace which lead to a swipe at upstart Workday.
In those three months we signed up three times as many customers as Workday did in its comparable quarter.
And those customers were worth what exactly?
Ultimately the key sales pitch that Evans flagged is the company’s suite strategy which Evans claims to be Oracle’s strength in the cloud against the upstarts at Amazon, Microsoft and the ‘best of breed’ players.
Over the history of the enterprise computing business suites of applications always win. This goes back to the mainframe, the client server and the PC and it’s certainly going to continue to exist in the cloud.
My take
Analysts have said it before and it remains true today — Oracle is late to the cloud party but has the problem of contending with internal business transformation and declining revenues while keeping Wall Street happy. SAP, IBM and others have the same problems.
Open World is the company’s opportunity to show how they can arrest the decline and keep existing customers from straying away to the pure play cloud players. Reducing complexity sounds like a nice way to talk about vendor lock in, something that customers have resisted in the last few years.
Let’s not forget that Oracle has a huge war chest with which it could continue to acquire. In that sense, Oracle is one of the best placed vendors in the enterprise market. The question we’ll be looking in the coming days is how prepared are Ellison, Hurd and Safra Catz (CFO) to use their existing lucrative cash flows on the creation of a lean, if less profitable business model.
Next up, Larry Ellison’s opening keynote.
Disclosure: SAP, Oracle, Workday and Salesforce are premier partners at time of writing. Oracle covered most of the author’s travel and expense costs for OOW.
Read more on: Analytics planning and data analysisCloud ERP financials and supply chainCloud platforms - infrastructure and architectureMobile 