
Vishal Sikka, CEO Infosys
Last year’s slightly awkward performance by Vishal Sikka, then newly minted Infosys CEO, at Oracle OpenWorld 2014, seems a distant memory. This year, Sikka was accomplished and assured, even when the inevitable demo fail kicked in.
Since Infosys is a personal client, I have a critical curiosity in observing his performance at public events. Those who see him all the time shrug, but his growth into the position he occupies, is turning out to be a fascinating journey. What did Sikka offer the crowd this year?
Launched earlier in the year, Infosys uses AiKiDo as a marketing strap to cover three main topics: renewal through knowledge based IT, platforms for next generation solutions and design thinking as the way to problem solve. Personally, I find the term and method of use somewhat awkward but I get why it has been done this way.
Sikka likes to talk in symbols that reflect things that happen in nature. It’s a useful device that talks to a grander purpose than the simple pursuit of profit. To that extent, he often refers to topics of higher meaning and a desire to educate. Some people find this approach distracting but I find it valuable in understanding what drives an individual in his position. His keynote was no different and while I wondered the extent to which this audience “got it,” there was no denying the smart way in which Infosys aligns itself to customers and partners.
While I’m sure he had no intent to offend, pulling Christian Chabot, CEO Tableau into the mix via video, was a potentially awkward moment, given that earlier in the event, Oracle had introduced its own Tableau competitive product. Be that as it may, Chabot is always good value, and as enthusiastic as you might expect having come off his own first 10,000 attendee user conference. Chabot also serves as a reminder to the crowd that Excel and Tableau have become the de facto reporting duo to dominate the enterprise landscape in recent years.
But it was when Sikka brought GE on stage that the keynote started to shine.
GE is pretty much everywhere these days and with good reason. GE is fast becoming the digital business of the moment, a classic example of what Sikka refers to as a business that is rooted in the physical world but which is transforming itself into a software entity in its own right.
Tom Grimes – CIO GE
Over the last year, Infosys and GE have formed a close relationship, in part because the Infosys acquired Panaya solution has a dramatic impact on upgrade time cycles.
Tom Grimes, Global CIO ERP at GE joined Sikka on stage to tell the story, explaining how GE is commoditizing anything that isn’t core to the business while accelerating time to value in back office ERP with Infosys and Panaya’s help. This is a topic we explored earlier in the year, but it was well worth the revisiting for this Oracle audience.
Grimes referred to the two speed nature of ERP where the core moves relatively slowly while things that sit around that core are moving at high speed. Grimes is endeavoring to smooth out the speed difference. That’s where Infosys/Panaya fit in.
That kind of endorsement is worth its weight in gold and then some because it helps Infosys differentiate and demonstrate the value of the AiKiDo message.
I would have liked to have seen Boeing on stage as well but that was not to be on this occasion. Again, Boeing is an amazing story about the institutionalization of knowledge that goes back decades in the pursuit of driving down cost and time to value.
But the best part for me was when Sikka talked about best practices, a common way of expressing implementation methodologies among software providers.
The thing about best practices is that they’re built on things that have happened in the past. They are inevitably backwards looking and that’s not what business wants today.
That will no doubt send ripples of disapproval among some colleagues but the point he makes is eminently reasonable when set in the context of what’s happening in the real world. What worked in the past is not working any longer and when faced with the kinds of challenge GE is hefting, for example, new approaches are essential.
My one disappointment was that Sikka’s keynote didn’t really address the headline topic of humanizing IT. This is a topic he has spoken about extensively in the past and particularly on the Q2 FY2015 earnings call. On this outing, the topic somehow got relegated to a few rushed statements at the end.
Nevertheless, and as an interested but detached observer, I felt that Sikka did a solid job. The Infosys brand may not be so well known in the US but it is getting there. The more world class customers Infosys can showcase, the better that message will become. I guess we will have to wait for the next big occasion before those cases come into view. In the meantime, and in my discussions with the company, I am pushing for the surfacing of those stories because as I’ve often said, customers always speak louder than anyone else.
Disclosure: Infosys is a premier partner at time of writing and a personal client of mine. Oracle covered most of my travel to attend OpenWorld 2015.
Read more on: Cloud ERP financials and supply chainCloud platforms - infrastructure and architecture 