
Yesterday, Judge Larry Hicks who presides over the Nevada District Court issued a permanent injunction against Rimini Street that says (PDF):
Rimini Street shall not reproduce, prepare derivative works from, or distribute PeopleSoft, J.D. Edwards, or Siebel software or documentation in any way unless both of the following conditions are met:
a. Rimini Street shall not reproduce, prepare derivative works from, or distribute PeopleSoft, J.D. Edwards, or Siebel software or documentation unless solely in connection with work for a specific customer that holds a valid, written license agreement for the particular PeopleSoft, J.D. Edwards, or Siebel software and documentation authorizing Rimini Street’s specific conduct; and
b. Rimini Street shall not reproduce, prepare derivative works from, or distribute PeopleSoft, J.D. Edwards, or Siebel software or documentation unless such conduct is consistent with the remaining terms of this order.
The court decision then goes on to enumerate and reiterate the terms as they relate to each of the software mentioned above. This is a reversal of the decision made in the 9th Circuit Appeals Court where:
On January 8, 2018, the Court of Appeals reversed certain awards made in Oracle’s favor during and after our 2015 trial, and vacated others, including an injunction that had already been stayed by the appellate court. The Court of Appeals also overturned all orders and judgments against Rimini Street’s CEO, Seth A. Ravin. Further, while affirming the jury’s finding of ‘innocent’ copyright infringement for processes that Rimini Street confirms are no longer in use since at least July 2014, the Court of Appeals also affirmed that Rimini Street ‘provided third-party support for Oracle’s enterprise software, in lawful competition with Oracle’s direct maintenance services.’ The favorable appeal decision should result in a refund of nearly $50 million to Rimini Street from Oracle.
On January 22, 2018, Rimini Street filed a petition for a rehearing en banc with the Court of Appeals to recover up to an additional $32 million from Oracle ($32 million over and above the nearly $50 million refund ordered by the Court of Appeals). On March 2, 2018, the Court of Appeals denied the rehearing petition.
Rimini Street will move forward to recover the court-ordered refund of nearly $50 million from Oracle, consider further appeal options (including a potential appeal to the United States Supreme Court) and continue to prosecute its pending litigation against Oracle – including its claims that Oracle has engaged in illegal and anticompetitive practices and conduct.”
A spokesperson for Rimini Street said today that the company plans to appeal the decision so back to the appeals court we go. In a statement the company said:
Today, the District Court announced that it intends again to enjoin Rimini Street’s former support processes that were previously litigated and found by a jury to be “innocent” copyright infringement. Today’s court order contains the same legal defects and flaws that resulted in the last injunction being stayed and then vacated by the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit.
In the meantime, the $28.5 million in legal fees that have been held in escrow resume their round-robin journey between Oracle and Rimini Street’s bank accounts.
What are the fatal flaws to which Rimini Street refers and over which the legal fees issue is particularly interesting?
Our understanding is that this hinges on the question of whether Rimini Street and its CEO Seth Ravin knowingly engaged in unlawful acts as determined by a trial jury.
In the jury trial that is the basis of this current round of appeals, the jury found that Rimini Street acted ‘innocently.’ That sets in train an argument that was the basis of the appeals court decision but with which Judge Hicks clearly disagrees, based upon the extraordinarily strong wording of his judgment. (PDF)
In that judgment, Judge Hicks notes that up until the trial, Rimini Street denied any infringement and specifically the charge of cross-use of the software. At the trial Ravin admitted that there had been occasions of cross-use:
 This was a direct and major alteration, effectively a sea change, in Rimini Street’s copyright defense throughout the litigation to that time and needlessly caused extensive investigation, discovery and expense to Oracle. As a result, Oracle was forced to spend substantially more time and resources to establish copyright infringement than should have been necessary.
In addition,  the court judgment references destruction of hardware on which the judge (and Oracle) believes there was evidence that would have further supported Oracle’s claims.
The latest judgment also made reference to ‘irreparable harm and damage’ to Oracle’s reputation, an issue that was brought up in evidence.
The problem here is one of interpretation in a case that is hideously complex and over which the District Court would appear to have wide discretion. In essence, the original judge in the case, who is still hearing these issues, is of the belief that Oracle was substantially wronged and had to spend an inordinate amount of time proving what should have been a relatively easy case to answer.
The judge may well think the testimony in court represented a ‘sea change’ but the fact remains that even though copyright infringement was found in 93 cases, the jury found the company’s actions and those of its CEO was innocent. That is an important aspect of the case.
For its part, Oracle said in a statement: 
Rimini Street’s business has been built entirely on unlawful conduct, and Rimini’s executives have repeatedly lied to cover up their company’s illegal acts. Rimini, which admits that it is the subject of an ongoing federal criminal investigation, has proven itself to be disreputable, and it seems very clear that it will not stop its unlawful conduct until a Court orders it to stop.
adding that:
The Court noted that it was Rimini’s brazen misconduct that enabled it to “rapidly build” its infringing business, while at the same time irreparably damaging Oracle because Rimini’s very business model “eroded the bonds and trust that Oracle has with its customers.”
Those are extraordinarily strong words but then such is the nature of the sometimes hyper-competitive world of enterprise software.
None of what is said in the judgment prevents Rimini Street from continuing to offer third party maintenance. In an earlier statement, Rimini Street reported quarterly revenue up 20% and a run rate of $246 million at a gross margin of 58.4%. That compares with Oracle’s estimated maintenance and support revenue of $19 billion at margins that are a tad difficult to calculate with precision but appear to be in the 90% range.
Other than the lawyers, there are rarely winners in these kinds of case, which will now likely roll on for an estimated additional two years. For our part, we continue to believe that having choice in the market is a vital part of enabling IT departments to make wise investment decisions.
Image credit - via fotoliaDisclosure - Both Rimini Street and Oracle are premier partners at the time of writing. Read more on: IT service managementProfessional services 