
OracleForce
So here’s how I see the final scene of the movie.
Nearly two decades after walking out the company door to build an empire of his own, the prodigal son returns to his roots, takes his place as CEO in the seat that was occupied by his mentor and the circle is complete. Big close up, final credits.
To be continued in OracleForce II – The Cloud Still Rises.
Or something like that anyway. It’s the way Hollywood would finish it if a movie were being made about Oracle and Salesforce. But this isn’t Hollywood and we’re not talking about Salesforce: The Movie.
Nevertheless, that ‘return of the prodigal son’ meme was alive and kicking yesterday as rumors emerged that Salesforce has supposedly engaged bankers to explore a takeover offer, with Oracle being the name that leapt most readily to most commentators lips – not least mine.
It’s been that way for a while with me. A couple of years ago I was talking to someone senior at Oracle about life after Larry Ellison and who was most likely to succeed him as CEO of the company he founded and shaped in his own image.
When asked, my response was Marc Benioff, contingent on a Salesforce merger with Oracle. The Oracle staffer I was talking to looked at me dumbstruck, the idea never having occurred it seemed, followed by a slow nodding of the head (and a slightly panicked expression it must be said).
But, I added, I don’t think it’s that simple. I still don’t.
The price
Dennis has gone over all the plus points that would theoretically make such a merger feasible, from technology fit through to the emergence of an Oracle-like enterprise sales culture at Salesforce. I don’t disagree with any of those points.
Where I find it a bit more complicated is when we look at the people involved and the cultural questions around both firms.
Prodigal son?
I’ve had the good fortune to meet and talk with both Ellison and Benioff at various points over the past 25 years I’ve been watching the software industry. As others have noted, there’s a respect there between the two that’s often been masked by the marketing aggression between Salesforce and Oracle.
I can completely buy into the idea that Ellison would be comfortable with Benioff as a successor. And I can completely see Benioff in the role of that successor.
What I’m less sure about is what the price would be for that and I don’t mean the financial price.
Benioff has spoken many times about leaving Oracle in search of something new in his life. His departure wasn’t the anger-fuelled walk-out of the likes of Tom Siebel, but more the apprentice leaving the master to do his own thing.
That thing of course was Salesforce qua technology company. But it was also Salesforce as a company with a very different ethos to Oracle. The firm’s 1/1/1 philanthropy model isn’t something bolted on to the company; it’s hardwired into the corporate DNA.
While Oracle has its own commendable charitable interests, Benioff told me once that the philanthropic gene just wasn’t part of that corporate culture in the same way as it is at Salesforce. What he built into Salesforce was something very different and something that has set a standard across Silicon Valley that others have emulated.
The recent bold stand taken by Salesforce against anti-gay legislation in Indiana is another good case in point. It was a brave position to take, with considerable commercial risk attached to it, for a tech firm to draw a line in the sand and say ‘enough’ and then not blink until the law was changed.
All of that comes from the top of the firm and herein lies one of my questions. With absolutely all due respect to likes of Parker Harris and the other founders, Salesforce pretty quickly became the Marc Benioff show as far as the wider world was concerned.
That’s something that I can see being honed these days with the higher profile of President Keith Block as another public face of Salesforce. That’s a good thing. I’ve always maintained that Oracle flies highest when Ellison has a strong number two in place to share the limelight, be that Ray Lane or Mark Hurd or Safra Catz. The same might yet be said of Salesforce.
Ambitions
But then comes the question of what is it that Benioff wants to do? I’ve asked him in the past about what his personal exit strategy is. I’ve never really expected an answer and I’ve never had one. But that still leaves me wondering.
As Dennis noted, Ellison is 70 and has absolutely nothing to prove to anyone (other than himself). He’ll sail his own course, increasingly literally I imagine.
Benioff is 50. He’s founded a hugely successful company, dominated a market sector and set a gold standard for corporate philanthropy in the tech industry, leaving aside his own personal efforts in that regard.
But there’s still the question of what next?
More of the same at Salesforce with the target of getting to a $10 billion run rate? Clearly that’s a goal. There’s plenty of work still to be done at Salesforce and no indication that Benioff is backing away from that challenge. He’s even building the tallest tower in San Francisco to house his ambitions.
Would he really want to swap that for Oracle’s emerald city out in the Valley?
In play?
If he did, then that would have implications for both firms. What would a Benioff Oracle look like? Would it bend to become more like Salesforce, complete with an Oracle 1/1/1 philosophy built in? Or would Salesforce adapt to Oracle and in so doing risk losing an essential something of its corporate being? Or could both be merged into something new over time?
Meanwhile what would the customers think? When the so-called bromance detente broke out between Oracle and Salesforce two years ago, the point was made by some that customers were going to be confused as to why we were no longer at war with Eurasia.
That’s the problem with revolutions. You spend years stirring the populace up to rise against their oppressor and then they get confused when suddenly peace breaks out without warning.
It would be same on the Oracle side of course as customers would ask how come we’re not only checking into that infamous ‘roach motel of cloud services’ that Ellison’s been warning against for years, we’ve actually bought the damn place!
In UK media and political circles, that’s called a reverse ferret. Scarcely unknown in Silicon Valley of course, but this would be a big ferret.
My take
Since last night, I’ve had various people asking me if I think there’s any truth to the idea of an Oracle takeover of Salesforce.
My definite answer is that I definitely don’t know.
We’ve been here with this Salesforce takeover rumour before on many occasions and been left wanting, although as several commentators have noted, this time seems different.
Only one thing can be said to be certain: the rumours have done Salesforce’s share price no harm at all. That’s the upside. The downside is that, left unaddressed, the rumours hand a big competitive FUD stick for rivals to beat Salesforce with.
Prospects who plan to opt for Salesforce over Oracle, and existing customers who did so, might well be in need of some extra TLC in the weeks to come if they suspect, rightly or wrongly, that there’s a For Sale sign outside headquarters.
There’s a messaging and image problem that needs to be tackled head on by Salesforce. Oracle sales teams on the other hand might have a bit of a spring in their steps today.
For now, neither side is commenting – which is the entirely correct response of course. If someone has made an approach, then as a public company Salesforce would have to explore that option in the best interests of its shareholders.
That doesn’t mean it would have to accept of course. And even if it did, the Justice Department might want to take an interest in the competitive clout of an OracleForce. So as things stand, it’s far from a done deal by any manner of means.
Personally, my opinion as of today is that OracleForce remains theoretically an entirely feasible prospect and one that still appeals to my sense of drama.
But having taken a simplistic ‘perfect symmetry’ view of the idea for years, on the assumption that in reality it wasn’t a near-term prospect, now faced with the prediction potentially coming true, I find myself with more questions than answers.
That’s the trouble with rumors.
Disclosure – at time of writing, Oracle and Salesforce are premier partners of diginomica. 

 
.
Read more on: Cloud ERP financials and supply chainCloud platforms - infrastructure and architectureCRM and customer experienceDigital and content marketing 