
Recently, I attended Oracle’s CX shows in Vegas – one for each of the CRM categories: sales, marketing, customer service, and e-commerce experience. The conference was their second annual on the matter, and it was held at the MGM Grand.  That’s the reporting stuff, the rest is my opinion.
The show was well attended, the specific numbers escape me but the audience seemed a tad larger than last year (if this is important, I am sure you can verify with Oracle).  The audience was divided between IT and Business stakeholders, but the majority I met and chatted with were business people – and most of them were worker bees – there was about 10-12% of management and executives in the audience.  I met people from all industries, and Oracle showcased logos from every industry you can imagine during their presentations.
There were three major takeaways, from my perspective, that I’d like to share with you.
1. Oracle continues in their path. I wrote last year that Oracle had found their path: they will continue to grow their customer base in their march to cloud, but will have limited success in new opportunities. The good part of this approach, I said, was they didn’t need to re-architect their entire product line and could continue to sell “private” and “hybrid” cloud to their existing customers.  The basis for this opinion is the nearly 20 acquisitions they made in the past few years to shore up their CX platform (née CRM) and their lack of progress on an open cloud platform.
A large number of the products they acquired had suffered from a loss of customers, lack of growth in their markets since acquisition, and few updates. (this last point is highly contested by some of the Oracle people I met. My opinions are based on what I see and comparison to other products).
Far from being bad, this is a good strategy for Oracle, since they have a large customer base, comprised mostly from late mainstream and late adopters – people who are not keen to jump into the latest and greatest technologies or change their entire company every few years.  Those folks are greatly satisfied with being able to address their need for “customer experience” with a product that continues their investment versus looking to implement a whole new architecture.
This show highlighted that. by addressing the popular topics of customer experience, journey mapping, even omni-channel while making innovations to the product lines to accommodate them.  Far from Microsoft Dynamics (who revamped their entire platform over the past few years) Oracle reaffirms for their customers an easy path without major changes – and their customers appreciate it.
2. Executive shuffling is a popular sport. We had a summit for analysts on Tuesday morning where Oracle was kind enough to bring their newly minted and reallocated executive team for the CX division.  Virtually all of them had come from other divisions within Oracle – with the notable exception of the newly hired Head CX Evangelist Des Cahill (with whom I had a very pleasant and interesting conversation). and ecommerce lead Ken Volpe, who remained from the ATG acquisition (the most successful one in my opinion). I had not met most of them before.
Large software vendors have the tendency to allocate successful executives that have proven their value to the company to new endeavors, and this was not an exception.  The shuffling of executives happened over the last one-to-two years as the previous holders of the offices, mostly executives from the acquired companies and long-term product people from within Oracle ranks, began to move or leave the company.
I, for one, welcome the change.  The message is now crisper and the people tasked with it are convinced of it.  Oracle has taken time over the last few months to congeal their message around CX – and it shows.  The culture-shock that was exhibited, on occasion, by some of the previous executives was no longer an issue and the narrative was better across the board.  With one notable exception –an outdated perspective of their DaaS (data-as-a-service) offering, which highlighted a company-centric approach to data management. Overall, I was satisfied with the people I talked to and their approach.
3. Customer experience is now mainstream. This is not an observation about Oracle only, but the market overall.  The fact that Oracle is having a conference just for this (and others have done it as well) and had renamed their product line for customer-facing products as CX is but one more data point.
Following in the heels of great hits like BPx (business process anything), CRM, ERP, even Data Warehouse, and other similar initiatives that made consultants millions and threw every single organization into upheaval at one time or another over the past two-to-three decades, we now bring you Customer Experience.
Expect your company to spend a large number of dollars doing something with Customer Experience.  Oracle has embraced the concept, led there by their customers – in a good way – with a clear strategy and message.  Their products are not visionary or market-leading (then again, they seldom are, outside of enterprise databases) but they are solid, performing products that have proven their worth and work well within their architecture.
Having a “red stack” – as the companies that have invested heavily in Oracle are usually tagged – is not for the most innovative and world-changing organizations in the planet, but it is for those that need to perform solidly and consistently while evolving legacy investments and accommodate new technologies.
Holding this show, renaming their products to CX, bringing proven executives to shore up their management team – these are all proof that we have finally hit mainstream with customer experience and that Oracle customers are ready to adopt the concept.
My take
At the end of the day, it was a good show for Oracle – mostly for the chance of showcasing the work they’ve done over the past couple of years, sharing their narrative, and showing to their customers what they are aiming to do over the next few years.  Customers got a chance to see what is coming down the pipe and how they can use it. The roadmap sessions I attended and the customers I talked to confirmed that. Analysts got to see and hear where the product is heading.  There were low points and disconnects – from the keynote to specific sessions and conversations –but it was a good effort.
Now we need to see how it translates into execution.
Disclaimer: Oracle is an on-and-off customer over the years where they hire for content (webinars, white papers, blog posts) here and there.  They paid for my expenses to attend the show (most of them at least) and fed me decent food.  I am sure that if they would’ve picked up the tab for my meal at L’Atelier de Robuchon I would’ve said nicer things – nah, just messing with you… but it was a very good meal.  Opinions above are mine, are not vetted by anyone (including Diginomica – who will tell you, I am sure, that Oracle is a partner) and likely not shared by many.  But, they are still my opinions.  Thanks for reading.
Image credit - Feedback concept with hand pressing a button © Melpomene - Fotolia.com.Disclosure - Oracle is a diginomica premier partner. Read more on: CRM and customer experience 