
In recent months we have seen a trend towards large services companies and vendors acquiring digital agencies, in an attempt to satisfy customer need when it comes to helping them understand the complexity surrounding digital strategies and development.
It seems that customers that want to become ‘digital’ aren’t necessarily looking to their traditional technology partners for support, but rather the trendy agencies that seem to have a grasp of user experience and end user design, as well as the broader tech implications.
Oracle, whilst not announcing an acquisition, has revealed that it is launching a dedicated digital practice in partnership with agency DigitasLBi. We got the chance to speak to Oracle’s Head of Digital, Neil Sholay, about the announcement – where he said that Oracle had “quietly” been running a digital practice inside the company for over four years now.
Sholay said that this practice could cite companies such as Unilever and RBS as some of its customers, as well as a number of start-ups. He said:
We’ve been helping them build out their digital strategies, but also build out their digital platforms to execute on those strategies. It’s something we have been doing for a number of years, but probably hadn’t been marketing it.
And the partnership now with DigitasLBi is to further break down silos both internally within the enterprise’s four walls, but also externally for the customer. Sholay said:
As to why we feel it’s right for us to enter this strategic partnership with a digital agency, it’s really driven by the customer. When I say the customer, I don’t just mean Oracle’s customers, it’s the end consumer. The way consumers want to research, select, purchase, service and advocate the use of products and services is becoming so much more blended and biased toward digital.
When we work with our enterprise customers it becomes clear that for some time there has been a real gap between the marketing, strategy and innovation teams, who create and design the experiences, and the IT teams, who would build, deliver and maintain that experience.
For many years the customers have been saying can you bring these roles closer together. That’s why we have decided to launch this partnership.
Not your usual partnership
Sholay said that this isn’t a PR exercise for both Oracle and DigitasLBi, where contracts are put in place and if circumstances permit then they might work together. No. Both companies will have skin in the game and will be proactive in jointly going to market – there will be dedicated resources on both sides, they will be running joint pipelines together and there will be joint planning and marketing.
He added that the digital practice will be providing an end-to-end service. DigitasLBi will work on writing the digital strategy and then Oracle will work with them to collaboratively figure out the blueprint architecture, figure out the operational plan, and even run a full managed service for the client if needs be. Sholay said:
We will as a combined team look at taking set piece propositions to market. We are going to target industry specific propositions, like CPG, manufacturing and hospitality. We have already won business in all three of those industries.
What we’ve done is that we’ve taken those projects that we’ve won, we’ve packaged them into a reusable go to market assets. That’s things like a reference architecture, a prototype, even things like how we commercially contract this. We will jointly go and target other brands. We are both putting skin in the game on this one.
Sholay added that the new practice will be selling both Oracle and DigitasLBi services into each other’s existing customer bases, but will also be going after net new wins.
Long live the CIO
Sholay was keen to highlight how the new digital practice is specifically aimed at bridging the gap between IT and the other lines of business – where Oracle will bring its clout with the CIOs and DigitasLBi will bring influence with the CMO/CDO. Sholay said:
The reason we’ve formed this partnership, is that in many cases digital was picked up by line of business. So that tends to be marketing teams and digital teams. Not by IT. For the last couple of years digital business has been the domain of the marketing and line of business teams. What we have seen now is that the pendulum is swinging back towards IT and the CIOs are reinventing themselves. They’re finding ways to work with the CMOs and CDOs, which is great. A lot of people were predicting that the CIO is dead, I don’t think this is happening.
The first thing we are seeing consistently is the building of this bridge, how you get those marketing, strategy and innovation teams to work much more collaboratively with the IT teams. That’s why this partnership is beautiful, because we can now go in and have a language that appeals to both sides of the audience.
Oracle can speak to IT, Digitas can speak to CMOs and CDOs. That’s once thing we see a lot, how you compress the divide.
However, Sholay also said that in his experience it wasn’t a good idea for companies to build out their own internal digital practice, as this fails to bring the rest of the business along on the digital transition. He said that he met with the CEO of a bank recently that was asking about skills acquisition and whether or not he should build a digital department – Sholay’s advice was to avoid it. He said:
We have a lot of discussions around building the most innovative technologies, building the most connected customer experience, but the cultural change is something that is neglected and forgotten. This is as much around how you have a talent acquisition strategy around how you bring those skill sets into your org, how do you redesign your organisational structure for digital and how do you make sure people comfortable.
Are you going to build a digital business unit? My advice is don’t do it. Because [the banking CEO] had 37,000 people that work in the banks and he’s got to bring them all on the journey. The minute you create a digital business unit, what you do is you make them the cool kids and everyone else is pressing their faces against the window asking why they weren’t chosen.
Digital should become the new business as usual, it’s everyone’s job. That’s why we at Oracle haven’t build a digital business unit, we have built a digital SWAT team. And we are training everyone on digital. From the receptionists to the key accounts director to the enterprise architects. Because we want it to be a groundswell.
My take
I expect we will see more of these partnerships in the coming months. Customers, for whatever reason, are looking to smaller, more agile digital agencies for advice and strategy support. Aligning yourselves with these companies can only be a good thing.
Image credit - Businessman behind touch interface cloud people network © maxsim - Fotolia.comDisclosure - Oracle is a diginomica premier partner at time of writing. Read more on: Digital skills and trainingDigital transformation - frictionless enterpriseProfessional servicesThe new professional and IT as a service 