
In the consumer packaged goods (CPG) industry, they’re typically referred to as ‘low-interest’ or ‘low-involvement’ products: mundane items, such as toilet paper or lightbulbs, which shoppers need to purchase, but which don’t tend to inspire much enthusiasm or brand loyalty in them.
For corporate marketers, these products pose a real challenge. A good deal of creative thinking is required, after all, to make ‘low-interest’ products interesting. Richard Huntington, chief strategy officer at advertising giant Saatchi & Saatchi, puts it like this: “There is no such thing as a low-interest category, only low-interest thinking.”
The Clorox Company makes a great many of this kind of product: Clorox bleach, Fresh Step cat litter, Pine-Sol toilet cleaner, Brita water filters. At Oracle OpenWorld this week, Clorox’s senior director of media and marketing communications, Ellen Liu, shared with attendees how data is increasingly helping the company to build a buzz around them.
In particular, the company has invested in Oracle’s Data Management Platform, based on the BlueKai technology acquired by Oracle in February 2014 and now part of the Oracle Marketing Cloud. Said Liu:
We see this as a holding zone – an opportunity to aggregate all our audience segments and capture the interactions that customers have with online and offline messages in one, central place.
Some of this data is first-party data – data that’s drawn from Clorox’s own internal systems. Some of it is third-party data, acquired from specialist third-party providers who collect and sell on a huge range of information relating to market trends and consumer behaviours. And some of it is second-party data – datasets that are ‘co-created’ by teams working for CPG companies like Clorox and their retail partners, who come together to explore this information. Said Liu:
The data we need exists already, but a lot of it exists in silos, so establishing this orchestration piece is one of the biggest issues we’re trying to work through right now.”
The other benefit of Oracle DMP is its ability to scale and automate – to scale against these audiences, to automate against these audiences. Our vision of where this will lead us is of a place where we know a great deal about our customers, have all that data centralised and orchestrated, and use it to coordinate really smart marketing communications.
It’s early days yet, but Liu and her team are exploring how this data repository can help them…
…experiment with different targets, understand more about consumer groups and deliver personalised and relevant content to them across online and offline media.
 Early trials with Oracle DMP have focused on two Clorox Company brands, she explained: Brita water filters and the Clorox ToiletWand disposable toilet cleaning system.
With the former, they’ve been testing which messages play best to different audiences: the taste message (filtering water makes it taste better); the health message (drinking filtered water is good for you); or the value message (filtered tap water is cheaper than bottled water).
With the later, they’re looking to figure out how they might target messages according to the ‘life stages’ of consumers. The groups selected are people who’ve just moved house (do you really want to take your dirty old toilet brush to your new home?); new families with small kids (ToiletWand is more hygienic); and the young professional (here’s a faster way to clean your toilet).
The data-led insights into understanding the media mix that works best for particular brands and particular audience groups will, over time, allow for bolder, more daring marketing messages – like Clorox’s recent series of television adverts, featuring comedian and former Saturday Night Live regular, Nora Dunn. Says Liu:
A lot of times, [marketers] get too caught up with what we know worked in the past. I feel like data’s going to help enable smarter risk-taking because it’s going to open up what we know about our consumers and it’s going to open up what we know about our competitors. I think brands need to lean in.
But technology alone can’t solve the challenge, she added:
You need to combine the art and the science. You need smart, creative thought-leaders to help you build this.
Read more on: Analytics planning and data analysisUse cases 