
Nottingham City
The adoption of public cloud services – or even an understanding of why or how to make the shift – is patchy amongst local government authorities in the UK. Some are driving the way forward, whilst others haven’t even heard of procurement mechanisms such as G-Cloud.
However, one commercial organisation that is aiming to help to councils rethink their ways of working through the adoption of cloud technologies is East Midlands Shared Services (EMSS). EMSS was created in 2012 when Nottingham City Council and Leicestershire County Council came together in partnership after they decided it would be beneficial to replace and share their finance, payroll and HR systems.
In 2013 the councils went live on Oracle E-Business Suite and have saved more than £2 million in the process. Staff are co-located and the councils have been using the same systems for the past five years.
However, with a hosting contract coming up for renewal, and with support for E-Business coming to an end around the same time, EMSS decided to undertake an options appraisal. I got the opportunity to speak to Lucy Littlefair, Head of EMSS, and Jill Turner, Business Development Manager at EMSS, about the organisation’s future requirements and its ultimate decision to migrate to Oracle ERP Cloud.
Littlefair said:
I’ll be honest, we did look at potentially doing an upgrade on e-Business, which in all fairness would have ended up looking and feeling a lot like a reimplementation. What we decided following that initial options appraisal was that we would do a full OJEU tender. We were very open at that point as to whether it would be a cloud product or not.
Local government, at the moment, it is a very challenging time. We needed to make sure that whatever decisions we were taking was really ensuring best value for taxpayers. During that tender process we did extensive demos, as well as kind of the desktop scoring. Off the back of that we ended up choosing Oracle Cloud.
Turner added that Oracle came out on top for both “quality and price”.
EMSS tendered separately for the new solution and a systems integrator. Having landed on Oracle Cloud in Spring of last year as the chosen solution, it then selected Evosys as an implementation partner in the Summer. The implementation itself began in September of this year, with the aim of being completed by November next year.
Ambitions
The pair explained that EMSS has the aim of moving to the cloud to streamline processes across the partnership, including improved reporting, user experiences, as well as supporting the skills of an agile, flexible and digitally enabled organisation. Turner said:
I’ve got an ambition that our ways of working should be very different. The way we do things as a shared service should change. And then absolutely in terms of out in the business – local government, the nature of our organisations, is so diverse – that we need make sure that the system fits the purpose across the whole spectrum. We want to ensure we reap the benefits of being in the cloud. We also see significant savings around our hosting and around IT support.
However, the implementation doesn’t come without its challenges. Turner added that data migration and managing the culture change across the organisation are top of mind. She said:
We were fairly aware of what the challenges might be – as always, the quality of the data that we hold in our current system. There’s a significant amount of work that’s going on in relation to the cleansing of all of that. No point of moving rubbish data from one system into another.
However, I think our biggest challenge is around the business change. Just the way we do things. We are very keen to push, as the organisation always is, compliance for example. The use of self-service for some parts of our organisation for our employees will be new. At the moment the majority of our frontline staff, who don’t have access to the networks, don’t use self-service from Oracle. And we are really keen to push that out. Hopefully make their jobs a lot easier, by having the access to the system, whether it’s on their own devices or the council’s.
A cloudy future
As noted above, the adoption of cloud within local government is patchy at best. As such, I asked Turner whether there were any challenges in getting the decision to go for Oracle Cloud approved. However, she insisted that whilst cloud isn’t an adoption strategy in principle at the councils, the assurances they received in terms of data residency, meant that there was no opposition. She said:
We have been asked this question a couple of times. I think there’s a level of assurance, due to the products, in terms of Oracle. That global brand. We’ve done a very detailed walkthrough of all the security provisions that they have in place. It was very clear that our data will be stored in the UK.
So, no, we didn’t really come across any opposition to the cloud. But we were very open minded. We don’t have a cloud first strategy in either council, but the business case stacked up and made sense.
Image credit - Image via Nottingham City Council. Disclosure - Oracle is a diginomica premier partner at time of writing. Read more on: Cloud ERP financials and supply chainDigital enterprise in the real worldUse cases 