
Millennial hierarchy of needs
For the grumpy old men of the enterprise tech industry, one of the constant puzzlements is engaging with younger generations. One of the panels during Oracle Open World yesterday was an opportunity to stop muttering at the young ‘uns frolicking on one’s lawn and hear how companies are dealing with the challenge of the Millennial consumer.
‘Connecting with Millennials Through Technology’ showcased two food companies doing a fair job of connecting with younger customers in two very different global markets, UK’s Wagamama and Australia’s Guzman y Gomez.
Both companies are upmarket food outlets with global aspirations. Wagamama has 117 Asian themed restaurants in the UK and 39 overseas, although the chain withdrew from the Australian market some years back, while Guzman y Gomez is expanding it’s taco and burrito food franchises to Japan and Singapore — two places as notorious for poor Mexican food as the company’s home town of Sydney.
Ahead of the panel, host Tim Brown, Oracle’s Senior Director of Food and Beverage Sales Consulting for EMEA, described a hopelessly unscientific Facebook poll he ran to see what Millennial customers expected of food chains.
The results confirmed the attitudes seen in more rigourous surveys, not least one released by Oracle and consulting firm Interbrand in January this year which flagged how Millennial consumers are segmenting into five clear groups.
Brown’s survey looked at what younger consumers are expecting of hospitality establishments, that young adults were expecting Wi-Fi and increasingly wanted cashless payments, preferably though their mobile phones along with apps that made it easier to order and plan their meals.
Richard Tallboy, Wagamama’s Business Development Director, endorsed that finding and warned that consumers don’t like to be surprised. “There’s an expectation all channels will be consistent,” Tallboy said. “When they’ve had their meal they want to pay in their own time and they don’t want to be waiting around.”
Guzman y Gomez Chief Digital Officer Shahrooz Chowdhury, himself not much older than a Millennial, flagged social media as being the key channel for both marketing and engaging for those younger customers however he was somewhat sceptical when asked about using the online channels for payments and ordering.
There’s definitely merit to it. You look at Snapchat, 70% of users are under 25 and there’s a lot of people using the service and there’s probably a way to do commerce on that.
There’s two ways, actually making the transaction take place on platform going through a POS pass through with all the complexities around that. The other one is to treat these platforms as a referral and acquisition source. The latter I think is much easier and has lower risk and hurdles to get through.
Guzman and Gomez’s own use of social media has been more focused around marketing.
Traditional interruption messaging is irrelevant if you’re adding value in the right way
says the company’s Chief Technology Officer, Julian Dabbs. That’s something Den Howlett recently explored through the lens of PepsiCo’s president.
Their own marketing incurred the wrath of dating service Tinder where Guzman and Gomez setup two fake accounts to promote their product range. Tempting fate, Dabbs says of the campaign:
We were willing to get ourselves banned…we got banned after two days.
While today’s millennial focused marketing concentrates on social media, both companies are trying out technologies like location services and biometrics. Even so, Guzman and Gomez’s Chowdhury see problems with the next wave of technology.
We know every single person’s Mac address in this room whether they are connected to the wi-fi network or not. In that sense before we even see your face, before we know who you are, we can see your Mac address.
This isn’t stuff we do today and it’s something you have to look at very, very carefully in terms of privacy. The laws haven’t caught up with the technology, if you recognise someone’s face, what data can you store? There’s lots of grey areas. That’s going to be a very interesting area in the next fifteen years.
While there’s a lot of grey areas for today’s hospitality operators – this older Gen Xer found the constant talk of Tinder creepy — both the Wagamama and Guzman Y Gomez technologists see getting the basics right as important for dealing with the uncertain future of marketing to millennials. This from Dabbs:
Unless you have a foundation that allows you to integrate to other technologies you can’t move forward from that. My role is to make sure we have a foundation that allows us to adopt new technologies and adopt existing ones.
My take
There’s been much cant and nonsense written and spoken about Millennials and their behaviour so it was refreshing to hear from three practitioners who are having to deal with the realities on a daily basis.
What’s clear is the hospitality sector along with most other industries are struggling to deal with the connected customer, whether they are younger Millennials or grumpy older consumers struggling to read their smartphone screens. The sensible advice from the Guzman and Gomez staffers to focus on technology foundations and build on those as tastes and tools evolve sets the right tone for customers who are only too willing to ream out retail suppliers who mess up.
Disclosure: Oracle is a premier partner at time of writing and covered most of the author’s travel expense for attending Oracle OpenWorld
Read more on: CRM and customer experienceRetail e-commerce and the omni-channelSocial 