
G&J Pepsi-Cola Bottlers, the Cincinnati-based bottling and branding company that is responsible for many of the popular brands we see on store shelves today, has implemented a wide variety of Oracle HCM solutions in the cloud to drive efficiencies and better engage with employees.
Speaking at Oracle OpenWorld this week in San Francisco, the company’s HR executives shared their experience of delivering Oracle Human Capital Management Cloud, Taleo Recruiting, Taleo Social Sourcing, and Taleo Onboarding Cloud Service in less than 90 days.
The company has over 1,650 employees and is based across 13 locations, with quite a diverse mix of working groups that have very distinct needs and requirements. Christina Walker, Executive VP of HR at G & J Pepsi-Cola Bottlers, explained how when she joined the company in 2015 she was aware of the challenges facing HR and the requirements from the business to drive efficiencies via new technology projects.
Walker said:
It’s actually quite complex, because we aren’t just a distributor. We actually manufacture the product, we also have our own print advertising, so we have an array of different types of employees – from truck drivers, to merchandisers, to our special team designers. To add a layer of complexity there we also have six union contracts, so we have a blend of union and non-union environment.
We are looking to grow our top line through innovation, whether that be through our products or even services and things we do in the food and beverage industry. We are still remaining competitive versus Coke, and we want to make sure that we want to beat them to the punch.
Bernardo Samaniego, Sr. Total Rewards & HRIS Manager at the company, joined Walker and said that the system that was previously in place to manage employees was a mid-market software solution that was actually intended to be used for accounting and finance. He said:
But they also utilised it for compiling HR data. However, because it wasn’t able to do anything around HR, it was very difficult and everything was manual. A lot of things were very cumbersome, took a lot of time to accomplish things, it was very paper based. Everyone knows here, the more paper there is, the less efficient it is.
The pair also said that there were interface challenges, which meant that the solution couldn’t integrate with third party vendors. This inability to get some of the information out in real-time meant that a lot of data was being hand keyed into the system, which was then tracked on Excel spreadsheets. Walker said:
There were a lot of errors, data integrity issues that we had to really evaluate, which obviously takes time and manpower.
There was a lot of efficiencies to really go from a transactional, to a transformational, to a strategic HR method with our business. And be more proactive than reactive.
A bad rep
Walker said that the previous system meant that HR couldn’t be there all the time to meet the demands of employees, and that it wanted everyone in the organisation to be able to use Oracle to self-serve. Instead of HR being in high demand for every single request, Walker and Samaniego wanted employees to be able to reach into the system, see the data, and to be able to make changes in real-time. Walker said:
The managers and employees didn’t have visibility into the data. Managers didn’t even know how much their employees made. They didn’t even know what the last appraisal review rating was last year. Every single question had to go to HR and we had to provide them answers. And that took time.
The lines were going out the door. That was the concept of HR, we have our doors closed all the time. But that’s because we were looking stuff up and looking at confidential data. HR had a bad rep, we were micro managing their data and their decision making.
Since the systems went live, G&J has already noticed improvements in its talent management. HR is feeling some relief. And the reason that HR was able to move so quickly and get the system implement and up and running in 90 days was that Walker had buy-in from senior management to go at an accelerated pace. She said:
Some of the benefits are really the honouring of commitments. Sitting at my level, I discussed this with the board and told them that I needed a lot of money to implement this HCM system. And the first question is: well, what are you going to give me in return?
I promised them efficiency and commitment to helping them drive the bottom line. They empowered trust and through that we were able to execute fast.
Samaniego added that the organisation’s plans to get employees more involved with their HR activities is already being noticed. He said:
One thing I’ve seen is increased efficiencies. HR business partners are actually able to focus on employees more and the business. As opposed having to be at their computer, making data entry changes.
They’re actually able to focus on employee relationships. Automation – the fact they can log into the system, view their data, change their address, life events, things like that, really compound the employees. I think they appreciate that.
Priorities and challenges
Both Walker and Samaniego also used the opportunity to pass on some advice about what to be aware of when undergoing such a project. Unsurprisingly, the two key challenges rested on data and cultural change.
For example, Samaniego said that he made data conversion “the highest priority” on the company’s list when migrating away from the legacy application. He said:
So everybody within G&J that was on this project absolutely knew and understood that the conversion and getting the data into the format that we needed it, scrubbing it, making sure it that it was free of errors, that was key priority.
Without that, if you import data that has errors, obviously you’re not utilising the new systems to its full potential and you’re just migrating over the mess that you had before. That’s what we wanted to avoid. So we spent extra time on the conversion piece and pulling in the data.
Walker, however, noted that cultural change management was what set them apart from previous technology projects. She said that a lot of organisations focus so much on getting the implementation right that they forget that they need to bring employees along with them, so that the tools are actually used when the go live happens.
She said:
But actually we started the communication and the training plan on day one, along with Bernard working on the conversion. So we built up a lot of hype about it. Telling them what they were going to get, told them that they were going to be able to log into the system and see their data. We even rebranded the name of our system – called it POP (people of Pepsi). We sent emails out. We were talking about it when we did our roadshows going around to the different locations.
Explaining how they were going to benefit and breaking it down at different levels. Because obviously there are different needs at different levels of the organisation. What were managers going to get out of it? What were executives going to get out of this system? What were directors going to get out of it? We wanted to make sure that they knew what we were doing.
Walker added that there were even times when employees were pulled into the project, to get their feedback, to ensure that the HR team was giving people what they actually wanted. She said that it was important to have this “partnership”, and that this hasn’t ended since the systems went live.
Then when they start using it, you have to continually drive the training and development. We use it everyday and know it like the back of our hand, but the employees are scared of it. Not only that but we have a low turnover rate, so we have mixed generations across the board, we have people that don’t know how to use a mouse – so there are definitely pain points. There are people out there that don’t have this mobile capability. Do we have to give them company phones? We are working around this.
I think it’s the continual training, we do a lot of lunch and learns. Where we take a particular topic, we try not to overwhelm them and show them the entire system, we break it down and show them how to do something like an address change. It’s about that constant engagement with the employees, to get them to accept the new cloud product and actually use it.
Image credit - Decision intersection business people © Rawpixel.com - Fotolia.comDisclosure - Oracle is a diginomica premier partner at time of writing. Read more on: HCM and the digital future of workHR admin and payrollTalent managementUse cases 