
Reggie Bradford
Bristol in the South West of England has a proud history of innovation, home to the great civil engineer Isambard Kingdom Brunel. It was in what used to be his engine shed, now converted to a £1.7 million digital and creative industries center by Bristol Temple Meads train station, that Oracle launched the next phase of its Cloud Accelerator initiative to support start-up growth.
It’s the expansion of a pilot scheme that launched in Bangalore last year, which kicked off with 100 applications for support, honed down to five chosen candidates.
Following the success of the initial venture, Oracle this week has ramped up the global spread of the scheme. As well as two new centers in India – Mumbai and Dehli – there will also be hubs in Singapore, São Paulo, Tel Aviv and Paris, as well as Bristol, which was chosen to kick-off the expanded programme.
The same benefits and terms and conditions will apply as have been in place in the pilot. Participants get a combination of six months of mentoring from technical and business experts, a co-working space, free Oracle Cloud credits and all-important access to Oracle customers to assist in winning sales and future funding.
Start-ups that show promise can apply for a two-year extension for Oracle Cloud credits. Oracle does not take any form of equity stake in the chosen start-ups and you need to have a team that’s been together for six months in order to apply to participate in the initiative.
In charge of the Accelerator programme is Reggie Bradford, a serial entrepreneur with three successful launches and exits behind him in the shape of WebMD, N2 Broadband and social brand management pioneer Vitrue. The last of those was sold to Oracle in 2012 for $300 million, after which Bradford became SVP of Product Development at Oracle, reporting in to Thomas Kurian.
I had a chance to chat with Bradford at the Bristol kick-off and it was clear from the off that this is indeed someone for whom the start-up culture is his most comfortable environment, although a large part of the ‘day job’ to date has been built around evangelising the Oracle Cloud portfolio.
The Oracle accelerator programme is about ‘the rise of the rest’ according to the launch slides. Bradford explained that the initial Bangalore pilot emerged from a meeting between India’s Prime Minister Shri Narendra Modi and Oracle co-CEO Safra Catz. That’s resulted in 80% of the initial participants going on to acquire funding for the next stage of their development.
Who you know
Bradford said that all this fits nicely with his own vision which is to “pay it forward”. This isn’t about pumping cash into start-ups or putting down a marker on potential future acquisitions:
There is a whole new generation of start-ups and developers coming. We are not a traditional accelerator. During the dot com era, our big advantage as Oracle was our enterprise relationships with customers. I know that my biggest challenge as an entrepreneur was around how I could generate customer references and access. That’s something that we can help with. We know how to sell into the enterprise.
He added the common observation that most start-ups fail, so there’s a role here that a firm like Oracle can get behind:
We can provide stewardship, mentoring, access to platforms and make sure our products can work for this [start-up] market. We requests from our customers all the time, wanting to know and to idenitfy what other companies can connect on top of our products. This helps us to get an early look at and access to the great companies of tomorrow.
In the Bristol hub, Oracle will be working closely with SETSquared, an accelerator based in the Engine Shed and which over the past 14 years has overseen the incubation of over 200 tech firms in the Bristol area alone. Monika Radclyffe, Centre Director, said that collaborating with the software firm added to the ability to nurture new businesses:
We can really focus on the business and the people skills. What excites about this is that Oracle is providing technical and product support to our companies, but also help with enterprise sales. That’s difficult for start-ups to reach on their own. If you’re a team of three people, how do you get to speak to the right buyers in large organisations?
Isambard Kingdom Brunel
So it’s in part about ‘who you know’ and opening doors for start-ups who, in theory, will provide add-on applications and solutions that support the wider Oracle Cloud offerings. The Oracle Cloud Credits will be used on PaaS and IaaS as platforms for development. They might in some instances be used for SaaS, but Bradford says that tends to require more “hand-holding”.
The temptation is of course to assume that this is good for Oracle by encouraging, perhaps insisting, that start-ups get up-and-running on Oracle tech, although Bradford said that this is not the case. Could a start-up building on AWS or Azure or Force.com really get selected though? It’s possible, said Bradford, as the emphasis when it comes to selection is the solution and its need in the market and the potential for growth.
I also spoke to Becky Sage, CEO of Interactive Scientific, a Bristol-based start-up which is working on digital aesthetics and immersive experiences for education and research. Her firm has been working with and talking to Oracle around R&D, but she confirmed that in terms of platform choice, it’s been left to her and her team:
We have looked a little bit at other [options], but more at Oracle than anyone else.
The applications [for the Accelerator scheme] are not open yet. Wer haven’t signed on to the programme, haven’t offically done things, but we have been working very closely with Oracle.
The access to markets and enterprise customers angle is particularly appealing, added Gareth Williams, founder and managing director of Yellow Dog, which grew out of the idea of using spare mobile CPU capacity. He said it’s all about sales when you’re pre-IPO:
The value of accelerator is to shorten your time to market. Mentoring, advice, technology is all good, but ultiinately it’s all about sales. You need the right people to help you to get sales. We’ve done stuff with Oracle and the platform that Oracle has given us is amazing, with reach into the US market.
Certainly Yellow Dog has been an international success, even if the UK’s Brexit vote and the subsequent uncertainties, including the fall in the pound, hasn’t always helped. Williams was blunt:
Brexit sucks for me. We have suppliers in Europe who have put up their prices. It’s also about how people perceive us. We’ve got customers all over Europe and the day after the vote they weere getting in touch and asking what’s going on? It’s frankly embarassing. But then because of the pound’s value, we’ve picked up more sales in the US. It all goes back to sales.
My take
It’s near impossible to find fault with initiatives such as this. It’s still on a pretty small scale – five companies every six months at each hub, so ten start-ups a year in each location at present. But from tiny acorns etc etc. Timing is everything, Bradford told me when explaining that the firm sees now as the right time to make this move.
He’s right. A year ago, everyone sitting in the Bristol Engine Room would have been pre-Brexit, pre-Trump and pre-a period of enormous uncertainty and clarity about trading conditions around the world. A year from now, who knows what will have changed. So all the help that start-ups can get is to be welcomed.
There was much use of the word ‘scalable’ at the launch and I suspect that applies to the Accelerator programme itself. If this works in its expanded form, then watch for Oracle making a more deliberate push to emulate the Salesforce AppExchange model of helping third parties get to market on top of their underlying platform. With Oracle’s cloud ambitions in plain view, that’s a logical step to take. Building an ecosystem of Oracle third-party solutions around its PaaS and IaaS is essential.
One other interesting aspect of today was around size. There’s a meme around all iterations of the Accelerator initiative that says of Oracle,  ‘We get it. We used to be a start-up’ – to which the answer is, yes, a hell of a long time ago. Oracle’s spent a lot of time over the years moving ever higher up into the enterprise, its definition of a small and medium firm being one with revenues of less than $5 million.
So on the face of it, Oracle’s not the first company a start-up would necessarily think of as an ally for growth. Indeed, as one participant at the launch put it to me, it’s been a firm that seemed “scarily big” to the would-be Oracles of tomorrow. So the pitch to that start-up community is one that is both interesting in its focus as well as one that needs handling with care. In that regard, Bradford’s demonstrable start-up cred is a clear asset, as his enthusiasm for entrepreneurial enterprise. Brunel, I suspect, might well have approved.
Image credit - OracleDisclosure - At time of writing, Oracle and Salesforce are premier partners of diginomica. Read more on: Cloud platforms - infrastructure and architecture 