
As I said in the prequel to this year’s Oracle Open World, there is a strong focus on Human Capital Management and a workforce that’s soon going to be dominated by Millennials. This is an area where Oracle believes it has an advantage. It is worth noting that in keynotes and conversations, Oracle makes clear that Workday is its competitive target.
Aaron Green, Oracle’s Asia-Pacific vice president for Human Capital Management, spoke to diginomica about some of the opportunities Oracle sees in the space as organisations struggle with a changed workplace.
Green’s view about the future of the HR department is remarkably similar to that cited by almost every vendor for IT departments with technology giving HCM a strategic role within the organisation.
I think HR has got very comfortable for many years with being administrative and uncomfortable in being strategic because there hasn’t been the view inside organisations that HR has the skills or the grasp of the data to be strategic and that’s where technology comes to play.
The data and technology should be enablers for the operational requirement and they should deliver to the strategic people within HR a set of information that is immediately is useful to them.
For Green, the opportunity in the new world of HCM for Oracle is the renewed investment required by organisations as the workplace changes with connected, younger workers.
HCM for us really represents one of the more traditional, underinvested areas within a corporation. Twenty years ago HR was personnel and payroll, it was a recruitment function. In the 1980s, HR started talking about being a business partner, they kicked the tires a bit on having a seat at the boardroom table.
In the 90s HR moved away from the transactional and more firmly into talent management but all of that came with very limited investment for HR people so in the 90s and early 2000s was when core HR systems were really put in place but we didn’t necessarily do anything with them, it was just great way of building systems to manage administrative tasks.
Where the market has shifted is that people are at the very heart of the businesses that organisations run. If you’re not constantly connecting with those people and not delivering the consumer grade experience in their day to day work then you’re losing the hearts and minds of those employees.
Green believes Oracle has a significant advantage over competitors. He claims that its ability to pull in different data sources and apply deep data analytics with the platform that include disparate sources like the length of staff tenure, management reviews, comparisons with peers and even their commuting time allow customers to predict issues that might affect an employee’s performance or retention.
Interestingly Green sees Millennials as not being the drivers of change in the workplace as older workers are adopting mobile, social and remote workplace technologies as quickly as the youngsters.
I don’t think Millennials are driving it, while they came out of the womb texting, they have certain expectations but at the very heart of it it’s the fact that if we aren’t engaging with people then we aren’t delivering for them.
Then there is the long standing debate about what really matters to Millennials. Is to a paycheck or is it an eclectic mix of benefits?
My take
Green’s take on the evolution of the HCM follows Oracle’s company line and, in fairness, is likely an accurate reflection of the marketplace.
It is notable that the pitch of giving the HR office ‘a seat at the table’ is exactly the same as what we hear about from vendors about technology delivering for the IT team as well and this probably reflects more the erosion of silos within organizations. That is an ongoing discussion inside organizations where line of business — especially in HR departments — are becoming the natural hunting ground for hard pressed recruiters and those tasked with retaining talent.
The talk of predictive analytics delivering deep insights into staff behaviour is a promise we’ve seen from Oracle and many other vendors around their platforms over the years. While advances in data analytics and artificial intelligence can improve hiring and retention, it remains to be seen how well Oracle’s services will deliver on their promises.
Let’s be clear. Oracle has a job on its hands. Despite its massive financial resources, Oracle still has to persuade buyers that it represents the best bang for the buck. But then it has also released a significant update to its PeopleSoft solution. That in itself creates internal conflict around products going into customer sites. Die hard PeopleSoft users may, for example, only chew of some of the cloud offerings. Others may see it as an opportunity to re-engineer HR. Still others may be tempted to look further afield.
Oracle is now visible as a viable competitor in ways that have been less well recognized by media and analysts, where attention has been focused on Workday, and more recently, SAP, with its SuccessFactors and Jam offerings.
Game on?
Disclosure: SAP, Oracle and Workday are all premier partners at time of writing. Oracle covered most of the author’s travel costs for attending OpenWorld.
Read more on: Analytics planning and data analysisFuture of workHCM and the digital future of work 