
Peter Lilley, co-founder and director of UK-based travel and mapping start-up iGeolise, is pretty frank about his expectations when he decided last year that his company should participate in the Oracle Start-up Cloud Accelerator programme. Speaking at this week’s Oracle OpenWorld 2018 event in San Francisco, he told attendees:
I thought there might be a degree of bullshit – the typical big corporate bullshit you expect when working with an accelerator. But it’s not been like that, actually. Oracle seems to actually care about helping us go out and talk to people.
Giving start-ups access to Oracle customers who may, in turn, become those start-ups’ customers is just one aspect of the accelerator programme, launched in 2016. If they need accommodation, participating start-ups can choose to be based out of one of the software giant’s accelerator locations, of which there are now nine: Austin, Texas; Sao Paulo, Brazil; Bristol, UK; Paris, France; Tel Aviv, Israel; Singapore; and Delhi, Mumbai and Bengaluru in India.
Most importantly, the Oracle Startup Cloud Accelerator offers start-ups technical assistance and cloud credits that they put towards building out new digital products and services on Oracle Cloud Infrastructure (OCI), the software giant’s infrastructure-as-a-service (IaaS) offering.
Oracle doesn’t take an equity stake in these companies, stresses Jason Williamson, vice president of Startup Ecosystem at Oracle. Instead, he says, the hope is that the investment represented by cloud credits given to participants eventually becomes a self-sustaining revenue stream for the company:
If we can put start-ups in front of our customer base and the start-ups start landing deals with those large enterprises and getting revenue, then it makes sense that they’ll need more Oracle Cloud Infrastructure from us.
First-cohort participant
iGeolise was in the first cohort of start-ups to participate in the programme when the Bristol, UK location opened last year. Its product is a tool that enables consumers to search for content based on travel times, rather than travel distances.
For example, a visitor to a property site might want to search for houses that are a 45-minute commute by public transport from their place of work. This technology is licensed to other companies that want to offer this kind of search capability to visitors and customers include property site Zoopla and online employment search specialist Jobsite. As Lilley explains:
It’s a useful tool and one that nobody else seemed to offer. And it’s such an obvious thing, really. Nobody cares about distance. They care about when they’ve got to leave one location and what time they’ll arrive at another location and the best mode of transport to use.
iGeolise has around 26 employees and operates in 23 countries worldwide. When it joined the accelerator programme, it was already an ongoing business – but not an Oracle customer. In fact, it had no Oracle technology in its stack, says Lilley.
Today, the iGeolise platform is based on OCI, using the cloud service’s bare metal servers, as well as Oracle Cloud Infrastructure Container Engine for Kubernetes, which is used for parsing maps, plus a custom-built geocoder based on Oracle VM to convert human-readable postal addresses into latitude/longitude coordinates and vice versa. The speed of this technology is crucial, says Lilley:
One of the biggest websites here in the UK, a property site, says that for every tenth of a second over one second, they can expect to lose 10% of their audience. So [in order to work with them], we have to generate a travel-time area, go and interrogate a database of properties, find the relevant ones, write and sort them, calculate the route to each one and return the results in 0.3 seconds. And if we’re not doing all that in 0.3 seconds, then by the time [the property site] gets the results up on screen to the consumer, they face losing their audience. So we wouldn’t have a product if we couldn’t do this really quickly. We’d have a product that could be used for analysis, but not on a consumer-facing website.
Getting up and running fast
As Lilley’s iGeolise co-founder Charlie Davies explains, using the Oracle Cloud Infrastructure has enabled the company to develop an entirely new product and one that is due to receive a sustainability award from Oracle. This focuses on helping companies to route sales executives or field engineers or health workers across London, using public transport instead of driving. Says Davies:
Without the compute power that’s provided, we would never have been able to achieve that in any economic way, as a start-up.
In fact, adds Lilley, being part of an accelerator programme like this can potentially take a lot of the pain out of getting a new idea up and running fast.
I’ve done five businesses so far. The other four, I had to go and find accommodation, I had to find a team, find the infrastructure, find people to clean the office and make the coffee. During this accelerator programme, accommodation if you need it is there. Technological expertise is on tap and always willing to help. Access to enterprise clients isn’t just available, it’s pushed at you all the time. I almost think, why on earth would anyone who had the option of participating in something like this NOT set up a new business or grow their business within a programme like this?
Image credit - Image sourced via iGeoliseDisclosure - Oracle is a diginomica premier partner at time of writing. Read more on: Cloud platforms - infrastructure and architectureDigital enterprise in the real worldIoT robotics and AI 