
The sharing economy operates on the principle that there are under-utilised assets and resources in the world that can be tapped into, on demand, by people or companies that need are willing to ‘rent’ them on a short-term basis. The most prominent examples include Uber and Airbnb, for transport and accommodation, but it extends to everything from cleaners to freelance writers.
However, a UK-based company operating out of Bristol, Yellow Dog, is attempting to bring this idea to the incredibly under-utilised industry of super compute power. Yellow Dog founder and managing director, Gareth Williams, has recognised that providers of public cloud compute often only operate their servers at a 5-15% utilisation rate.
Because of this there is an opportunity to match up under-utilised compute power with companies that need it on a short-term basis, because they don’t have enough capacity of their own on-premise, don’t necessarily have the know-how to build their own commercial relationships with the providers, or don’t want to sign up to any long-term commitments.
We got the chance to sit down with Williams at Oracle OpenWorld this week in San Francisco, where he explained that since the company launched last year it has signed up hundreds of customers and is quickly bringing the sharing economy to this niche area of the technology market. He said:
We already believe that there is enough computing power in the world. But today there is a bit of an imbalance between supply and demand. What we do with our unique technology is securely harness and monetise under-utilised computer power, enabling businesses and organisations to deliver cost effectively, or super quickly, by leveraging this virtually unlimited power on demand. We are effectively building the world’s fastest supercomputer.
In terms of the compute power we use today, we work with AWS, Rackspace, AVH, and for the last six weeks we have actually been using the new Oracle Bare Metal Cloud compute power. We’ve used a lot of compute power from public cloud providers and we are very interested to see how the performance compared. With the Bare Metal Cloud, it was minimum two times as fast as any other public cloud provider. At best it was 9.8 times as fast.
The use case
Yellow Dog works with a variety of clients, but at present is specifically targeting companies that have requirements to render large computer generated animations. For example, it is working with art projects, children’s TV shows, films, special effects companies and architecture firms. Williams explained:
Most car adverts, the vehicles you see created there, they are computer generated. We have customers who make these car commercials. In a typical animated sequence you have 25 animated frames per second. In over two and a half minutes, that’s a fair few frames. One of those frames can take 10 hours to produce. 90% of the customers we speak to, they run out of compute power when it comes to producing this.
Yellow Dog works by stacking loads of compute power to the companies that demand it, via an API integration with the public cloud companies. Williams said:
The public cloud companies say, for example, use my server between this particular time of day. Or there is a CPU and RAM utilisation threshold that they set. When it’s below that threshold we essentially have access to that computer. That’s able to say to our platform ‘hi, I’m available, give me some work’ – and we basically send them bits of work.
It’s like the sharing economy. On average, most business servers, the utilisation rate is between 5 and 15%, which is quite low. We can help them really maximise the return on investment of that capital kit.
The business case
So why wouldn’t these animators go to Oracle or AWS for the compute power directly and build it themselves? One reason, is that Yellow Dog can quickly, and easily, provide companies with 96,000 cores within 30 minutes. Williams said:
Rendering itself is an inherently complicated process. We have had a number of customers that have tried to do it themselves by extending their own IT infrastructure, and they find it really hard. Partly because of managing the actual data transfer.
Partly through some of the technology that we have licensed in from the render engines themselves, the licensing for that is really difficult to deploy in the cloud. For them the ROI for using Yellow Dog is clear, it’s about total cost of ownership.
For Yellow Dog itself, Williams said that the gross profit margins vary between 65% and 80% – a decent return if the company can scale effectively. However, this hasn’t come without its challenges.
One problem that Yellow Dog ran into, was that it quickly recognised that the performance of public cloud compute varies quite significantly between each provider. As such, when a job comes in, it needed to understand what it required from whichever provider it was utilising. To do this, Williams and his team have had to create a platform that benchmarks performance at any given time. He said:
The other thing we’ve had to build is something that normalises the power. Generally when you go and get a 16 core shape instance node from AWS, it doesn’t quite perform in the same way that a 16 core node from Rackspace does.
To ensure that we understand the performance, we have written some algorithms and processes that essentially benchmark each of the machines. So when we first bring it up we load all of our images on it, it runs a little routine that asks how powerful is this machine? So we understand exactly what we have to use.
Elsewhere, Yellow Dog’s challenges are familiar challenges for any quickly growing start-up – money, talent and execution. Williams said:
We’re a start-up. So part of it is access to funding. Being based in the South-West (of England), the funding environment is quite different compared to London. Money doesn’t grow on trees, I guess.
Bristol is quite a vibrant hub and there is a pretty decent ecosystem, but getting access to the right people that are right for your business now – is always tricky. The other one is just go to market execution, some things work and some things don’t, being able to response dynamically to that.
My take
I like this. It’s a smart idea that obviously taps into a gap in the market. Yellow Dog obviously needs to scale this appropriately, but Williams hinted that he already had plans to open up offices here in the US and in Canada very soon. He also said that the company’s exit plan is to be acquired in the next five years. Good luck to them.
Image credit - Modern interior of server room in datacenter © Oleksiy Mark - Fotolia.comDisclosure - Oracle is a diginomica premier partner at time of writing. Read more on: Cloud platforms - infrastructure and architectureInfrastructure 