
Diversity and inclusivity is – quite rightly – a hot topic for the tech sector, and at Oracle OpenWorld, delegates had the opportunity to hear from experts making it their business to tackle the challenge of achieving equality.
Here are their hot tips for those wanting to work in and lead diverse, inclusive organisations.
Be selfish
Rick Welts, Golden State Warriors President and COO, has certainly earned the right to talk about equality. He’s the first openly gay person to be inducted into the Basketball Hall of Fame, and was also responsible 22 years ago for setting up what is now the longest-lasting women’s professional sports league in the United States, the Women’s National Basketball Association, which is credited for changing the mindset of corporate America about the potential opportunities for women’s sports.
But Welts is quite happy to admit that his passion for D&I is mainly business-driven.
In my heart of hearts, I really believe that having a diverse group of people at the table creates a better business. It’s a selfish strategy, it’s not to check the box and be the right thing to do.
When I’m looking around the table, if there was a bunch of people that looked like me, we’re probably not going to make decisions that are reflective of our customers and not reflective of what different backgrounds we bring to the discussion. If you look at our executive team, I’m proud to say it’s probably the most diverse team in professional sports and it makes us better at what we do everyday.
Zara Nanu, CEO of pay transparency startup Gapsquare, agrees that hard, cold financial analysis can be an effective way to promote D&I.
For every three percent increase in diversity, there’s a one percent increase in earnings. Ultimately beyond the ethical reasons for diversity there’s also the bottom line reason.
The tech sector in particular is struggling to attract top female talent worldwide – about 15 percent of those working in the sector are women. The sector is really missing out from the growth and innovation that can come from adding on the other half of the population into it.
The sports arena is another sector that’s not a level playing field – take tennis as an example. Serena Williams is the top earner in women’s tennis – but even though she’s won around three times as many grand slam titles as the highest-earning male tennis player, Novak Djokovic, her prize money of $86m in prize money is dwarfed by his $119m.
Welts concedes that despite examples like the success of the WNBA, more work is still needed to make all sports and sports people equal.
On the business side we’re making progress. Our industry in general probably was late to the game adopting this philosophy. On the basketball side, it’s hard because we don’t yet have a qualified pool of candidates that reflect the kind of diversity that we really want to see long term throughout our organization, including basketball.
Don’t leave diversity to HR
D&I has to be a mainstream topic that is a constant part of company discussions, according to Welts.
If I were to counsel you as a leader, then talk about it. This is something that should be in your meetings every week. Let’s talk about our latest hires, let’s talk about the pool of candidates, about how we can reach out to them.
It has to be in the DNA of the conversation every day, it’s not something for the HR department to think about, it’s not something for the diversity and inclusion panel to think about. It has to be in the mainstream every day that we’re focused on this and we understand why it’s important for our organization.
Be a role model
In May 2011, the New York Times ran a cover story, in which Welts came out as the first openly gay sports executive in male sports.
It was a big leap for me. I’d spent my entire career not acting differently than I would otherwise act, but in choosing not to bring that part of my life into my workplace. That was a calculation as I was not sure that in male professional sports, how that would affect my ability to do the thing I loved. But I reached a point where I thought the time was right for me.
Welts was aware that he could keep the news to his immediate circle and was confident the outcome would be positive – but he decided to share his story more widely, to hopefully inspire and comfort others in his position. And it ended up on the front page of the NYT.
It was a remarkable, scary, wonderful experience. But I didn’t have anybody like that in sports that I could look to and see them go through that experience and say, ‘Hey, it can turn out okay’. The hope was if there was one kid out there who loves sports and wanted to have a career in sports who could look at my story and say that can work out ok, then mission accomplished.
It’s been remarkable to be in touch every day with people who are in a similar situation in our industry who haven’t made the decision to take that step and just have somebody who would understand what they’re going through and help them think through their own life and their own story. And that’s been the gift to me.
Take affirmative action
D&I is not just going to happen organically, Welts pointed out, it’s something that requires specific action.
We’ve been having a conversation about how we can create some opportunities for people who wouldn’t otherwise be considered for a coaching position in the NBA. Maybe using our summer league and maybe we select some women who are really focused on athletics at a region level and put them in an environment where they’re in contact with decision makers who are going to decide job hirings as it relates to the basketball side of the operation.
That’s an affirmative thing we can do. It’s going to happen, but it doesn’t happen just because we want it to happen. It happens because we’re taking strong steps for women, we put a stake in the ground about what we stand for, why it’s important and we measure ourselves as time goes on to see if we’re hitting our goals.
Diversity isn’t inclusion
Although interlinked, it’s important to remember that diversity and inclusion are two different sides of the same point. Nanu believes this mindset will help tackle the issue the technology sector is facing of women leaving after three or four years of working in a company.
I’ve seen a lot of companies try to increase the number of women in the company so they go out and try and recruit more women, but at the same time they don’t put any type of mechanism in place to facilitate the organisational culture to help women thrive.
Don’t exclude men
As Nanu noted:
Sometimes we get caught up in a women’s network, we get together and talk about our issues as women. But it’s also important to identify male allies and take them on the journey with you so they can sponsor and help support growth.
Image credit - Image taken by author at the event. Disclosure - Oracle is a diginomica premier partner at time of writing. Read more on: DiversityFuture of workHCM and the digital future of work 