
Ellison and Benioff – Bromance again?
Every 18-months or so, the rumor treadmill, plus or minus a slow week in the IT press, me thinks throws out the idea that Oracle, Microsoft or Martians will acquire Salesforce. Last time Salesforce was rumored to be in play the scuttlebutt was that the price was in the $60 to $80 billion range and that ultimately quashed a deal.
They are nearly always a rumor based on a hunch wrapped up in speculation because according to a source, which is why we report this stuff, right? And of course there are any number of competitors willing to stick it to Salesforce – frequently saying things that imply Salesforce has run out of ideas, the market is saturated and it  is offering old, clunky solutions.
Out of ideas? Salesforce? Really? Saturated? Which market? Salesforce keep inventing them.
I just spent two days with part of the executive team exhaustively going over the roadmaps and it sure didn’t feel like they were out of ideas. Waterboarding was more like it.
The event was capped by a discussion with co-founder Parker Harris who reminded us that the company spent about $4.5 billion on M&A in 2016. Parker is having a great time pulling it all together and the vision is still grand—nothing less than becoming an information utility. So no, I don’t think they’ve run out of ideas, money, or people.
Salesforce has always taken a long view of the market in part because it knows that it is inventing the future—one that will require a lot of new technology and ideas to diffuse throughout the world.
Their original innovation, nearly two decades ago, was cloud computing, or what became it, and today its major competition is finally up to speed and competing. But diffusion takes time, especially when the customer has to buy the infrastructure or at least part of it.
Compare, for instance, the diffusion time of railroads and highways and compare that with the fact that customers had to purchase cars on one hand but only tickets on the other.
All you need for confirmation is the successes touted by Oracle executives at their CloudWorld New York conference last week. To listen to their presentations you’d think Oracle invented the cloud. Of course they’re promoting their position as the fastest growing cloud company, which is correct because they are relatively new to the race and thus growing off a modest base.
The world has gone cloud now so much so that one of Oracle CEO Mark Hurd’s slides in New York was about an 80 percent reduction in corporate datacenters by 2025. The world has received the message and vendors are scrambling to get to the cloud.
Salesforce is in a bit different position as the first highly successful cloud company for enterprise software. Their customers are happy to reconsider business process realignment along with cloud adoption, an idea I have referred to here as the difference between disruption and transformation. So Salesforce is selling a future vision more than just lower IT costs.
How about these two? Nadella and Benioff
Salesforce has a team of people—the Ignite team—dedicated to working through blue-sky analyses with CEOs of companies that want to transform and with each engagement they surface more new ideas. So, again, I just don’t see it.
I have always been of the opinion that the EU and SEC would look unkindly upon an acquisition of Salesforce by either Microsoft or Oracle—or SAP for that matter—because it could easily be seen as a restraint of competition or an attempt to monopolize the market.
There’s no doubt in my mind that both Oracle and Microsoft will be fine in the cloud but they are addressing very different customers.
Legacy customers have a different set of circumstances. Legacy customers are not eager to give up or move the apps they’ve relied on for 20 years. Sure they’re old and brittle but they work. However, the cloud is such a compelling economic maneuver that no one can seriously ignore it any longer as Hurd said in his keynote in New York.
So they’ll tend to move their infrastructures to the cloud but leave the apps as is for as long as possible. Oracle and Microsoft have offerings for Infrastructure as does Amazon and there is a large second tier of infrastructure providers.
So the way it all boils down is that Oracle and Microsoft are doing some interesting things but they have a different agenda from Salesforce. They’re all about protecting their bases, which they will do with reasonable success. Salesforce, on the other hand, is inventing business processes at a torrid rate and these very different companies ought to remain separate.
My take
Every public company is “for sale” so speculating about acquiring Salesforce goes with the territory.
But you need more than speculation and a not very original idea to buy a company like Salesforce. The time for making that acquisition was ten years ago and there were certainly other companies like Salesnet and UpShot that did indeed get bought back in the day. Salesnet is still independent though not a player and UpShot was acquired by Siebel before Oracle bought Siebel.
Neither of those companies made major dents in the market. This quickly brings us to Salesforce’s secret sauce, the duo of Marc Benioff and Parker Harris. You might buy their company if you can come up with enough billions, but you won’t get them. Then where would you be?
Image credit - via Salesforce, Microsoft and Stuart LauchlanDisclosure - Oracle, SAP and Salesforce are premier partners at time of writing. Read more on: Cloud platforms - infrastructure and architectureCollaboration sharing and digital productivityCRM and customer experience 