
Remember personnel? You have to be of a certain age — it’s a couple decades since personnel gave way to human resources (HR), followed by its close cousin, human capital management (HCM). Now a new transformation is taking place, according to Fairsail CEO Adam Hale, as the HR function gives way to what he believes should simply be known as the people function.
So instead of being thought of as an HR vendor to global mid-sized companies, Hale is repositioning Fairsail around the people motif.
Fundamentally we’re helping organizations become people companies.
This is going to take a while. The change from personnel to HR took 15 years, and there are some companies and some verticals honestly that may never make that transition. That’s okay, because we won’t work with them. They’re not for us.
This is for companies that really care about their people, and are progressive. This is a journey we want to take them on.
Hale described some of the key features of this move towards a people function in organizations during a meeting at last week’s Dreamforce conference in San Francisco — Fairsail has built its software on the Salesforce platform.
Eliminating HR admin
The most basic aspect of the transformation is the automation of routine administration that used to be done manually by a central HR resource. That not only puts people directly in charge of updating their own information on the system, it also frees up resources for higher-level activities, says Hale.
All of the HR operations that have been built up can be, in many, many cases automated. They’re the kind of manual processing that should be done in a consistent, systematic, organized way.
When you have proper self-service operating across your business, we’ve given organizations up to a 50% productivity increase in HR.
Bring on people scientists
Just as sales and marketing organizations harness data science to better understand and engage with customers, so the people function should do likewise.
If people really are your most valuable asset as a company, you should have a people scientist to understand your people and their behavior.
This is going to start to answer some questions that can’t be even asked at the moment, like what are the people that are actually successful in our business? What is it that’s making them successful? How do we hire more of those people, and develop more of those people, and hire and develop fewer people that aren’t successful? Are we genuinely paying for performance? Who are the people who are likely to leave in six months?
These are all questions they just can’t answer at the moment. That will be the job of a people scientist.
Recruitment as marketing
The same transformation that marketing went through as it adapted to digital capabilities is now coming to recruitment, Hale believes.
A lot of recruitment is essentially manual now … Most companies now, when they want to hire someone, they have to start again. They don’t have a view of their talent pool, they don’t have a view of what’s there, what nurture campaigns [to run], they haven’t got it structured out. None of this stuff that a marketing function has now, exists in a recruiting scenario.
Workforce experience
The transition to being more people-oriented means that companies are paying more attention to what it feels like to be part of the workforce. Hale cited the example of Innocent Drinks, a company with a youthful brand image that markets fruit-based drinks, and which has branded its people platform accordingly.
Their Fairsail, it’s not called Fairsail, it’s not called HR system, it’s called Fruitbook. To go look at anything people related, they say, go look on Fruitbook. Have you been on Fruitbook?
The companies who are really focusing on their customer experience, they’re starting to focus on their workforce experience, really what that’s like to be in the organization.
Chief people officer
Naturally, the executive in charge can no longer be called the CHRO if it’s not the HR function any more. But the change must run all the way through the organization, cautions Hale.
This is definitely becoming the name title change, but we would say you’re not a chief people officer unless you’re doing these things. You can’t just change your title, and [do] the same thing.
From a systems perspective it’s turning the systems from things that are exclusively used by HR into something that’s genuinely on-demand and used by everybody across the workspace.
My take
This is not the first time that someone has tried to redefine the HR function as people management. But Hale’s timing is good. There’s a whole lot more that can be done with modern, connected, digital systems to bring that vision to life than was ever possible before.
He’s also emphasizing the need for the right culture and mindset to make this work well. We often see organizations rolling out cloud systems and discovering business change happening as a result. Hale is arguing for anticipating and driving those changes from the outset.
It’s a message that resonates well with the high-growth, entrepreneurial businesses Fairsail targets. In the old world, the HR processes got all the attention while the people were taken for granted. Now it’s the other way around.
Image credit - Graphic of hand holding magnifying glass over people © princerko - Fotolia.comDisclosure - Salesforce is a diginomica premier partner at the time of writing. Read more on: Digital transformation - frictionless enterpriseHCM and the digital future of work 