
Two become one
When we last looked at betting giant Paddy Power last month, it was on the occasion when the firm announced its intention to merge with rival BetFair, a coming-together that would create the biggest digital gaming provider in the world.
Flash forward a few weeks and it’s now possible, as part of our ongoing series of progress reports on digital transformation initiatives, to get a bit more detail on what’s in store, with Paddy Power CEO Andy McCue and his counterpart at Betfair, Breon Corcoran, updating on what to expect in the months to come now that the merger has been formally approved by both firms.
Corcoran is quick to emphasis that this is an amalgamation of equals, not one predatory firm taking over a weaker competitor.:
These are two extremely strong businesses with real momentum on both sides. Both of these businesses excel in terms of product, in terms of other capabilities and in terms of talent.
We have two businesses with many common features and common strategies. Both are sports-led,. Both have an excellence in terms of mobile capability. Both value the certainty of regulated markets. Both businesses put a premium on brands, on quality brands, on product investment and differentiation. And both indeed have a history of outperforming or performing ahead of market expectations.
So what’s the reasoning for merging if both firms are powerhouses in their own rights? One practical reason is the increased pressures that each will face as a result of legislative and regulatory changes. Against such a backdrop, size may well matter. Corcoran says:
The enlarged business would have scale which will allow greater returns to be made on the very substantial investments we make and will make together in both technology and marketing.
I believe that successful online consumer businesses require scale to thrive and indeed three years ago, when we set out the Betfair strategy, our fear was that our Sports Book would remain sub-scale compared to the incumbent operators.I think we’ve succeeded in the testament of the hard work of our team, but we still firmly are of the belief that scale is a major advantage.
He cites necessary product investment as a case in point:
The cost of developing a new feature can now generate returns across a much larger group of customers and this means in turn greater returns from our product investment. It’s clear to me that the combined business will enjoy substantially greater scale than was likely to be achieved organically any time soon. Paddy Power Betfair will be the largest regulated online gaming operator globally. This business will rank in among the very largest European online businesses of any sector.
Scaling up
Being a mega-organization will also support international expansion ambitions, he adds:
The final point to make is that scale isn’t just about domestic or just about existing markets. There are other opportunities and will be other opportunities, to accelerate our growth internationally and having the resources of a large business will be beneficial to us in those efforts.
A lot of the success of the merger will be built around successful integration of the two firms technology plafforms. Both parties are bringing different things to the table here, says McCue:
Paddy Power Betfair will have significant proprietary technology capabilities. The Betfair Exchange is the number one global exchange and a truly differentiated sports product access with significant volumes traded. The Exchange can also facilitate the creation of new sports good innovation and features.
Paddy Power Betfair will also have significant in-house gaming capabilities, which combined with key strategic third party partnerships, can ensure we can continue to grow eGaming revenues.
For example, Betfair customers will have access to content from Paddy Power’s Bulgarian development base, which produces exclusive gaming content, which is of the highest quality significantly outperforming third party gains.
Of the two organizations, Paddy Power probably has the greater mobile service offering, something from which the combined entity will benefit, says McCue:
Multi-channel customers are a key growth segment, Paddy Power’s retail estate has a disproportionately high multi-channel reach, with our shops having sports betting turnover over double that of the average competitor unit. This gives our estate a reach of equivalent to around 1,200 competitor units. The opportunities we are targeting through multi-channel initiatives such as in-store online sign up, customer cross sell and short deposit and withdrawals will be further enhanced by the merger.
Of course, there are plenty of examples of mergers of businesses stumbling on the technology integration aspect. There are overlaps in the Betfair and Paddy Power estate, but it’s clear that lessons have been learned from others experiences, with expectations being carefully set by Corcoran when he says:
There is very deep and complementary technology capability in both businesses. We’ve had a couple of high level conservations about what that might look like. I think it’s telling that the bids teams [are thinking] about solving where the technology needs to be in a couple of years’ time, as opposed to what’s the most efficient way of running this today. So I think it’s premature at this stage to go into it. I expect we’ll be in a position to give those answers hopefully within 12 months’ time.
My take
With the merger approved, now comes the tricky bit – pulling the two organizations together. The managing of expectations around the technology aspect of that is a welcome development. Best to proceed with caution and get it right.
Read more on: Analytics planning and data analysisCRM and customer experienceDigital and content marketinge-commerce 