
Earlier this week we looked at the digital progress of bookmaker William Hill in an increasingly competitive market sector.
Management there defined as one of their corporate priorities the need to establish strong differentation to rivals, including the likes of Paddy Power.
It’s interesting then to find that across at Paddy Power, CEO Andy McCue is also in hot pursuit of differentiation himself, stating:
Our future strategy places greater emphasis on products differentiation. In the future, we will release innovative compelling products built primarily in-house. We will deepen the distinctiveness of our brands, which will in turn support the launch of new products. And we will continue to develop leadership positions in strong large regulated market.
It’s a clear imperative, he adds, as digital dominance at this stage is increasingly vital. McCue notes:
Online growth is clearly outpacing retail. Globally, consumers are migrating from retail to online and online as a percentage of the total market now represents 11% as opposed to 6% 10 years ago. Clearly, there are still plenty of migrations to play out given the relative size of the retail market. For example, in Paddy Power’s market, every 1% of retail that migrates, translates into 5% growth to online.
It’s not just online in general however, but most particularly mobile activity that’s the real sweet spot:
Future foreseeable industry growth pretty much all lies in mobile. In the UK, over 90% of total sports and gaming future growth will be by mobile devices and increasingly customers are choosing to use mobile exclusively over desktop. In Australia, within the sports-betting market that we operate in, all the growth is in mobile with retail, phones, desktop all forecast to decline.
Against this backdrop, McCue argues that Paddy Power is already well-positioned:
Over three quarters of our profit are from online. In mobile, we have the sector leading penetration with 55% of our online revenues last year coming through mobile, and over 70% of our revenues are from the large and robust sportsbook market.
Sports compared to gaming offers more strategic opportunity to differentiate from the competition and have customers that are cheaper to acquire and less likely to churn.
We are also well-positioned geographically with profit spreads across multiple geographies. We only operate in markets where we can achieve critical scale to succeed. Within the UK, Australia and Ireland, we have established market-leading positions with potential to further grow share as activity flows towards the best and most efficient operators.
But there’s still that need for differentiation which means a decisive shift in emphasis towards product, which McCue says means:
providing the best possible intuitive customer experience. We will launch innovative betting products which make us distinctive from the competition. To achieve this, we need to operate at pace and flexibly, and so we will further expand our in-house development capabilities.
While we have a competitive product today, I firmly believe we have the capabilities and the ideas to create clear blue water between our products and those of the competition.
The reason differentiation matters is straightforward, he adds:
The simple answer is that consumers tell us as it is. Across our markets, 35% of consumers cite product features as the key factor driving operator choice, while analysis of lost customers indicates on an average about one in three customers go elsewhere due to product reasons.
Customers’ hierarchy of needs will match to our development priorities. We have developed and are working on enhancements throughout the journey to improve customer navigation, as well as making the product increasingly personalized to individual preferences and richer in relevant content.
McCue says product innovation will come across multiple dimensions, such as platforms, either through existing platforms or by emerging technologies. By introducing new market and game types, and by developing products for multichannel customers, which enable us to capture a higher share of their online spend.
He cites the Cash-Out functionality recently introduced in Australia as a case in point:
We’ve extended the cash-out functionality to Each Way bet in Paddypower.com, and in quarter two we will launch partial cash-out. And we’ve even extended its gaming with the launch of Cash-Out Blackjack. We continue to increase the proportion of development we control and build in-house, and this year we expect nearly three quarters of our product development spend to be in-house.
We are uncoupling and gaining ownership of critical customer-facing front ends from third-party suppliers and this allows us to differentiate our product from other operators. We do know however not to try to ultimately do everything in-house. We will continue to cultivate third-party partnerships, where they allow us to operate in pace or more efficiently by leveraging their scale of a path to the customer proposition which do not necessitate differentiation.
Innovation and differentiation need to be backed up by strong marketing and brand communication and so it is that McCue identifies these as a second key element of future strategy:
While our brands today are entertaining and engaging, we can make improvement in how we communicate our products’ advantages, while furthering our reach by continuing to invest in social media and digital marketing expertise, while our creativeness of the brand will not be changing.
Our brands aim to engage and entertain in a way that it’s impossible for others to replicate. And in a crowded marketplace our Paddy Power and Sportsbet brand standout. To further deepen the distinctiveness of our brands we will launch new creative campaigns for both the Paddy Power and Sportsbet brands this year.
Again, McCue insists that Paddy Power has already made strides in this direction:
We dominate our industry on social media, both in terms of the number of fans and followers we have, but also in the level of engagement with these fans. We will continue to push the boundaries of social engagement.
When it comes to our marketing campaigns, we will increasingly focus on highlighting to consumers our new and original product features. For example, our recently-launched TV campaigns in Australia feature the Cash Card and Cash-Out product, and in the UK we are currently promoting the recently launched pitch visualization.
Our marketing will also ensure that customers see us as being competitive on value with distinctive, simple and relevant offers.
Optimizing marketing efforts will deliver returns, he adds:
Last year, we substantially increased our TV spend, driving material increases in our share of voice both in the UK and Australia. This generated strong return, including 28% growth in online customer acquisition.
We will continue to invest in leading share of voice in UK and Australia, while furthering our digital and market capabilities, to ensure we maintain a lead in marketing efficiency. For example, last year even with this significant increase in TV spend, our efficiency elsewhere ensured that total marketing costs per new customer acquired was flat year-on-year.
My take
Another interesting statement of intent from another player in an increasingly febrile market sector.

Read more on: Analytics planning and data analysisCloud platforms - infrastructure and architectureCRM and customer experienceMobile 