
Two become one
Looking at the digital ambitions of the combined Ladbrokes Coral bookmaking group yesterday inevitably brings to mind another major merger in the sector, the £7 billion tie-up between Paddy Power and Betfair. The former is a company whose digital story and technology strategy we’ve covered a lot at diginomica, the latter less so.
But as a combined entity, getting an integrated tech strategy in place is a critical aspect of making a success of a merger that’s intended to create defensive scale in an increasingly competitive landscape. CEO Breon Corcoran makes no bones about it:
As in other online consumer industries, scale is very important determinant of long-term success, perhaps the most important determinant of long-term success..In addition to driving higher returns within our existing markets, our scale better positions us to withstand regulatory headwinds. And when combined with our enhanced technology and operational capability, gives us greater capacity to enter new markets as opportunities arise.
With revenues at the internet arm of Paddy Power growing faster than the offline business – 11% year-on-year against 6% – translating that scale into the tech planning is essential. Paddy Power customers have seen a number of tech-centric initiatives over the past year, such as the firm’s Track My Bet service on its Self Service Betting Terminals.
Online sign up tablets have been used to successfully target multichannel customers, while all high street outlets now come with free Wi-Fi. Meanwhile in January the firm launched its new retail app, Paddy Power On Site, which Corcoran says:
brings some of the benefits of digital into the retail estate, but in a way that’s more attuned to the retail customer, This ultimately provides another platform for online cross sell.
But with the Betfair integration, there are grander plans afoot. One immediate goal is to migrate Paddy Power and Betfair onto a single technology platform, linking Betfair’s online trading system with Paddy Power’s odds pricing arm. Corcoran talks in terms of:
A single platform for products to develop once-conservative multiple brands, multiple jurisdictions, multiple customer bases, drives down the overall cost and service…the ongoing integration of online platforms. The primary objective is to ensure that we’re best positioned for the long-term by having the single platform that’s efficient, scalable, flexible and controllable, and that can support multiple brands, channels and jurisdictions.
With 100 in-house software engineers across the group, work has begun on this unification, the basic architecture of which is based on Betfair’s thinking, says Corcoran:
It’s based on the modular architecture of Betfair existing platform, which is currently being enhanced with key functionality for the Paddy Power platform, as well as further developing the platform’s overall capabilities, visibility and scalability. Once this platform work is completed, the Paddy Power brand, including the Paddy Power customers, will migrate to this platform.
Migration
The CEO sees work on this crucial project as progressing well and on track to completsion by the end of Q4:
Most of the propriety functionality to the Paddy Power platform including the pricing risk management systems and the Cayetano content, the Bulgarian games, have already been integrated with the Betfair platform. This has started to have benefits, particularly for the Betfair Sportsbook.
We’ve also completed work on improving the platform’s operational resilience, such as processes to better detect fraud and verify customers as well as adding other payment processing capability to the Betfair stack to ensure redundancy for all of our customers.
Most of this ongoing work is to ensure that the Betfair platform is already for the migration of the Paddy Power customers, including scaling up for the demands of the future, the scaling of capacity for future demand and adding functionality to operate multiple brands, which will include the flexibility of operating a third or fourth brand or further brands in the future.
Of course, there remains the big challenge of migrating the customer base over to the new platform, but Corcoran insists that this will be carefully managed to avoid the risks of a big switch-over. No overnight ‘big bang’ here:
As with any technology change, we can start with the small core of customers and thought a lot this migration once we’re confident there are no issues. In many cases, customers won’t even notice this process, other than having access to new products and features that weren’t previously accessible on the Paddy Power stack.
But this does have implications both for Paddy Power customers and for Paddy Power’s own bottom line. Corcoran cautions:
This means that this year Paddy Power customers will experience limited new product up until the time of migration. As for developing new product at this stage, that product will be redundant within months and will therefore almost certainly not generate a return. It also means that the throughput of product development on the Betfair platform will be reduced as a significant proportion of our resources are focused on this platform integration.
My take
As noted at the start, the Paddy Power success story has been one that has had technology planning at its core for many years, but the success of that thinking has never been more crucial than now. The planned single platform for Betfair and Paddy Power will open up new cross and up-selling opportunities for the combined entity. Execution of this strategic plan is essential.
Image credit - PaddypowerRead more on: Digital enterprise in the real world 