
Paf is an online gaming company with a difference: much of the money it makes is distributed to projects and organizations working for the good of the community on the Aland Islands – an autonomous, Swedish-speaking region of Finland composed of 6,700 islands and home to just under 30,000 people.
The causes supported by Paf, which is owned and controlled by the Government of Aland, include the local volunteer coastguard service, historical sites, sports clubs and the Regnbagsfyren (‘Rainbow Lighthouse’) organization, which supports the archipelago’s LGBTQ community and holds the annual Aland Pride festival. In 2017, the company posted revenues of €116.5 million, and an operating profit of €27.6 million, of which €18 million went to the Regional Government of Åland to be distributed to good causes.
The differences don’t end there. Paf is older than the vast majority of online gaming companies, having got its start in 1966, operating slot machines and gaming tables on the islands themselves, as well as on the ferries and cruise ships that criss-cross the Baltic and North Seas. Those activities continue today. It’s also taking a lead on the issue of responsible gambling: last year, it introduced an annual loss limit of €30,000 for customers.
In many other respects, however, Paf has much in common with other players in its industry: its development teams are expected to deliver a steady stream of new games and new functionality and its infrastructure is expected to cope with peaks in demand. After all, gamers like novelty – but they don’t want their gaming sessions interrupted.
Putting DevOps into practice
These demands have prompted a move to the cloud and a shift to new, DevOps-based practices at Paf in recent years. The organization is in the process of moving workloads to Amazon Web Services (AWS) and, at the same time, looking to containerize software deployments on that environment.
While the move to a more componentized architecture is what allows new features and functions to be delivered at speed, it also introduces new complexities when it comes to monitoring systems and resolving issues to keep them performing at scale, explains Lars-Goran Hakamo, Security Architect at Paf:
For a long time, we were stuck with a legacy set-up in our own, in-house data center. And with that, you don’t have the scalability and flexibility you need for a business like this. So we decided on AWS and we’re still very much in the transition here. We started with some of our in-house management tools, but we now have our continuous integration environment set up on AWS and have started deploying smaller services that will become part of the online gaming system. We’ve created a complete separation of the management services and the front-end, customer-facing services that gamers actually use. That gives us a lot of freedom to experiment as we move ahead with new plans.
As it stands today, we should be done with migrating workloads by Spring next year, which is a very tight schedule. In part, that’s why we need to have DevOps, because there’s no way that our development teams could rely on a single systems team to handle the full production set-up for them.
In other words, the key to moving forward at speed lies in getting systems knowledge deeply embedded in development teams – the combination of ‘dev’ and ‘ops’ from which the term ‘DevOps’ derives. It’s a huge cultural challenge for an IT group not used to working in that way, as Hakamo acknowledges, but so far, it seems to be working. In the next month or so, he adds, individual DevOps teams at Paf will begin working in three-week ‘sprints’.
Key performance insights
Another element of this new DevOps drive at Paf is provided by Sumo Logic, a cloud-based data analytics services that brings together log and metric data from across the hybrid environment, so that DevOps teams can monitor the performance of software once it’s deployed and quickly tackle issues that could lead to outages. That’s important, because of the DevOps principle that the team that builds a service or feature should also go on to run and maintain it in production:
Previously, we had maybe five different tools for doing log analysis, metrics and so on, and we were hosting them all in-house. So we said, ‘Okay, we really need to have one tool and we need to have a provider that hosts that tool for us, so we don’t need to maintain it, because that will just take up resources that might otherwise be delivering business value for Paf. It took us about a week to get pretty much all of our data ingested by Sumo Logic, the set-up was easy and we really didn’t look back after that.
For example, Sumo Logic now ingests data from development platform GitHub, so that Paf can see what repositories are being used in the development process and by which team members. The company gets build metrics, enabling it to see how often builds are performed and information that enables it to follow a build all the way through to production, to see the status of that service once it’s deployed.
This approach supports the short feedback loops on which the continuous improvements promised by DevOps rely. Metrics on a newly deployed service, for example, can be shown to the business team and, if they’ve not been received as well by gamers as had been expected, that can be the trigger for changes to be made, or perhaps even for A/B testing of two different implementations of the same feature, in order to arrive at the best result for gamers. As Hakamo puts it:
To work effectively in DevOps, you need good metrics to make good decisions. It’s as simple as that.
Image credit - PafRead more on: Cloud platforms - infrastructure and architectureDevOps NoSQL and the open source stackDigital enterprise in the real worldUse cases 