
Pandora
When we last took a look at digital music pioneer Pandora, the firm was the subject of takeover speculation after the return as CEO of its founder and the engagement of Morgan Stanley to explore strategic options.
Flash forward to this month and those rumors aren’t going away any time fast, despite the best efforts to affirm an independent direction for the company.
This week, it emerged via Bloomberg that Pandora has now hired boutique advisory firm Centerview Partners on a similar strategic options search seemingly prompted by a need to placate activists at Corvex Management which owns a 9.9% stake in Pandora.
To add to the scuttlebutt, Liberty Media Group, which controls satellite radio service Sirius XM Holdings, made an informal offer to buy Pandora for roughly $15 a share, according to reports in The Wall Street Journal. These overtures were reportedly rejected by Pandora on the basis that the firm sees its value as at least $20 a share.
It’s all a major distraction for Pandora which would doubtless prefer attention focused on its five year strategy to quadruple annual sales to $4 billion by 2020. Last week it turned some lackluster second quarter numbers with revenue falling $8 million short of its projected $343 million target to hit $343 million.
More seriously, the firm saw its listener numbers dip to 78.1 million from 79.4 million, even though listening hours were up to 5.66 billion for the quarter against 5.52 last quarter. Nonetheless CEO Tim Westergren finds himself having to pitch hard the idea that the firm’s long-term strategy remains sound:
Our strategy in front of us it to offer this broader product, and we want to have our audience as large as possible when we hit that and bring that to market. So we are trying to balance monetization efficiency with maximum retention and engagement.
Counter-churn
Churn remains the challenge, as it does with all other on demand services such as Netflix, which has also been hit by a subscriber slow-down that unnerves Wall Street. Westergren acknowledges the issue:
You can drive new subs, but how long can you keep is a big question? One of the strongest correlations to churn is engagement. So you need to develop a product that actually engages listeners and causes them to believe it’s value we’re paying for. I think labels are seeing we have that ability too. When you look at our existing product and how successful we’ve been at driving engagements, we bring that same expertise to this domain. I think we’ll have the ability to not only offer these products, but through that, lower churn and better economics ultimately.
Just as content is king with Netflix and the most urgent need is to have the right content licensing deals in place, so it is with Pandora, with all the added complications of some in the music industry remaining inherently suspicious of the model. Westerberg thinks this is changing:
On the deal front, absolutely so far we’ve been able to get deals that allow us to offer the product we want. It’s one of the really encouraging parts of this so far. I think that what we’re finding is that the case we’re putting in front of the rights holders, people are believing that we are bringing something that is truly incremental and that is not just going to drive the high-end subscription, but will also bring in a big part of the market that is not currently paying.
Pandora is uniquely positioned to do that. We have this enormous audience, approximately 100 million people every three months, and our ability to introduce them to these products is unique. And so our confidence just keeps growing about being able to not only get the feature set we want, but also the economics we want long-term. We won’t sign deals that don’t preserve that. That’s the beauty of having actually a healthy core business to start with.
But it’s how to monetize that subscriber base that’s critical and something that Pandora has yet to demonstrate it can do consistently and effectively. Again Westergren inevitably has the dial turned up to 11 on this front:
We feel more confident than ever about the core advertising business due to, one, strong local advertising results, now representing 28% of our revenue. Two, an increase in demand for our visual ad product, which has resulted in significant uplift in the eCPM and the expected year‐end launch of new visual ad products, where early betas have already seen great results. Three, continued adoption of native advertising, such as sponsored listening, which is already pacing to exceed our revenue expectations for the year; and of course, a new high watermark for listener engagement.
Our strategy continues to be a focus on high‐quality, premium audio advertising, at ad loads that balance strong monetization with increased listener engagement.
Friends with benefits
He backs up these claims with some powerful stats to support his case:
We now stream more hours of music on mobile than YouTube streams hours of video in the US, and are second only to Facebook in total time spent [online]. Ultimately, it is this massive scale that underpins our marketplace strategy.
Pandora now averages 24 hours per listener, per month, a new all‐time high, and total hours grew 7% year‐on‐year, or nearly 400 million hours, to 5.7 billion, also a new all‐time high. We view this as a very encouraging data point, particularly when you consider the number of free or heavily discounted on‐demand alternatives readily available to consumers.
While total users remained essentially flat, we would expect both hours and users to grow over time as we launch new products, and as more people migrate to streaming radio and music services. Along with this migration, so too will dollars continue to shift from traditional radio budgets to digital platforms.
Alongside this core business model, Pandora has set about building a broader ecosystem strategy that involves third party partners, such as TicketFly and Uber. These are critical for growth, explains Westergren, and not just Pandora’s growth:
Since Ticketfly has begun joint selling with Pandora, they have exceeded their bookings projections. Why? Because we are combining ticketing inventory supply with a massive and highly targetable audience of listeners. Venue owners see the power not only to drive ticket sales, but also to more effectively program based on precise knowledge of their customer base. These early results provide a glimpse into the future of live events in our marketplace.
The Uber partnership speaks to the audience growth prospects. Why did Uber put us in the driver’s seat? We are the perfect solution for in‐car listening, a massive category that remains largely untapped with our current offerings. We are the service their drivers and riders use already. In just three weeks, more than 50,000 Uber drivers have used Pandora via the Uber integration, and average daily listening is over 2.5 hours per user. The early adoption numbers are even more encouraging given Uber is still in the process of rolling out the integration to their complete driver audience. Ubiquitous, habitual use is the foundation of our marketplace, and we are forging towards that vision.
But at the end of the day, it’s all about the tunes and Westergren reminds us that this is the core of the business:
A central part of our approach to a complete marketplace for music is providing a valuable platform for artists. This quarter we announced that we generated more than $2 billion in all‐time royalties paid for artists and songwriters, just nine months after hitting $1.5 billion royalties milestone. We are proactively working to ensure that as we launch new products, they are fully licensed, and they are being paid correctly.
My take
I know many in the music industry still have concerns about the Pandora model, particularly in Europe where Pandora still hasn’t managed to get a foothold due to licensing issues. As with the video streaming market, internet radio’s becoming an increasingly febrile space. Pandora needs to shake off those ‘strategic option explorations’ sooner rather than later I feel.
Image credit - PandoraRead more on: Digital and content marketing 