
Parker Conrad, ex-CEO Zenefits
The news that Parker Conrad, CEO and co-founder Zenefits, has been replaced by David Sacks, former COO will be no surprise to those who understand and care about governance even though it seems to have shocked some (article needs unlocking) in Silicon Valley.
Regardless of the relative ‘inside baseball’ nature of the story, there are real issues at stake that play to the gung-ho, FU climate among some Silicon Valley startups. What went wrong?
A good set of clues comes from the Sacks penned email that was leaked to media in the aftermath of Conrad’s sudden demise. The key points:
The fact is that many of our internal processes, controls, and actions around compliance have been inadequate, and some decisions have just been plain wrong. As a result, Parker has resigned…
Buzzfeed has been close to this element of the story. It boils down to this – Zenefits was brokering insurance policies but did not necessarily have licensed people doing the business. Buzzfeed discovered that in Washington state, 80% of Zenefits’ recorded deals were completed by unlicensed Zenefits representatives. Does this matter? Hell yes, but not I suspect for the reasons many suppose.
What you don’t know
Last year when all this blew up, I did some digging around the networks to determine what was going on. Zenefits was skating on very thin ice. On the one hand I found plenty of evidence to suggest that inside the company, the only thing that mattered was selling and pretty much by any means. There’s plenty of anecdotal evidence of that to be found in the networks and places like Glassdoor.
On the other hand, once Buzzfeed started exposing the problem of unregistered ‘brokers,’ Zenefits attempted to smarten itself up. At the same time however, I came across a number of instances where named individuals who were licensed brokers clearly had no background in the business. I found this through checks at LinkedIn to people who were on lists which have since been withdrawn from Zenefits website. Conrad had no background in health insurance brokerage prior to establishing Zenefits.
Regulation is part of the problem
Upon further digging, I discovered that the relationship between states, brokers and insurers is odd to say the least. The primary purpose of registration should be to ensure that a broker is qualified to offer advisory services and make recommendations to clients. Yet in almost every case, I found that the knowledge needed to pass muster was rudimentary at best. How do I know this?
Back in the day, I used to be involved in this business in the UK. At that time, we employed brokers who operated under a regime that required qualified knowledge. Our involvement was as advisers helping clients mitigate tax. What we could not do was make specific insurance, pensions or investment recommendations. Even so, you pick up knowledge along the way. Now – bear in mind it is over 20 years since I was involved in this game and was looking at this from inside the US where I have no training whatsoever.
Without doing any real research, I took a couple of the sample tests. Apart from some specific US centric terms I didn’t understand, I was able to easily pass the sample test. Digging further, it transpires that a good number of brokers saw state exams as little more than an attempt to levy a form of state tax. And when you look at the exams in detail, they seem far more about selling than they do about providing the most appropriate advice. And that’s hardly surprising given that health insurance is an incredibly lucrative business.
The problems of regulation go a bit deeper. It seems that even though Washington State knew there were issues with Zenefits, they were not sure the extent. Why not? Part of the problem lays in the fact there is no national database of brokers. But again, look at what Buzzfeed discovered when it approached insurers. In every case, the insurance company was far from clear what was going on. Of course not.
You can conclude four things:

Regulation exists to extract fees.
Regulation exists to ensure that licensed brokers know how to sell.
No-one inside the insurance industry or collectively as the United States has a clue what’s going on.
Parker knew nothing about the insurance industry (or HR) before establishing Zenefits so what made him in any way qualified to lead a national insurance brokerage?

The clean up begins
Sachs is trying to wipe the slate clean but that’s a tough ask. Last year, Zenefits attempted to put its house in order. That clearly was not working.
….We must admit that the problem goes much deeper than just process. Our culture and tone have been inappropriate for a highly regulated company. Zenefits’ company values were forged at a time when the emphasis was on discovering a new market, and the company did that brilliantly. Now we have moved into a new phase of delivering at scale and needing to win the trust of customers, regulators, and other stakeholders
My interpretation? “We saw an opportunity, we saw flawed regulation and took advantage of it in a cynical way. It worked for a while until we got caught. We’re about to get our asses handed to us on a plate (queue lawsuits) and need to smarten up very quickly or we’re toast.”
……I believe a new set of values are necessary to take us to the next level. Effective immediately, this company’s values are: #1 Operate with integrity. #2 Put the customer first. #3 Make this a great place to work for employees. In order to be a great company, integrity must be at the core of what we do. We must have integrity in our business practices, compliance obligations and internal processes. We must have integrity in our product. We must have integrity in our data and infrastructure. And we must have integrity in the way we treat each other.
This plays to the oft quoted frat house atmosphere that was said to exist under Parker’s leadership. But these are platitudes I could hear at pretty much any software vendor Town Hall meeting. There is nothing new here. He’d be much better off saying something like: “We’ve behaved like a bunch of drunken assholes the last couple of years. Guess what – party time is over.”
…I’m making my first actions as CEO about culture and values because I believe these things are fundamental to a company’s success and who we are and want to be. I want to push down decision‐making ability into the company. Culture and values enable us to do that by ensuring that everyone is aligned around the right goals…
Is this cut and paste from some change management book? Hard to tell but is there anyone at the company with the experience to manage or make sensible decisions? I mean that as a serious question.
…There is one other critical thing that I want to do, and that is make Zenefits a purpose‐driven company. I’m glad that Zenefits is one of the fastest‐growing business software companies, but that’s not our mission. It alone doesn’t fill my life with any meaning, and I doubt it does yours. However, Zenefits does serve an important purpose in the world, by making the lives of small business owners so much easier…
So that’s the purpose? OK – and that wasn’t stated beforehand?
My take
Zenefits has never been short of providing entertainment. It is working in a moribund industry and could yet disrupt the insurance business providing benefits for the small and medium sized business. But at the end of the day it is still a brokerage and has to operate inside a regulated environment. The fact that environment looks weak makes no difference because in this industry, we’re talking about people’s money. And you don’t get to mess with that unless you fancy facing dire consequences.
Investors must be annoyed with themselves. It’s a big dent in the reputation of Andreessen Horowitz, largely considered the current sages of Silicon Valley and lead investor in Zenefits. The debacle makes AH investor/partner Lars Dalgaard look a bit of an idiot. After all, it was Dalgaard who was quoted  as saying: 
“I did not think that I was going to invest in another HR company,” Dalgaard said. “I’ve seen all of the things that are working, and I’m not impressed. But then I was completely blown away with Parker, and then I was blown away with the numbers.”
“The company has a moat,” Dalgaard said. “It’s a visceral analogy meaning that no one can come in. In this case the moat is gigantic because he is doing two businesses and neither of the competitors in each of those individual businesses really wants to go after him.”
Classic investor bullshit or one bullshitter bullshitting another? Go figure because I can’t make sense of these statements in the context of the most recent events.
Image credit: still shot from presentation via Khosla Ventures on YouTube.
Read more on: Future of workHR admin and payroll 