
Harald Reiter and Phil Loewen – Infosys
This week, I held a unique video conversation with Harald Reiter and Phil Loewen of Infosys that covered the developing relationship between Infosys and SAP.
I’ve known both for many years. Reiter is a regular on our SAP related video shoots but this was the first time we have had an in depth discussion about what Infosys is doing in the SAP HANA world, what the latest thinking around developers looks like from a large partner perspective and how that fits into Infosys’ AiKiDo strategy.
For those unfamiliar, AiKiDo describes a three pronged approach to the broader Infosys ‘renew and new’ message to customers.  All are built around the concepts of knowledge based curation, innovation, cost optimization and strategy.
One astonishing thing I learned during the conversation. When Infosys undertakes a discovery project, the customer gets full access to all Infosys tools as part of the project. There is no separate charge, no licensing topics. This is a practical reflection of how Infosys is addressing customer need, which are often based open what Sanjay Purohit, head of consulting describes as “unknown unknowns.” These are topics that emerge through design thinking workshops and which serve to express the nut of an otherwise vague problem.
I really like this approach because it gives customers the freedom from lengthy and distracting negotiations.
I asked Reiter whether this was an approach that SAP should adopt. He met Bernd Leukert, SAP board member and the person who runs all SAP development, and noted that despite undertaking many HANA migration projects in the last year, things haven’t got any better, any faster or predictable for making those migrations.
It has to be a lot faster, it has to be a lot better. What we want to do now is co-innovate with SAP that allows us to do this stuff [in] automated [fashion.]
Reiner then went on to say that Leukert is all in favor and is putting his stamp behind this initiative. As always, we await the outcomes but we now have a partner on record willing, able and ready to help customers move quickly and pressuring SAP to help it get there. That is a welcome outcome.

Disclosure: SAP and Infosys are dignomica premier partners. SAP covered most of my travel for attending SAP TechEd. Infosys is a personal consulting client of the author.
Read more on: Cloud ERP financials and supply chainProfessional services 