
Partnering
With Windows 10 about to become a reality the time is now fast approaching when Microsoft is put to the real test.
The potential and promise that Win10 can provide to its core market, particularly in the form of Microsoft Office, is still at the heart of most business processes. It could be even more significant when coupled with cloud-based service and applications delivery.
But it could also be the beginning of the end, especially if Microsoft continues with its traditional philosophy – that all routes to market lead to the sale of applications.
One sign that this philosophy might now be in real decline is the spate of recent announcements by both Microsoft and some of its partners about developments in the world of Azure. If the real world is a real hybrid – a mashup of different applications and services that run not just on-premise and `a cloud service’ but on mixes of on-premise environments and different cloud services from different Cloud Service Providers (CSPs) – then it does start to look as though Microsoft is getting the hang of how to play in that environment.
At its recent Worldwide Partner Conference, the company announced that a number of partners will be adding or expanding their existing Azure services, adding them to those that they already provide for both customers and other CSPs.
Rackspace ramps
Rackspace, for example, has ramped up its overall support for Microsoft with the addition of extensive new support for Azure. According to the company’s Chief Technologist, Jeff de Verter, the aim is to take cloud out into other services and provide Intensive Support for Azure, targeting the users that are looking for applications support as well:
Azure and its support is being modularised. Customers can buy just a couple of options that fit their needs, and buy the support for them. Azure has some 84 components all told, though we are targeting the IaaS elements of Azure to offer both the services and support.
de Verter acknowledged that it could be argued the company is a bit late to the Azure `party’, but suggested this was just a case of waiting to move when the market was ready and the need tangible:
Historically we have never been first to a party. Of course we like shiny new tools like anyone else, but better still are the ones that customers want to use.
The company already has extensive experience of supporting Microsoft applications and infrastructures, so he is confident that its Fanatical Support team already has the expertise needed, especially as it is aiming to target users looking to add Azure to a wider infrastructure and applications mix. This means the company is able offer customers a single pane of glass through which to manage all their operations, both Azure and Openstack.
The company is not running Azure itself. Rather, it is providing users access and use through their Rackspace nodes around the world.  And now that Microsoft has added at least limited support for Linux within Azure, the ability for users to mix and match the most appropriate environments for specific applications and services, while building up a unified management front end, could be an important lever for both Rackspace and Microsoft.
Odin, nee Parallels, expands
Another partner offering customers the opportunity to mix in Azure-delivered services with others is Odin, which many will know better by its old name, Parallels. (A deeper dive into how Parallels’ cloud services and hosting operation became Odin, and why, will appear soon on diginomica).
Coming together
The company’s key customer base is CSPs looking to provide more comprehensive Azure services to the existing, largely Microsoft-based, services the company already provides. These partners can now use the Odin Service Automation to automate end-to-end service delivery, customer management and billing across Microsoft Azure services, Office 365, and the Enterprise Mobility Suite, as well as the other Odin-enabled services.
According to a statement from Alex Danyluk, VP of Alliances at Odin:
The Microsoft CSP program opens up new opportunities for partners. Service providers who work with Odin are able to future-proof their Microsoft investments by having access to the latest offerings, such as Azure, through the Odin Service Automation platform.
Available services in the Microsoft program have expanded from Office 365, Windows Intune and Enterprise Mobility Suite to include Azure and CRM Online. Service providers can also deliver hybrid cloud offerings based on Azure technologies. These use the Windows Azure Pack for building out on-premise services.
The CSP program is available in two tiers, with Tier 1 aimed at high-end Odin partners looking to provide an end-to-end customer experience, including full customer support. The Tier 2 program targets the majority of its partner community looking to sell Microsoft cloud services.
In both cases, the objective is to add Azure to the mix of services these partner companies provide, arguably a role Microsoft itself cannot really take on itself (for example, who would believe them?). It is also far closer to the real world of many of its existing customers as they contemplate the cloud and its potential.
My take
Putting Azure into a position where it can be a component in a larger, richer, corporate mix of hybrid infrastructure is certainly a sensible move. And if Microsoft extends this thinking it will adjust its marketing plans to avoid all mention of technology or other wonders like that. If it plays to technology it will lose.
Instead it should play to the needs of business for continuity and consistency. Moving to the cloud will not be a walk in the park for any business, but it will be essential. So if they can take most of what they use, and know, with them it will be that much easier – and far easier than the inevitable rip-and-replace moving to new technology options will require.
Read more on: Cloud ERP financials and supply chainCloud platforms - infrastructure and architectureInfrastructure 