
 
Drink it like Beckham
This is going to be a period of brilliant disruption.
Comments about disruption are of course commonplace in the consumer sector, but often these are lamentations about the impact of change on existing business models. That’s not so much the case at PepsiCo where CEO Indra Nooyi is upbeat about the food-and-beverage giant’s progress in e-commerce channels – plural. She explains:
I say channels, plural, because we’re addressing growth opportunities across e-grocery, pureplay, urban grocery delivery, direct-to-business and direct-to-consumer models.
That proclaimed success is the end result of significant investment in digital,m including creating a dedicated global e-commerce business unit:
Today, we have a team of roughly 200 e-commerce professionals supporting our businesses to capture growth in the rapidly emerging e-commerce channels. It’s made up of seasoned e-commerce and tech professionals, combined with our best entrepreneurial talent from within PepsiCo.
We’re managing this unit more like a tech company than a traditional CPG (Consumer Packaged Goods), from how and where they work, the risks they can take, to how they are compensated.
Tech spend is seen as an increasingly essential elememt of PepsiCo strategic direction, particularly in relation to creating “value-added relationships” with customers. Nooyi explains:
We continue to fortify and enhance the full suite of capabilities that we believe will enable us to win in these channels, from data analytics to specialized e-commerce supply chain knowhow.
For example, using big data and predictive analytics to shape real-time marketing messages, dynamic merchandising, and tailored offers, our team is enabling us to drive greater purchase instrumentality and higher basket size for our customers online.
All of this is paying off commercially, she adds:
As a result of these efforts, we have a business that’s approximately $1 billion in annualized retail sales with impressive growth in key e-commerce markets. For example, this year, our e-commerce retail sales are projected to be up 80% in the United States and nearly double in China.
In many cases, our online share exceeds our offline share and we are gaining online pretty much across the board. While overall penetration of food and beverage remains relatively low compared to most of the categories, it is growing fast and its development is sure to be highly dynamic, and we believe we are well-positioned to win in this space.
Digital comms
There’s also a leaning towards digital platforms when it comes to marketing and comms, with Nooyi talking in terms of:
tweaking our consumer communication with sharper brand messaging on pack, at point of sale, and through traditional, social and digital media.
But it’s a case of having a flexible approach rather than a wholesale commitment to one channel or another, she adds:
It’s how much and in what. It’s better to invest in pull activities than to hit the pedal on push activities. When you start getting into this competitive battle of more and more promotions, we’ve been there, done that. I don’t think that’s a way to create long-term, strong businesses. So, we’ve tended to focus more on innovation and pull-related spending, more A&M (advertising and marketing) spending.
The shift to digital is a question mark because I don’t know what the ROI on digital is as yet. We’re relooking at all elements of our marketing spending to see exactly which method of spending gives us the best ROI by brand. So, that’s a piece of work we are doing.
The thing to be careful about is this industry should not escalate to going from push spending to pull spending and everybody throws a lot of money into this business. It’s going to be a judicious management of this business, where you’ve got the right amount of A&M spending and judicious execution, so this business remains profitable going forward.
As for that disruption she refers to, this obviously isn’t limited to PepsiCo. CPG firms across the market are going to have to re-evaluate their direction, advises Nooyi:
As we look forward, we’re still looking at retailers, if they want to deliver margin growth in a period in which they’re seeing price compression, they have a couple choices. They can do private label or they can get more efficient or they can get innovation to the stores from the big manufacturers that drive more traffic and velocity.
From our perspective, doubling down on big brands, making sure innovation and making sure execution is perfect, [that] our whole system is aligned, so when we have to make changes, we can do it fast. And then within our company, making sure we have enough levers on productivity so we can get more and more efficient deploying automation and other tools to be able to put it back on innovation, driving the topline growth, whatever we have to do. I think that’s going to be the game going forward.
This is going to be a period of brilliant disruption over the next three to five years and we’re [all] going to approach it with pessimism or optimism. We actually think this could be a time when a lot of competitor balances could be reset. And as perhaps the largest US company in food and beverages and the second largest food and beverage company in the world, believe me, we will play an outsized role in this resetting of the competitive balance.
My take
PepsiCo quietly set up its e-commerce business unit a couple of years ago, but hasn’t really gone big on talking about it until now. The reason for that is, inevitably, the Amazon factor. At arch-rival Coca-Cola Co, there’s also a bigger focus on online relignment, so expect to hear a lot more about the e-commerce credentials of both fizzy drinks behemoths in the years to come.
Image credit - PepsiCoRead more on: Digital and content marketinge-commerceRetail e-commerce and the omni-channel 