
PepsiMojis
Coca Cola is often cited as a digital leader, referenced by tech providers such as Salesforce, SAP (SuccessFactors) and ServiceMax as being a prime example of an innovative customer.  I’ve seen fewer references to rival PepsiCo, which is unfortunate as a primary strategic objective of the firm is to find ways to connect with digital-age consumers. 
Or as CEO Indra Nooyi puts it, the challenge is around: 

connecting with consumers in the age of social and digital media and the purpose-driven consumer. 

To that end, PepsiCo is looking to a number of integrated digital and offline marketing outreach programs, such For The Love of Sports. Built around PepsiCo’s Gatorade brand, this is a US campaign that encourages athletes to think about and hold on to that moment when they were younger and further in love with sport. Nooyi explains: 

The multi-faceted campaign features a national retail promotion, TV commercials, and a unique cause initiative that encourages consumers to vote for deserving sports-focused organizations to which Gatorade will donate on their behalf.

While social media outreach will be critical, the retail component is built around creation of limited-time-only bottles featuring athletes such as Usain Bolt, Serena Williams, Paul George and April Ross with a special callout of the For the Love of Sports cause initiative. 
Gatorade has partnered with a 19 sports-focused non-profit organizations, five of which were selected by a roster of athletes featured on the limited time offer bottles. For the remaining 14 organizations, consumers will have the opportunity to vote for their favorite online to receive donations that will help athletes pursue their love of sport.
Elsewhere, digital outreach is being used in a bid to get consumers to keep eating porridge in the summer months, tempting them via means of online tutorials and education to promote the concept of ‘overnight oats’. Nooyi explains: 

We have collaborated with influential foodies to bring consumers quick and easy online tutorials on how to make delicious and nutritious jars of chilled overnight oats perfect for days when you just need a simple, no-cook recipe.

As well as this, there’s a use of crowd-sourcing in the shape of a Bring Your Best Bowl contest, a nationwide search for the next Quaker oatmeal flavor. This is an ongoing exercise, says Nooyi: 

Millions of consumers submitted creations using two to five ingredients, along with their inspiration behind their idea. Three finest flavors are now being developed by Quaker and will be revealed on around National Oatmeal Day, which is October 29. The selected flavors will then be made available in stores across the country for consumers to taste. Then it’s up to America to vote online before the winning flavor is revealed in February of 2017.

In similar mode, consumers are being asked to go online to decide which flavors of Lay’s potato chips should survive and which should go, Nooyi says: 

Consumers were invited to visit flavorswap.com to vote for their favorite flavor in each of the four flavor swap matchups. We received millions of customer votes, drove tremendous social media buzz and consumer engagement and strengthened Lay’s brand awareness in regard.

Emojis
So far, so X-Factor, a good use of social media and online engagement. Rather more innovative is an initiative involving emojis in a new way. Nooyi explains: 

To support trademark Pepsi this summer, we’re taking the world’s global language, emojis, offline in a visually striking and socially-shareable campaign, inviting consumers to Say It With Pepsi from a smirk to a kiss to a wink. This initiative connects cola lovers around the world through a common language that is uniquely and definably Pepsi.

The PepsiCo design and innovation center has created more than 600 PepsiMoji designs, all incorporating the brand’s iconic globe shape and the colors of blue, red and white. Nooyi expands: 

Both globally relevant and locally significant PepsiMojis designs come to life across the full Pepsi portfolio and also beyond packaging in unexpected ways such as a fashion collaboration with designer Jeremy Scott.
The limited edition Pepsi with Jeremy Scott Capsule Collection includes six styles of emoji-inspired sunglasses featuring PepsiMoji designs. We have partnerships with famed photographer, Ben Watts, as well as Daniel Arnold, a street photographer with one of today’s most enviable Instagram followings. Their work shares the story of #PepsiMoji in the same non-verbal vein as emojis themselves with a quirky, candid and playful tone.
We also have localized experiential content from vending machines in India that dispense Pepsi product adorned with the PepsiMoji design that matches users’ current state of mind to online engagement in Argentina where consumers can create a personalized PepsiMoji design or use PepsiMoji accessories to fashion their selfies. And we also have a free PepsiMoji keyboard app that can be downloaded at the Apple App or Google Play Stores.

It’s a big initiative on a global scale, says Nooyi: 

Global television and original digital creative also showcase how communicating through PepsiMoji icons can lead to unpredictable and memorable adventures and experiences. And consumers around the world have already begun to experience #PepsiMoji in the US, Australia, Canada, India, Mexico, Russia and Thailand. The global campaign is being featured in more than 100 markets around the world in 2016.

Back-end
Away from the consumer-facing front end, PepsiCo is also investing in digitally-empowered tech to improve productivity in the back-end, says Nooyi: 

In addition to marketing, we’ve also continued to invest in critical capabilities like R&D, the establishment of our global design center and the creation of our global e-commerce group. To capture productivity, we are increasingly leveraging automation and advanced technology, as well as the development and deployment of global best practices, all to make our supply chain more efficient.

In common with global firms the world over, PepsiCo has spent more than its fair share on ERP over the years. Nooyi says the firm is now seeing some benefits from that: 

We spent a lot of effort, time, and money on putting in an ERP system when we invested in SAP. We started that way back in 2000 and we’ve been doing that for the last 10 or 15 years. Putting in an ERP system takes time, takes money, and now we’re beginning to see some of the benefits from that ERP implementation. As we complete a lot of those implementations, we’re able to take out the costs from those implementations and start to realize the benefits. So it’s streamlining the supply chain, the organization, smart spending, and now the increased leverage from the SAP investment.

There are, in fact, now hundreds of supply chain productivity projects being rolled out across PepsiCo, she adds: 

We’re implementing automated high-speed packaging lines across the globe, increasing packaging line speeds by up to 50%, while at the same time eliminating the bottleneck to total production lines and significantly reducing labor costs.
To improve our water use efficiency, we have developed and are implementing technology and processes that capture sugar and starch from wastewater streams. The waste sugars and starches are then sold as byproduct. The resulting water stream can then be repurposed for secondary manufacturing uses such as sanitation. This not only generates incremental cash flow and saves money, it also reduces our water usage to advance our sustainability agenda.
Our global operations group is identifying and then lifting and shifting best practices developed by our manufacturing teams around the world. For example, our manufacturing team in Romania developed a refinement to our potato cutting process that can reduce raw potato waste by up to 2%. We’re now implementing this process improvement in other plants around the globe.

Such a diversity of programs is paying off, says Nooyi, and on a globally-transplantable scale: 

We’re capturing significant savings by using advanced logistics planning processes and tools, which enable us to optimize both the mode and routing of material transport. These tools initially developed and deployed in North America have been expanded to nine more countries and are generating 3% to 4% savings in transportation costs.
In key markets, we’ve also advanced our third-party transportation procurement process by consolidating all transport-origin destination pairs across our food and beverage businesses to present to the market for competitive bids. And we have the opportunity to expand this process to many more markets.

Such investments are being combined with careful budget controls, concludes Nooyi: 

Productivity is also being captured through the implementation of our smart spending program, which is driving meaningful reductions in key discretionary spending areas like travel, facilities and consulting. We’re attacking spending on both rate and volume dimensions.
So, for example, we’ve reduced meeting-related travel by insisting on the use of teleconferencing in place of physical meetings in many instances. And as a result of all of our productivity efforts, we’re capturing significant savings that are delivering meaningful margin improvement and also providing the funding necessary to invest in the long-term health of the business.

My take
That PepsiCo is investing time and resource in the back-end as well as on gimmicky front-end social media-assisted consumer engagement campaigns, is a plus point here. While finding new ways to connect with the digital customer is clearly important, running the most efficient supply chain possible is mission critical for a global giant like PepsiCo. Sixteen years on from starting to spend on ERP, it sounds as though the benefits are coming through. 
Image credit - PepsiCoDisclosure - At time of writing, Salesforce, SAP and ServiceMax are premier partners of diginomica. Read more on: Collaboration sharing and digital productivityCRM and customer experienceDigital and content marketingDigital enterprise in the real worldRetail e-commerce and the omni-channel 