
If you were able to turn tables on your performance management process and rate it on a 1 to 5 scale, how would it score?
For Jason Averbook, chief executive of performance and engagement firm, The Marcus Buckingham Company, it would probably be a 1. He believes (along with a tranche of other HR experts) that performance management is in need of a major rework.
At the HR Tech World Congress last month, Averbook outlined the three major shifts needed to fix performance and talent management. The first of these shifts, he says, is for HR tools to move away from serving organizations to serving teams:
The next era of talent management is about teams, because guess what, that’s where the work happens.
HR today is too focused on organizational structures and job codes, notes Averbook, but that doesn’t reflect what’s actually going on in companies:
That’s how we organize all our systems, yet, in most cases, only 20% of the work that you do is actually visible to your manager. The rest of the work is to do with the team that you’re on. …but at the end of the year, who’s giving you your performance review?
Another problem is that teams are made up of contingent labor, vendor and freelancers, as well as regular employees. Most HR systems simply aren’t designed to cope with this ad hoc team structure.
Regardless of any technology, teams will only flourish if they have good leaders. These leaders share three attributes, says Averbook:
The best team leaders understand the strengths of their employees, they know what they are doing and how they are feeling – all the time.
So, to be effective, leaders must understand the strengths of their team members, as opposed to their competencies or their weaknesses. They need to know what their people are doing on a day-to-day basis rather than through a yearly performance review.
Finally, they need to know how their team members are feeling.
It’s about chemistry
 To illustrate the importance of team dynamics, he uses the example of his kids playing FIFA on their Xbox:
My kids will take the best players in the world and put them in a team and they won’t win.
His point is that success is down to more than a team’s list of competencies, you also need to understand the chemistry between the players. He adds:
When we think about the data we have on talent management what do we have, a 3, 4 or 5 and competency models. You get a lot of ‘stuff’, but it is not going to help with this.
The second important shift in performance and talent management is that organizations must start to use real data; not big data, but real data.
Today’s performance management is based on bad data. When managers rate someone they cannot escape the “idiosyncratic rating effect”, which basically means that their rating has more to do with their own attitudes and experience than the employees they are rating. A manager who is lousy at time management is likely to award any employee with a modicum of expertise in that area highly, when it’s likely that their performance is below par. As a result, says Averbook:
The data that goes into all talent management data is bad. So all that work we’re doing to rate people is not good.
360 reviews are not the answer – they merely multiply the problem, as more biased opinions are added to the mix. Increasing the number of reviews to four times a year won’t help either; the result will be simply more faulty data. As Averbook eloquently puts it: “The process is just screwed up.”
Better data
In contrast to many HR experts, Averbook is not suggesting scrapping ratings altogether, but changing the nature of questions asked:
We’re not getting rid of rating. We need ratings; we need data to judge people, to make decisions about people. But what we need is accurate data.
The questions are not asking the manager to make a judgement about an employee’s performance, instead they are asked for their opinion: would you like to work with Boris again? If you could promote Boris tomorrow, would you do it?
The third shift is to move away from competency models to looking at behavior and understanding employees.
For Averbook, this is all about finding out people’s strengths. Out of a choice of nine strengths, everyone will have a couple they excel at:
For example, I’m a teacher/influencer. Those are my two. I know that those are my strengths and when I’m at my best I’m using those two.
That’s important because it’s what Averbook terms “frequent strength-based check-ins about near-time, future work” that drive engagement. In other words, people feel more engaged if they are regularly given the chance to do what they do best. Averbook says:
So how do I move from models to behavior? I have to know my people and the way I know my people is not based on what they learned in school or their competencies, but what their strengths are.
Averbook’s final point is that for performance management 2.0 to work it has to be
Jason Averbook
timely. Team leaders need feedback immediately, not four months’ time after HR and senior management have all taken a look at results. Averbook says:
Twitter is the measure of now. I’m not waiting 10 weeks to get my evaluations back from you all, I’m getting it now. So your engagement has to be tied to this whole idea of the measure of now.
My Take
Few would argue that there’s something very wrong in the house of performance management. One of the key elements of current process that has come under fire is the obsession with rating systems.
What’s interesting is that Averbook and the Marcus Buckingham Company’s approach is not to scrap ratings altogether. They recognize that organizations still want that dashboard info on their workforce’s engagement and performance.
Instead, Averbook’s new-approach performance management embraces the subjectivity of the rating rather than pretending that managers’ views are purely objective.
Averbook talks a lot of sense about the importance of teams, leadership and enabling employees to play to their strengths.
And any approach does that does away with the dreadful word ‘competencies’ has to be a good thing.
Read more on: Talent management 