
Taking the medicine
The idea behind personalized medicine is that, based on your own personal genomic sequence, lifestyle and environment, it will in future be possible to tailor therapeutics to ensure they are optimised for you as an individual.
Somewhat confusingly for the beginner, however, the term “personalized medicine” tends to be used interchangeably with “precision medicine”. The former expression is the one favoured by the general public as it makes care sound more individualised, according to a market research study undertaken by the Washington DC-based Personalized Medicine Coalition (PMC).
But “precision medicine” is the term preferred by scientists, academics and politicians, not least because it reflects the current state of play. Hanno Ronte, partner at Deloitte’s healthcare and life sciences team, explains: 

‘Personalized medicine’ gave rise to the notion that different treatments and drugs would be used for each individual – and that may happen, but it’s a very long way away. ‘Precision medicine’ is preferred as it refers to groups of people with the same genes that you can base treatments on. It acknowledges that even for relatively common diseases, treatments don’t work equally well for everyone, but better for some than others. So ultimately it’s about using huge data assets to help understand how to create better interventions.

Whatever you choose to call the approach though, it first made its appearance in the wake of the human genome being mapped in 2003. This breakthrough promised the possibility of creating more targeted medicines and other interventions, ultimately leading to more effective clinical outcomes. 
But it also promised better outcomes for pharmaceutical companies too. Tim Hoctor, vice president of life sciences solutions services at Elsevier R&D Solutions, which provides data and technology tools to researchers and engineers, explains: 

Pharmaceutical companies are looking at how they can reduce their failure rate. In the past, if only 30% of people responded in a drugs trial, the trial would fail immediately. But if you can identify what that 30% has in common and test and deliver therapies to them, you can optimise your research and get better outcomes.

At the national level, personalized medicine is also being seen by countries such as the US and UK as a means of gaining competitive advantage. As a result, both are investing heavily in the area, which includes creating the necessary research infrastructure. 
The UK, for example, set up the ‘100,000 Genomes Project’ in December 2014. As the name implies, its aim is to sequence 100,000 genomes from 70,000 NHS patients and their families with a rare disease and/or cancer in order to act as basis of a new genomic medicine service. 
Early days
In the US, on the other hand, President Obama launched the Precision Medicine Initiative (PMI) in his State of the Union address at the start of 2015. At the same time, he also pledged $215 million to support the Initiative, which included $130 million for medical research centre the National Institutes of Health to create a “cohort” of a million volunteers. 
These volunteers are providing a raft of data about themselves ranging from their gene profiles and medical records to information about their lifestyle. The aim is to undertake big data-based analysis of it all in order to understand what drugs work on whom and why.
But even before the impact of such research is anywhere like being felt, Amy Miller, the PMC’s executive vice president, claims that the sector, although in its “early days”, has already reached a “normative plateau”. 
To make her point, she indicates that “a significant minority”, that is 28% or 13 out of a total 45 novel new drugs approved by the US Food and Drug Administration in 2015, could be classified as personalised medicine. This situation continued a trend started the previous year when nine out of 41 such drugs were authorised for use.
The most popular application to date has been in areas such as breast and lung cancer. But despite this, Elsevier’s Hoctor believes that there is still a long way to go before such an approach hits the mainstream and becomes pervasive. He says:

In my estimation, it’s still very, very early days. We’re still defining the science, the principles, and are trying to understand what the data means. But once we understand that, we’ll be able to look at more applied tools and algorithms. We also have to look at the data over time, so we need 20 to 30 years of understanding how predispositions lead to disease. Then we’ll have much more context. We lack that today, but once we have it, we’ll be able to move forward much more rapidly.

But he acknowledges that the long lead-time means that it will be challenging to obtain the necessary multi-year funding. Although initiatives such as PMI are good for profile-raising, for instance, its future remains uncertain once President Obama leaves office. Nonetheless, Hoctor is convinced that personalised medicine will continue as a research priority no matter what happens. He explains: 

It absolutely won’t die. There are too many people who have committed to researching into this and they recognise it takes time. So there’s no way it’ll die, although whether it can be accelerated is another question.

He also points out that it is not just academics who are showing interest in the area. IBM has already spent more than $4 billion building up its Watson Health division to get in on the action. Google, Amazon and SAP, meanwhile, are all carefully positioning themselves as pioneers in the space in a bid to offer pieces of the underlying technology infrastructure puzzle too. 
But there are a number of other hurdles that will have to be surmounted before personalised medicine can really take off. For instance, the fees associated with sequencing the genomes, or even genes on which this approach is predicated, may have already plummeted.
Questions and challenges
But the cost of processing and storing every citizen’s fully-sequenced genome (7Gb of data each) has failed to keep pace, which means that the cost of introducing a national programme would be huge. There are also considerations for doctors choosing to undertake gene sequencing on a more limited as-required basis. Deloitte’s Ronte explains:

If someone comes in with a cough, how many diagnostic tests does a doctor run? It could be ‘flu or lung cancer, but should they test for other possibilities too? Or should people carry a card detailing their full genome data or store the information in a secure area of their mobile phone?

A further challenge, particularly in the US, is that each individual’s medical data is usually scattered across silo’d systems that rarely talk to each other. This situation can make it difficult to obtain an holistic view in terms of their lifestyle and other factors that influence health.
But the problems don’t end there. To date, only one private health insurance company in the country is prepared to pay for genome-sequencing. The PMC’s Miller explains:

Over time, it will be covered by health insurance companies, but we need to demonstrate the data. So in theory, you can do a lung biopsy and five different tests, or do one genome sequence of the tumour. But today, foundation one is only covered by one large insurer, which found it to be more cost-effective.

Cost is also an important issue for the pharmaceutical companies developing personalised medicine-based drugs. Their concerns centre on the fact that lengthy clinical trials and approval processes mean they currently need to spend the same amount on drug discovery as they ever have, despite the potential audience for each drug being smaller – a scenario that will inevitably hit profitability. 
In a bid to tackle the problem, therefore, the UK government, for one, is currently exploring ways of possibly accelerating the clinical trials process without endangering patients.
But another potential worry for big pharma relates to the viability of its business model into the longer-term. As healthcare moves from an interventionist approach when things go wrong towards more of a preventative stance, it poses questions around how the pharmaceutical industry will maintain its own financial wellbeing.
Beyond such economic questions, however, there are also various socio-political ones. Deloitte’s Hanno explains: 

So if everyone gets a gene sequence at 18 and you’re told you have a high chance of breast cancer, what are the moral implications, who needs to know and who decides? Research indicates that 1/3 of people say ‘yes, I want to know so I can proactively manage the situation’. Another third say ‘no’, and the last 1/3 say ‘it depends if I can do anything about it’. So there are philosophical questions to be answered about how much it’s good or right to know.

But there are also questions over just how open to abuse this kind of information could be too. For example, in 2008, the US passed the Genetic Information Nondiscrimination Act, which prohibits health insurance companies or employers from using genetic information to discriminate against individuals. But the PMC’s Miller says that the limits of such legislation have already been recognised and so: 

It’s a conversation that’s just starting.

My take
Despite the huge potential benefits of personalized medicine for public health, the approach appears to raise as many questions as it answers – not least the societal and environmental impacts of increasing human lifespans even further. 
Disclosure - SAP is a premier partner at time of writing Read more on: Healthcare transformationMachine intelligence and AI 