
Healthcare giant Philips will today unveil a prototype connected application designed to help people with diabetes better manage the condition. This is the first of a line of connected healthcare solutions for chronic conditions that the company plans to build on its HealthSuite Digital Platform, which brings together data from electronic medical records, personal health devices and other sources.
The prototype app also incorporates technology provided by cloud CRM software giant Salesforce, and will have its first live public showing on stage later today at the vendor’s Dreamforce conference in San Francisco.
400 million people worldwide live with diabetes, which is the seventh leading cause of death in the US and generates healthcare costs of $245 billion a year in the US alone. Those with the Type 1 form of the disease must carefully monitor their blood sugar levels and constantly have to think about the potential impact of factors as diverse as what they choose to eat and do, or how stressed they’re feeling. This typically adds up to as many as 180 separate decisions throughout the day as they think about what action they need to take to maintain their blood glucose at the right level.
Philips worked with patients and researchers at Netherlands-based Radboud university medical center (Radboudumc) to understand how an application could support people living with this form of diabetes. Dr Carla-Krystin (ck) Andrade, director of product management for the HealthSuite Digital Platform explained in a pre-briefing last week:
They told us the five or six key pieces of information they want to have at their fingertips to make those decisions.
They worked with us iteratively to be able to say, this is the functionality I need.
The application presents the information via smartphone or tablet, showing important parameters such as blood glucose levels, insulin use, or nutrition, and includes a coaching function that provides advice and guidance. There is also a secure online community where patients, clinicians and caregivers can interact via private messaging or shared posts. In this way, patients can get online feedback and advice from their care team using the combined data and can easily share experiences.
An important element is giving patients more participation in healthcare decisions. Lucien Engelen, Director REshape Center at Radboudumc, who will demonstrate the app on stage today alongside Jeroen Tas, said in prepared remarks:
By collaborating with Philips, we’re creating the digital framework necessary to make data actionable and transform how patients engage with their caregivers and social community.
Connected health data
The application is the first of its type to use the Philips HealthSuite Digital Platform. This connected platform aggregates data from electronic medical records, from personal health devices, such as wireless glucose meters or activity monitors, and from the patient’s own input directly into the app, including their assessment of emotional factors such as mood and stress.
The HealthSuite platform will become the foundation of a series of applications that could ultimately revolutionize healthcare, according to Jeroen Tas, CEO of Philips Healthcare Informatics Solutions and Services. In an interview with diginomica last year, he explained that by bringing together information from all these different sources that provide the historical context as well as real-time metrics, it becomes possible for the first time to focus healthcare on optimizing the ongoing treatment that long-term, chronic conditions like diabetes require, instead of simply applying acute care when things go badly wrong.
What you can see here is that we’re starting to connect these dots which were never connected … It only works if you combine that data and make it actionable.
We want to make sure that everybody in that journey understands what the ultimate outcomes have to be and how you can guide every participant to understand how we can optimize to get a better result for the patient.
That’s why we created this digital platform — this will be the core infrastructure for every product that we bring to market going forward.
Dr ck Andrade, Philips
Philips has had to surmount two significant roadblocks to be able to consolidate the data into the HealthSuite Platform, Andrade told me.
The first is literally finding and connecting data. There are different components on the platform that integrate to the electronic healthcare record and into device cloud technology to uptake data from connected devices.
An important standard that the platform builds on is the Fast Healthcare Interoperability Resources (FHIR, pronounced ‘fire’) being developed by the Health Level Seven International (HL7) standards organization. This builds on previous healthcare data interchange intiatives while adding RESTful web services APIs and other modern web technologies. It allows Philips to structure the data in a compartmentalized data repository, explained Andrade.
This allows us to house patient data in one data tenant and the institutional reocrds in another data tenant, and then reconcile data across different tenants. This was one of the first challenges, how do you get data in and then match it and have it all in one longitudinal database.
Protecting patient data
The second roadblock was the need to manage security and identities to address stringent regulatory requirements on data protection that often vary between locations. It’s not merely a question of keeping each patient’s data private to them and their caregivers. A patient may not wish to share all of their healthcare data with individual clinicians — for example, they may not want their mental health record to be visible to their endocrinologist. Andrade explained:
The service layer constrains the transactions people can do, and there’s an identity management wrapper that manages the authorization. One of the key elements when you have all this data is the concept of who has permission to see what.
One of the things that Philips has a long tradition of, is being able to work with large volumes of medical data and be able to deal with all these regulatory and security requirements.
While separate from the recently-launched Salesforce Health Cloud, the Philips diabetes application to be demonstrated today uses a combination of Salesforce components to present and work with the data provided by the Philips HealthSuite platform, said Andrade.
We were working with the Salesforce team as they were developing Health Cloud on having a good integration so that we could pass the data from the Philips Health Suite Digital Platform into the Health Cloud data model.
Salesforce announced its Health Cloud platform earlier this month.
My take
Today’s announcement by Philips is an important milestone on a multi-year journey that will see the healthcare giant transformed from a product company into a data management and software applications business. This transformation was an explicit strategic choice the company made two years ago, as Jeroen Tas explained when I interviewed him last year:
You can resist it or you can jump right in and be an agent of change. We opted for the latter.
Connected computing is at the heart of this transformation, bringing data together in the HealthSuite digital platform and then presenting it on smartphones and tablets in the hands of patients and their caregivers. What we call the cloud is now becoming pervasive in every aspect of people’s lives, and the business transformation it has set in train at Philips is a harbinger of the change in store for every enterprise that has the foresight to harness its full potential.
Disclosure: Salesforce is a diginomica premier partner. My travel to attend Dreamforce has been funded as part of a paid consulting engagement with Vlocity, a Salesforce ISV partner.
Image credits: courtesy of @Philips.
Read more on: Collaboration sharing and digital productivityCRM and customer experienceHealthcare transformationInternet of Things 