
A loyal core customer base and growing e-commerce presence aren’t enough to drive growth in a disrupted retail sector. That’s the realisation that’s dawned on Alisdair James, the recently-appointed CEO of US houseware chain Pier 1 Imports, as he contemplates the challenge ahead to transform the firm’s fortunes.
The company has just reported a first-quarter loss of $3 million compared with a loss of $6 million a year ago.  E-commerce grew to 24% of total sales, up from 19% a year ago, but comparable-store sales were flat year-on-year. So it’s not surprising that James sees digital investment as a priority with an expectation that online could end up accounting for up to 50% of total sales:
Our digital footprint has grown rapidly over the past five years and in the first quarter accounted for nearly 25% of our total sales. We will be exploring opportunities to leverage the solid foundation we have in place and to build on the steady momentum we’ve gained over the last five years. In the coming months we will be further exploring and testing enhancements that we believe will see us accelerate sales growth in this area. Key areas of focus include increasing our assortment breadth and using machine learning tools to better target our promotional investments to our customers.
But as with so many other traditional retailers with an real-world presence, Pier 1 needs to strike an omni-channel balance between offline and online – and that means looking long and hard at the retail real estate. The chain is currently about half way through “a store optimization plan”, which translates to the closure of 100 stores before the end of fiscal 2019, leaving the portfolio at approximately 965 stores.
James says that those stores are an asset and remain profitable. They will, he argues, be an important part of the mix moving forward:
I’ve been able to get in the robust study that’s been carried out at a granular level, literally store by store and which is guiding our optimization plan. The role stores in today’s world is changing as our customers gravitate toward more experience driven environments. Pier 1 Imports stores are an integral part of our supply chain and offer shopping experiences coveted by our loyal customers.
Talking to new customers
So the challenge is getting customers back into the stores. Part of that involves offline in-store events, but it’s also a case of changing the outreach to customers about the Pier 1 brand. In this latter respect, digital and social platforms will come into play, says James, particularly to bring in new customers, not just preach to the converted:
What we’ve seen is brand traffic improvements as a result of our TV advertising campaign that we ran. But what we’ve also found is that predominantly we’re speaking to our core customer via our TV advertising…There is clearly the opportunity for us when we look at our overall marketing spend around by both direct mail, digital, particularly social and then TV. We split those relatively the same across those three and clearly the opportunity for us is we develop new customer outlook and approach to getting to a newer customer is to use digital, social and other means as well as TV.
Talking to a broader customer constituency and understanding their needs through more effective analytics is another priority, he adds:
When you look at our core customer, and we can see this now across our database of customers we have, where the vast majority of our transactions now are captured. We therefore have an ability to know who those customers are. Now it’s a relatively tight core customer, roughly around the age of 50 years of age and household incomes are over a hundred thousand. So when you actually look at that kind of customer, and you see the person that likes the Pier 1 product at the moment, and you then look at how many of those live within five to ten miles of our stores, we are talking to most of them.
So the real opportunity for us is to therefore speak to the customers that we aren’t speaking to currently and to actually take a smaller share of a new group of customers whilst continuing to talk to our core.
There is a need to invest in greater analytics capabilties, admits James, and the timing of when these will be in place is a few months away yet:
Realistically this is a significant piece of work we’ve kicked off as a business, which will take us four months to bring to fruition. Then we’ll be able to be much, much clearer on the timings behind that.
But there is one immediate big positive on the tech front that excites James:
We have just have been able to fill a CIO position. We had an individual accept that role this week and he will come to the organization with lots of knowledge of Artificial Intelligence, machine learning, digital online pureplay stuff as well as retail.
My take
These are familiar challenges for the 2017 retailer, but Pier 1 Imports is another timely reminder of the importance of continuing to reach out to new customers rather than just relying on your core audience. To achieve that and to shift brand image, digital investment is a valuable tactic.
Image credit - Pier 1 Imports Read more on: Retail e-commerce and the omni-channel 