
111th US Senate class
Earlier today, the US Senate passed the USA Freedom Act. It will restore but reform the expired Patriot Act’s spy measures. Crucially, it snuffs out – at least for the time being – the indiscriminate collection of data by the NSA which has caused significant angst on both sides of the Atlantic. Those with a political agenda will no doubt spin this to their convenience but of one thing we can be sure, the twin topics of privacy and surveillance ain’t going away.
We have written extensively about the implications of broad brush surveillance powers, initially revealed by Edward Snowden in the US but also in the UK and Germany. Most recently, our own Derek duPreez said:

If we leave the Republican party politics to one side, this is an incredibly profound moment in the NSA’s 63-year history. Say what you like about Edward Snowden, his revelations have led to a much needed discussion about how comfortable we are with the NSA’s surveillance powers.

On the ground so to speak, Tim Cook, CEO Apple today delivered a blistering and thinly veiled attack on both Google and Facebook saying:

I’m speaking to you from Silicon Valley, where some of the most prominent and successful companies have built their businesses by lulling their customers into complacency about their personal information. They’re gobbling up everything they can learn about you and trying to monetize it. We think that’s wrong. And it’s not the kind of company that Apple wants to be.

On Facebook, uber firehose Robert Scoble, referring to Cook’s words had this to say:
This is why my Apple watch sucks. It behaves the same no matter where I am, who I am with, or what I’m doing. Really, now, Apple is falling behind here. Does it matter to sales? Nope, because Apple has the rich people.
At least my privacy is intact on it, though. Well, except Apple knows my heart rate, knows where I am when I have a high heart rate (exercise, excitement, sex?) It’s just too bad that Apple isn’t using that data to improve my products.
Meanwhile Facebook’s feed gets better. So does Google Now. How will Siri get better? Only if Apple starts betting on the future, which means getting people to put more of their private details into their phones and putting more sensors into their phones. Right?
To put this in context (sic), Scoble has a chili rammed firmly up his ass on privacy, taking the view that you have to sacrifice privacy in order to get the context that helps improve products and that context trumps everything. At the risk of sounding utterly foolish, I prefer to play back to Scoble Edward Snowden’s recent words:
Some might say ‘I don’t care if they violate my privacy; I’ve got nothing to hide.’ Help them understand that they are misunderstanding the fundamental nature of human rights. Nobody needs to justify why they ‘need’ a right: the burden of justification falls on the one seeking to infringe upon the right. But even if they did, you can’t give away the rights of others because they’re not useful to you. More simply, the majority cannot vote away the natural rights of the minority.
In short, commercial interests, however powerful and allegedly well meaning, have nothing to say on this topic unless we allow them to remove rights currently under discussion and which have become the center piece of many technology debates in both the consumer and enterprise tech worlds.
Let’s also consider what’s happening around Scoble’s much beloved Facebook. In 2013, a survey suggested that people below age 45 were much more concerned about privacy in the post-Snowden era. This is on point. Jeff Chester of the Center for Digital Democracy notes:
The U.S. digital giants, including Google, Facebook and Yahoo, want the U.S. Trade Representative to help them become powerful commercial versions of the NSA. Americans must be assured that the administration won’t trade away their privacy rights to help expand the information collected by the NSA and U.S. data companies.
In January 2014, US based research data published on Time showed a dramatic decline in Facebook users in the 13-17 and 18-24 cohorts. Pew Research suggests a more nuanced picture emerging from 2013-14 for adults who are online:
Facebook continues to be the most popular social media site, but its membership saw little change from 2013. The one notable exception is older adults: For the first time in Pew Research findings, more than half (56%) of internet users ages 65 and older use Facebook. Overall, 71% of internet users are on Facebook, a proportion that represents no change from August 2013.
Every other social media platform measured saw significant growth between 2013 and 2014.
That data doesn’t include the 13-17 cohort although yet more research suggests that the 13-24 age group is still vitally important, not especially going away but more to the point, active in their Facebook usage.
In short, the emerging picture is one that varies at least according to age profile but is often confusing unless you have the contexts of age, gender, geolocation and race. This brings me back to the topic of context and how we can view privacy from an enterprise perspective.
As far as I can tell, Facebook does no better a job at presenting me with adverts than any other platform. Despite the obvious claims to collecting and sifting data to provide a more personalized experience, the most common complaint I have and hear from colleagues is the lack of context.
Scoble’s main argument sounds persuasive but look at the 22 hoops you have to jump through in order to get its algorithms to present the information you want? It’s a HUGE task. Will the average person do any or all of this? Why should they? It utterly destroys Scoble’s argument about the work being put in by the social media giant, all the while it continues to suck up data in an effort to provide more contextually relevant ads. I’m not buying it except to the point of arguing that whatever Facebook is doing, it’s not doing it very well.
Instead, I am much more persuaded by Vinay Gupta’s argument (see video at end) about the use of blockchain technology as the democratizing mechanism through which we can all mediate our interactions with any business. While Gupta’s narrative is rooted in what appears to be a deep distrust of the power of large companies like Facebook and all that is politically implied, there is a tantalizingly attractive logic that could serve to solve many of the problems we face around privacy today. For example, he poses the question: want if we had all pitched in $100 to being Facebook to market? Interesting as a concept? You bet.
I will have more to say on this later but it is becoming abundantly clear that whatever side of the political fence you fall on, the US legislature has finally demonstrated that it is willing to be persuaded – even if that means by unorthodox means – to re-open the debate on privacy and, by implication surveillance issues. That has to be welcomed.
None of this of course resolves the tensions that have emerged between the US and its so-called allies. The situation in Germany for example is particularly schizophrenic.
So what about the enterprise? All the SaaS vendors I speak with are nervous about privacy issues. Contrary to what I thought back in 2007, all have been reluctant to talk about the data they collect or the uses to which that data is put. It always struck me as blindingly obvious that if you can anonymize data to surface patterns among large numbers of user then you have the bones for exceptionally valuable insights. That may be true but so far, none of those same vendors have demonstrated an appetite to become vocal on the topic. Why? They are afraid that it could mean the kiss of death.
Regardless of where this story goes, and you can be sure it is far from over, some of the rights of individuals which have been trampled upon are back in play. Nothing the new USA Freedom Act brings in prevents the NSA or other agencies from collecting data. But now they have to be far more considered. At least for the time being.
In the meantime, we should all be watching this topic carefully both as individuals and those engaged in enterprise related topics. While surveillance may seem to be a matter that impinges upon our relationship as individuals with the State, the commercial implications for the Google’s and Facebook’s of this world are just as important – in this context.

Read more on: Data privacyRegulation 