

It really compares, if you can think about it in this way, to a wedding, a new baby, divorce and moving house all happening in the short space of time to you. God forbid it does. But that’s the sort of challenge that we have.

 That’s the colorful, if somewhat downbeat, assessment of the past 12 months from Jim McCarthy, outgoing CEO of UK discount retailer Poundland, which this week has attracted unwanted takeover attention from South Africa retail giant Steinhoff. 
Poundland last week reported a plunge in pre-tax profits to £5.9 million in the year to 27 March, down 84% year-on-year from £36 million. In large part this was caused by difficulties in managing the takeover of rival discounter 99p Stores following an “unwelcome and lengthy” competition probe.
Poundland has become one of the most familiar brands on British high streets in recent years, offering a single price point range of heavily discounted products. It’s the kind of store that customers drop into to buy specific items, but typically emerge with more than expected after finding an unexpected bargain. 
It’s a business model built heavily around bricks-and-mortar retail, but as noted last year,  the firm is experimenting with digital offerings in a bid to carve out a more omni-channel approach. Paul McDermott, Poundland’s head of e-commerce, told diginomica in December: 

We are pretty confident that there is customer demand. We know that the economics are different for us [as a value-based retailer] – we may have to adapt our offer, or adapt our range online – but we have launched with our eyes open; we want to be a full multi-channel operation.

Flash forward six months and the verdict from McCarthy is cautiously optimistic, although online sales are only making a “small contribution” to overall revenues: 

It does make a contribution, albeit small. Is it a loss-maker? No, it’s not. It makes a net contribution to the business, but it is relatively small.

The firm launched its transactional website in September last year. There’s an underlying hint from McCarthy that suggests that this was something that the firm felt it had to do, rather then necessarily wanted to do, stating that 

We have to be in this channel…It would be remiss, I think, of Poundland not to absolutely explore the opportunities that online gives, because customers want to use that channel.

That said, he adds: 

In my view over the longer term, this will deliver much – a Black Friday opportunity, multi-price deals, mainly incremental opportunities. We’re still learning, still early days, but we’re making good progress.
We think that the web site needs to be easy to navigate, and we’re doing things on that. We do lot of research on it. The operation itself works really well. We have good partners in handling and distribution. We are refining our range or our assortment that goes through that. And we are applying some creative thinking to the opportunities that are bound from it.

Data library
One area that is attracting investment is Poundland’s trail of multi-price format stores, Poundland and More, where products don’t just cost £1, but can scale as high as £150 for garden furniture. Everything is still heavily discounted, but there’s considerably more flexibility of pricing. This format is now running in six trial stores. 
What is emerging from this trial is what McCarthy refers go a data library of spending patterns, analysis of which is helping with the firm’s “opportunistic” approach to conditional spend items – items that cost more than £1. 
This is an area that got the company into trouble with the Advertising Standards Agency (ASA) last year. The ASA took exception to claims on the Poundland website that: 

“Everything for £1 was the idea of our founders in 1990 and we’re still true to that great vision today”, “Everything for £1 was the idea of our founders in 1990 and we’ve grown to become the largest single price value retailer in the UK”, “The same amazing price since 1990!” and “We are very proud to offer you a single £1 price, that hasn’t changed since we opened our first store”.

This is now something that the firm is using data analytics to manage differently, says McCarthy: 

We’ve been very careful with that in our Poundland stores. You have to spend a pound to be able to qualify for that. But the value is so compelling, so profoundly persuasive, that these conditional spends sell quite well. Within the range of those products, there are some clear winners. So we’re also learning from that. We have a lot more data now because of our six, 12 stores on the multi-price. 
It would also be fair to say that the execution of the conditional spend in our stores is sub-optimal. It varies. We haven’t really got it absolutely where we need it to be. And that’s something that we are working on internally. But this is a feature, I think, for us going forward. It is to an extent opportunistic, but I refer again to this data library that we’re now able to achieve out of the multi-price stores, which gives us a little bit more clarity.

My take
McCarthy steps down as CEO at the end of this month. If Steinhoff makes a successful bid for the firm, the future direction of Poundland may change, although the South African firm has bet heavily on e-commerce, acquiring a majority stake in Hungarian firm Extreme Digital last year. That said, looking at the Steinhoff portfolio, valued at £14 billion worldwide,  Poundland seems an unlikely addition. If no bid comes or is unsuccessful, the digital direction for the £1 champion will fall to new CEO Kevin O’Byrne, who’s expected to expand on his own strategic objectives in the coming weeks. 
Image credit - Poundland Read more on: Retail e-commerce and the omni-channel 