

Jason Averbook
You should spend about 45% of your time on people, 45% of your time on process and 10% to 15% of your time on technology. I realize that adds up to more than 100, but that’s the way our jobs are.

So says Jason Averbook, a long-time HR thought leader, speaker and author.  People, process and technology has become a well-used phrase, but it a great way for HR to focus and think through what its aims are. All too often, Averbook notes, organizations put too much emphasis on the technology portion, and not enough on the more important ‘Ps’ of people and process.
It’s important to refocus on these basics, according to Averbook, because there’s a perfect storm coming to HR, “probably the biggest storm our industry has ever faced”, as the complexity HR faces grows daily. But rather than a force of destruction, this perfect storm is an opportunity for positive change and improvement.
Averbook says that HR should focus on year 2020 as a keystone to focus on changing HR: 

I think workforce 2020 is a great rallying cry for you. It’s an opportunity to say the workforce has changed, expectations have changed, data has changed – how do we prepare for this? Because if we don’t, we’re going to lose our number one asset.

To put the department into shape, HR professionals need to identify what HR needs to be great at and what things are perfectly acceptable to be just okay at. What is the key thing that HR wants to be known for (and it isn’t payroll expertise). This must happen before any HR technology solution is bought, says Averbook:

You must not buy a thing until you know this. Because it impacts how you deploy, it impacts how you market, it impacts what your data’s going to look like.

Another important consideration is for HR to ensure that it is not mixing up strategy (a three to four year roadmap with agility built-in) with making plans (a list of tasks to complete). 
When Averbook asked the audience of HR professionals whether their HR department had a true strategy or just and HR plan, the balance tipped in the direction of planning.  But, the problem with a plan rather than strategy, notes Averbook, is that:

This creates shadow systems, a lot of expenditure and a lot of mess if people don’t understand what the long-term HR strategy is.

Implementing strategy needs the right people in place. A show of hands by HR professionals at the event revealed that many did not have change management people in the core HR tech team. Similarly, not many had data tsars, yet, Averbook asserts:

These skills are going to make or break what we do.

Another important people skill is to have story tellers, who can interpret for business people what the data HR is providing really means and point the way to what to do with the data.
Terrible at data
The HR profession “is terrible at data”, says Averbook. The companies that will move forward are the ones who can use data and tell stories about data:

We are way, way, way, way behind when it comes to data. And it’s not bad, it’s just a rallying cry. We have to realize that data is sexy….Data is power and data is the capital of the future.

Averbook continues:

We make decisions made on data so if we are to seen as more strategic based on how we use data – therefore not using data correctly or not getting it, we’re going to make bad decisions.

On the process side, HR must avoid the temptation to create a long list of vendor requirements and features, that aren’t really relevant to what is actually needed. Instead of bombarding vendors with a list of must-haves, Averbook suggests:

Tell them what your outcome is going to be, what the data is you want and you’ll get a much better response.

For every process, the equation has to be A+B = V, where V is value. The biggest reason we make mistakes with our processes is that we don’t think like consumers, about what their experience is like and what is really relevant. 
Processes in the past were designed for the HR department, but they must now be developed for the workforce who will actually use them.
HR needs to think holistically. It’s no use having a talent management function that doesn’t talk to talent development, which doesn’t talk to the core HR function and so on. The data may be all over the place, but employees don’t care and it shouldn’t make any difference to their experience. Averbook adds:

The easy thing is to copy where we’ve come from and the hard thing is to think differently about what that looks like. Our processes haven’ been designed for today.

To do that takes innovation.  Again, old-style HR was not designed to innovate:

Most HR organizations are designed to manage risk. From that 0.1% that do something wrong. But what about the 99.9% that might do something good?

So instead of being compliance driven, HR needs to build innovation for that 99.9 %. 
Only with the people and processes in place, should companies look at the technology component.  After all, great technology without the people and process elements in place won’t deliver value; but average technology with the people and process elements in place can still provide value.
My take
Although technology is increasingly part and parcel of the HR world, it is very much in third place behind people and process.
Disclosure - Averbook was talking at the HR Tech Summit in London. Read more on: HCM and the digital future of work 