
One highlight of SAP Controlling 2015 is seeing how customer views on analytics and HANA have evolved. The early years of the conference showed customer skepticism and confusion on SAP’s HANA roadmap. Analytics discussions were mostly limited to SAP Controlling tweaks and SAP BW.
Two years later, customers views on HANA have matured – though S/4HANA raises new questions. Views on analytics have also expanded, as customer grapple with options ranging from real-time/operational reporting, predictive analytics, and incorporating machine data (yes, I avoided the big data term as I did not hear a single customer use it during the conference).
To get a handle on these shifts, I taped a podcast with SAP Mentor Julien Delvat (Talking predictive and new SAP HANA use cases). Our podcast begins with a broader look at the rise of predictive before shifting into two SAP HANA scenarios Julien Delvat of Alta Via Consulting has been developing/investigating that are not widely known. Here’s a few highlights from our discussion.
Before we dig in, as a frame of reference, SAP Controllers typically have finance/accounting backgrounds, and deep expertise configuring and analyzing SAP financial modules. As such they have found themselves as important voices in the evolution of SAP HANA. SAP Simple Finance, which is at the heart of SAP’s S/4HANA solution, directly impacts their job functions and skills.
The rise of predictive analytics
Delvat, Controlling 2015
I asked Delvat if he had also seen a rise in the sophistication and emphasis on analytics discussions at the conference. Short answer, yes:
I think that what’s changing is people are moving away from just data collection and manipulation and into analytics. With better tools, they can not only look in the rear-view mirror, but try to look at today, and hopefully in the future. It’s very interesting to see this shift over the last four years of the conference going from very transactional, operational issues to people saying, “Well, let’s talk about this analytics vision, Simple Finance and those new analytical tools.”
But can the solutions live up to their own ridiculous hype levels? I asked Delvat, “Do you think it’s possible for people to get a business result out of predictive, and if so, how would they go about that?” His response:
Joking aside, there is value. Let me give you an example. Imagine you are an international company and you have multiple SKUs. You are selling through various distribution channels, so planning is a nightmare. It takes months if you want to do it correctly. Because you can’t, because of that volume, what happens is that you have to aggregate it. You just plan that region, or you plan that product group or customer group.
But what if you could use a tool like predictive analytics, and analyze all your sales data from the years before, and then propose a plan for next year, and then you only have to tweak it? Most of the ground work has already been done. So if you want to assess a new product, or a move into a particular country, the tool can do most of the ground work for you.
I brought up the example of a consumer packaged goods industry customer I spoke to over lunch. The have a global supply challenge and spoke to us about their quest to find a predictive solution that could incorporate Chinese market data and weather patterns in real time, both of which impact supply and demand. They were evaluating SAP and non-SAP solutions, including HANA. The cost of HANA was a concern, but they were still in the mode of evaluating predictive functionality across vendors. Delvat added:
Predictive goes beyond the data you have internally. You have to go into big data, even though the term’s a little cheesy. We had another presentation from Brazil that was also very interesting. As you know, currency is fluctuating, and if we can use that data to make better decisions – not next year, but today, that’s very important. I think we should be able to use predictive in analytics, but also in operations, and that’s really the next step where it makes a lot of sense. We can get value there.
But even as customers asked informed questions about analytics capabilities, they also shared their users’ struggles making sense of the data, and their current SAP system. So how does Delvat reconcile the sexy analytics future with the data overwhelm some customers expressed?
I think the key word in is “exception.” Let the robots handle common transactions, where you receive an invoice and it’s exactly the same amount as you expected. Focus on the exceptions. I think somebody was saying, “Well, you know, our consumption doubled. What happened there?” Manage my exception and then use that external data to predict it, or do something about it.
A new S/4HANA scenario – Central Finance
Full disclosure, this “Central Finance” scenario is not entirely new. Delvat first blogged on it in May (Deployment Scenarios for Simple Finance as Central Journal – it Depends). But now SAP has branded this scenario (as Central Finance), and in at least one slide presentation I witnessed, is positioning it alongside Simple Finance as a use case option.
What is the appeal? For older SAP customers, S/4HANA is a major migration. Central Finance is “sidecar” scenario that brings a much faster time to go-live, albeit with more limited use cases and functionality (You do NOT have to upgrade your SAP ERP release to go-live on Central Finance). In August, Delvat blogged on one interesting use case, How SAP Simple Finance as Central Journal supports Mergers and Acquisitions. On the podcast, Delvat detailed this S/4HANA scenario:
Let’s say you are a large corporation that through historical or technical reasons, has more than one instance. You’re trying to have a global view on anything from cash to risk to planning. Now, imagine you want to move to an S/4HANA platform. If you want to move to just one single instance, it’s going to take forever because just master data is so different from one system to the other.
Delvat sees companies in heavy acquisition mode as prime Central Finance candidates:
I was talking to some companies, especially in the pharma business, that acquire constantly. They said, “Well, we know we have only fifty instances, and we’re going to scale down to forty and that’s going to be (only) a three years project.” It’s like, “Well, what do you get after three years?” Now, of course, you don’t have to be that complicated. Imagine you only have two or three.
If you want to go to S/4HANA on three different instances, you have to upgrade to HANA on three different instances. Another way to look at it is with Central Finance. There, you have one central system – a new instance – where you install your S/4HANA system. Then, you use SLT, SAP Landscape Transformation, to get data at the transactional level from everywhere.
And the benefits?
First, you don’t change anything – so no change management. You don’t change anything from your operational systems. You just replicate all your data to the new one, and you now get a view across all services – at least from the financial side. You know your cash position everywhere. You can do planning at that level, and it’s real time, even on the operational systems, because it’s replicated to that system and that system has Fiori apps and UI. Now, you can get the Fiori app without ever changing your operational system… Now, it’s a special use case but I think it’s a very valid use case because it’s not disruptive.
Product Lifecyle Costing – lessons from a co-innovation
We wrapped the podcast with learnings from Delvat’s involvement in SAP’s Product Lifecyle Costing solution. This solution was a co-innovation project jointly developed with SAP, customers, and ASUG members such as Delvat. First up? Why was the solution needed? Delvat:
The idea is that in your current ERP system, let’s say you want it do product costing, which is a complicated task. It works once you go to production, but for any product not in production, it’s challenging because master data is incomplete. There’s a lot of collaboration required to get that information.
In other words, if you’re designing an elaborate product, it’s very difficult to cost it inside of an SAP system until it’s out in the world as a finished product. Product Lifecyle Costing addresses this through two capabilities, including a new product design function.
It runs on HANA – though Delvat was careful to note in his SAP Controlling presentation that HANA is not required. Or, to be more specific, a customer doesn’t have to have an on-premise HANA license. The solution could be serviced from the cloud by partners, via, for example, an Amazon AWS instance.
But the co-innovation aspect is the interesting part. Delvat was part of team that was tasked with coming up with a productized alternative to custom development in this area:
I worked with the development team to solve that problem. We wanted to do a new solution, but we wanted to do it right. To do that, SAP started an interest group through ASUG. As Chairman for Managerial Accounting at ASUG, I was able to help in trying to get customers involved. We had more than thirty customers giving their input over about two years.
We started with design thinking, putting up post-it notes in Newtown Square and in Germany. Then we moved on to prototypes, and giving feedback on early mock-ups that had no programming behind it. Then pre-releases, and now, it’s going to be a released in two or three weeks in Newtown Square. That’s the official launch for the Financial Excellence Forum. It’s very exciting because it’s really the product of collaboration between customers, experts and SAP.
And that’s a good note to end on – and I hear through the grapevine Delvat might have landed his first Product Lifecycle Costing customer. That’s what I call a good community development result.

You can also download the podcast.
Note: the embedded podcast is the short version, which you can also pick up on my Busting the Omnichannel iTunes feed. For the full podcast, including the SAP HANA use case talk, check out my SAP and Enterprise podcasts page.
Image credit: photo of Julien Delvat by Jon Reed. Feature image: hand holding Crystal Ball © violetkaipa – Fotolia.com.
Disclosure: ERPCorp paid the bulk of my travel expenses to SAP Controlling 2015. ERPCorp is a paid client, and I am part of the founding team that launched the SAP Controlling conference. I was compensated for my work at SAP Controlling 2015, including keynote facilitation and panel moderation. However, this article and podcast was produced on my own initiative. ERPCorp produces the SAP Controlling conferences independently of SAP. This year, SAP was a paid sponsor of the conference with a hosted demo lab for attendees. SAP is a diginomica premier partner. Diginomica has no financial relationship with Julien Delvat or Alta Via.
Read more on: Analytics planning and data analysisFinancialsInternet of Things 