
Food manufacturer Premier Foods is probably best known in British households by the names of some of its best-loved brands: Bisto gravy, Ambrosia custard, Mr Kipling cakes. But over the last decade, the company has sold off many others in order to tackle its debts and secure refinancing. These have included Hovis bread, Robertson’s jam, Crosse & Blackwell pickle and Fray Bentos meat pies.
The ups and downs in Premier Foods’ fortunes have naturally seen staff numbers fluctuate – and with it, demand for service-desk assistance when computers go wrong. The sell-off of the Hovis bread business in 2014, for example, saw a 50% reduction in the volume of support calls, prompting a move to a third-party provider of helpdesk services for incident management and service request fulfillment.
With that contract due to run out in November 2017, it was reassessed last year. According to Simon McKenzie, service delivery manager at Premier Foods, it was decided that the company could do a better and more cost-effective job internally – but only with a new in-house service desk team, using a new IT service management (ITSM) tool.
Introducing Freshworks
For this, Premier Foods has implemented Freshservice from software-as-a-service provider Freshworks to support more than 2,000 end users across 15 sites through a self-service portal for IT requests. A team of 57 agents, meanwhile, manage service requests, events and tickets via Freshservice and the product’s application programming interfaces (APIs) enable the Premier Foods IT team to integrate with monitoring tools and back-end systems.
Premier Foods began its subscription to Freshworks at the start of the company’s new financial year, on 1 April 2017. Within five weeks it had gone live on the Freshservice change management modules, followed by the problem management modules in July.
These were functions that Premier Foods had kept in-house while other service desk functions were farmed out to the third-party provider. With new software in place to handle them, the next step was to implement the software for tasks handled by the provider, says McKenzie:
With the November end of contract on the horizon, we went live with incident management, service request fulfilment and the self-service and mobile portals, all by 23 October. But the software was only a component of our go-live, since we were also onboarding and training a whole new service desk teak internally, as well as a new third party provider for out-of-hours support.
Condition of service
One condition put to that new out-of-hours service desk provider, he says, was that it would agree to use Freshservice to win Premier Foods’ business. Having different tools used for in-hours and out-of-hours service desk functions, McKenzie knew, could lead to big problems. He’d seen it before, during the previous service desk contract, when the provider used one tool for incident management and service requests, and Premier Foods used another for change management.
We stipulated from the very start that we wouldn’t even entertain the idea of having mixed systems. We said, ‘Either you use this tool, or we’re not interested.’
Despite being a big user of Servicenow, the new provider agreed and the go-live went smoothly. Today, around 38% of end-user interactions with the service desk come through the self-service portal, as opposed to phone calls, and that’s up from around 10% when the system first went live. McKenzie’s pretty pleased with that uptake – and with the positive feedback from end users and service desk agents – but he is looking to get a larger proportion of contacts coming in via the portal over time, he says:
Ideally, it would be 100% but in a business like ours, that’s not really feasible, because there are groups of employees, especially in factories, who don’t have web access to use the portal.
For now, he’s starting to consider how this new set-up at Premier Foods might benefit from a side-serving of artificial intelligence technology.
In particular, we’re looking at chatbot technology, because it makes sense to me to position a chatbot on our end-user facing portal so that it can automatically provide password resets and provide information around frequently asked questions. We would integrate that chatbot with Freshservice so that, as it answered queries and carried out actions, it would log a ticket for each interaction in the system, so we could track what was going on.
After all, a good proportion of calls into the service desk are pretty routine. Many don’t really merit the time and attention of a service desk agent – so why not let a robot take the strain as Premier Foods searches for new efficiencies in its revamped service desk operations?
Image credit - Image free for commercial useRead more on: Digital enterprise in the real worldIT service managementThe new professional and IT as a serviceUse cases 