
Steve Lucas – president platforms SAP
When I commented upon Steve Lucas keynote from SAP TechEd2015, I attempted to address the way things are having to change for developers. For its part, SAP has work to do. In a follow up video conversation, I got some additional nuance on certain of the points. There’s plenty of good news for developers.
Here are the highlight quotes.
Steve’s unspoken background:
[My father] taught me how to program in Fortran and COBOL
On the need for simplicity:
I really do believe that the IT infrastructure that’s been proscribed to us is too complex
On digital core:
I may not be able to perfectly articulate what a digital core is yet, but I can tell you what it isn’t. 57 applications from nine different vendors somehow glued together with some EAI, that isn’t a digital core.
On smarter applications:
I refuse to spend the rest of my life clicking OK when inventory is low, my machine should make that decision for me.
Lumira — dead or alive?
Very much alive. Lumira cloud will be absorbed into Cloud for Analytics. Frankly there is a very clear and lucrative desktop market for visualization but it’s narrow. I have a fundamental beef with visualization and here it is…making my data prettier isn’t going to prevent me from going out of business if my numbers are bad.
On the app marketplace
We have a few of those, we need to consolidate it. I don’t want to say that it’s the Wild West but it’s not far off that analogy…we need two, an app center and app store…I’m the first to agree, the app center, this is a beta, it’s not finished, it’s not polished.
On developers and finally nailing the thorny problem of developer licenses:
It is very clear that SAP is going to a much more developer oriented world…relying on a very large ecosystem of developers to build and extend upon [the core]…so today and forever, HANA Cloud Platform developer licenses are free and they will always be free, Vora developer licenses are free and will always be free. We haven’t launched it yet but Cloud For Analytics, we’ll do the same.
The money shot:
If you’re a developer and you’re not getting something for free, Tweet me. (@nstevelucas)

Disclosure: SAP is a premier partner at time of writing and covered most of my travel costs to attend SAP TechEd
Read more on: Cloud ERP financials and supply chainInfrastructure 