
Eager beavers need more than they are offered
More and more countries around the world are adopting a greater services profile. So, naturally, when a number of new and existing ERP vendors started creating their new cloud-based solutions, service industries were the go-to verticals for their new application software.
But, is this software materially different from the Professional Services Automation (PSA) and Project Portfolio Management (PPM) software of the late 1900s and early 2000s? Not really.
The new breed of solutions are, for the most part, mobile, cloud and collaboration-first solutions. Some functions, like travel and expense processing are slick and polished because of the way mobile use has forced the development agenda. The cloud makes most of the apps valuable for information retrieval anywhere there’s a live connection to the Internet.
But more work is needed. Here are some areas I see requiring leadership and not refactoring:
Service workers are people. It’s uncommon to see a PSA vendor possess a great and deeply integrated HCM (Human Capital Management) solution. Sure, they may have a superficial HCM solution of their own or they can integrate some other firm’s HCM with their product but that’s not the full extent of the issue. Not by a long way.
Service workers aren’t “Bodies” although that’s what many technology vendors and systems integrators call their staff. It’s not just insulting and demeaning but it speaks volumes as to how these people, their careers, input, etc. are perceived within their firm. Calling them “captive service” providers is no compliment either.
When companies like this go shopping for a PSA solution, they don’t think about their human capital. They just want a solution that will let them track time and bill clients. Nothing more. ERP or PSA vendors that enable this kind of behavior should be admonished.
When companies see people as faceless, interchangeable bodies, they fail to see that these people have career wants and needs. A large number of service people want a career and not just a job. They may want recognition for a job well done. They may want to someday become the company CEO. They may want training in something other than the new release of the company’s product. Without tools, tracking and visibility into one’s services organization, how can companies correctly:

Prevent attrition
Create powerful leadership development initiatives
Determine their succession plans
Staff people on the projects that will stretch their skillset and make them more valuable to the firm

PSA providers could do a better job of selling if they just listen for the word “bodies”. Firms that call service professionals ‘bodies’ don’t get the connection between engaged service providers and the financial health of their firm.
When PSA professionals are not recognized, valued and provided with career opportunities, they will leave. That alone creates a disruptive pattern of onboarding>training>working>attrition.
You only have to look at the fact that employee attrition among the Indian heritage outsourcers is a key reporting measure to realize that the creation of a meat grinder mentality has given rise to its own outcomes, often in inefficiencies and poor utilization rates.
The poor employer will suffer high attrition, earn low net promoter scores and leave customers with a sour customer experience. Regardless of what the industry says, it’s all preventable.
PSA software badly needs enlightened HCM. Specifically, all PSA software needs talent management functionality married with resource management functionality. All PSA software needs leadership development functionality added to its scheduling software. All PSA software also needs to address engagement, rewards and other motivation empowerment technology. In short, the people side of PSA is in help of real help.
Accountability and ghosting
My career has been built around my delivering the services I sold. If I estimated a piece of work at a given scope and price, I and my team have to deliver to that. When you ‘eat what you kill’, you are personally accountable for what you sold. Your career and income rise and fall with these deals.
Many technology and other firms have separate sales and delivery groups. The sales person, who may have never run a project before in their life, will create the project plan, assign resources and cost out the work. If the deal gets real competitive, the sales person might shave the scope or work estimates to get the deal under the prospect’s budget requirement. Once the deal is signed, Sales throws it over the fence to Delivery to figure out how to get it done. The sales person gets their commission and they’re off to the next prospect.
Who gets burned in this scenario? The service people often do as they’ll end up working lots of extra and unbillable hours to get the project completed. These are unfavorable, unplanned work variances. Some firms dictate the number of hours a staff person can bill on a project regardless of the actual effort that will be required. That practice, known as ghosting, is unethical and it deprives these workers of the pay they should receive.
Few PSA systems I’ve seen tie back the original plan by Sales to a revised plan by Services to the actual work required. Few project managers want to show these unplanned work and fee variances to their superiors as they fear this will reflect badly on them when the culprit was a lack of oversight and control on the development of the project estimates to begin with.
PSA vendors need to make ghosting impossible and the reporting of planned and unplanned variances a mandatory output of all deals.
Goal alignment
Integrators and contractors may, in some cases, be interested in flooding clients with lots of change orders and running up the meter. Clients want them to hold to their work and scope estimates. Channel partners and other third parties can enter the mix with their, often conflicting, goals, too.
PSA products often capture a number of data points about the administration and planning of an initiative but do they really help the parties get aligned before the project kicks off? Sometimes, when I’ve used contractors, I’ve been burned by:

Staffers needlessly running up project hours
Overly frequent substitutions of personnel
One contractor firm trying sabotage, squeeze out or undermine another firm’s workers

Alignment should be something determined at the beginning of a project and re-examined at each progress checkpoint. PSA solutions need an alignment module that determines alignment/misalignment at every step of the project.
Intrusive VMOs
Currently, there are two really bad trends with buyers of services: the use of vendor management organizations (VMO) and a requirement that all service arrangements must be under a master services agreement (MSA).
VMOs are, in my opinion, some of the most intrusive, brand-destroying and counterproductive organizations out there. They ask contractors to submit copies of their incorporation documents, copies of real invoices issued to other customers, tax-id information, corporate insurance policies, a lot of personal stuff that’s none of their business, and yet is often demanded in the name of compliance.
They may not guarantee they’ll protect this information and they may not tell you why they need this. One VMO, a student of the Marquis De Sade I suspect, put me through this hell just to get paid $500. This payment didn’t even meet 1099-MISC reporting standards. I’ve heard that some of the worst VMO’s arbitrarily change the payment terms the contractor had already worked out with the customer. And, the software some of these firms foist on contractors is downright unworkable.
If there’s a brave PSA vendor out there, they should create a contractor payment process and network that’s fair, reasonable and easy to use. If they do, the world will be their oyster.
Out of control MSAs
The MSA concept is currently out of control. It seems that a subset of lawyers is agog about these as a full employment solution for bored or lazy lawyers. Some corporate legal groups see every contractor as a work-for-hire toiler who will give away all of their intellectual property to the company and accept heinous payment, liability, indemnification, non-compete, non-solicitation and other terms.
In my experience, seriously lop-sided or inappropriate MSAs seem to be the rule not the exception. What many of these legal groups lack is an appreciation for the variety of contracted services out there and the different ways these deals can be structured.
In some cases, a contractor might staff several people on several projects for possibly several years and they should have a detailed MSA. But, a contractor that was brought in to do one simple service like repair a machine, shouldn’t trigger such an instrument.
In the way that HR solutions have an onboarding module, PSA vendors should create a contractor onboarding solution for larger deals and a different but fast, easy on-boarding solution for one-time contractors. It should never take more time to slug it out with corporate legal re: the MSA than the project’s total elapsed time. Recently, I did two days of work that required an additional 75 days to get the MSA completed. I still haven’t been paid and I doubt that I’ll assist that firm again.
A plea
PSA vendors need to create a new work relationship toolset for contractors and 1099s. The reputation of companies is often determined by how easy they are to do business with. At a time when skills are badly required, firms that force fit everyone through horrendous practices will likely find themselves dealing with sub-optimal resources that, in the end, cost them more than if they had thought through how to attract the best talent.
Please PSA/PPM vendors, fix this!
Image credit - via © Rob Byron - fotoliaRead more on: Future of workHCM and the digital future of workProfessional servicesThe new professional and IT as a service 