
Organisations making use of data visualisation and BI tools should keep them well away from the hands of the IT department if they want to successfully democratise data, according to two public sector spokespeople at Tableau’s Conference On Tour this week in London.
Neil Richards, business intelligence specialist at HESA (Higher Education Statistics Agency), and Robert Radburn, BI development team Leader at Leicestershire County Council, both agreed that what is needed to drive the better use of data across an organisation is evangelists that are willing to spend their time working closely with the ‘business’ and spreading the word of how and why data visuals are useful.
Much like many companies prior to implementing a more structured and visual data tool, both HESA and Leicestershire County Council were operating in Excel silos or using in-house developed solutions – which are notoriously difficult to extract useful information from and aren’t exactly user friendly.
Richards explained that implementing Tableau allowed his team at HESA to focus on becoming data experts again, rather than managing or maintaining systems that simply weren’t effective. He said:
We have a solution that was designed in-house, that was around 2007. This allowed universities access to the data we hold. It was seen as very clunky. It did the job, it allowed them to get data into very simple charts. But there were quite a few restrictions on what they could do.
We were getting to the stage where people were finding out about Tableau and other things. They were getting data and going and doing their own stuff. So we then wanted a solution that could integrate with one of the leading suppliers and it meant that we as an organisation could stop being software developers. We didn’t have to do the in-house solution and could then move back to being data experts again.
HESA’s use of Tableau is both internal and client facing – where those requiring statistics and information about universities and higher education institutions in the UK can create their own visualisations.
Whilst Radburn explained that Leicestershire County Council’s use of Tableau has grown massively over the past six years and has prompted the organisation to sort out and organise its back-end data. He explained:
We downloaded it in 2011. Just one desktop user. And we now have 35 desktop users. We have a Tableau Server core licence, with 600 users on that. We are a centralised team, so we cover the whole of the council. That ranges from children’s social care, adult social care, pot holes, grass cutting, to call centres. It’s very diverse.
In terms of how we use it, it’s a swiss army knife for us. Really what has happened is that it’s allowed us to go backwards. We have the front-end and what we’ve done is started reorganising the data so that Tableau can work more effectively
Radburn added that like many public sector organisations, Leicestershire County Council ‘doesn’t have any money’ and is facing 30% staff cuts year on year. But, he added, “you don’t waste a crisis”. His priority is making the jobs of those on the front line easier, through the use of data. He said:
What we have done is reorganise and we’ve now got a technical team, which I run. And what we’ve managed to do is sort out the data. IT always sorted the data and what we have done is move that over to us. We’ve got a SQL database, we have got access to the data and we create our own database schemas.
Our policy is to centralise our BI, we don’t want social workers mucking around in Excel. We build and they consume. We have super users within departments who have got Tableau desktop, but we don’t want social workers spending time creating visualisations, because that’s someone else’s job.
Don’t be cold
Both Richards and Radburn agreed that using BI and data visualisation tools creates the opportunity for data use to be more evenly distributed across an organisation, rather than held by just one person or one team. Both said that Tableau is easy enough to use that almost anyone can get stuck in an get some benefit out of it.
However, this won’t happen on its own. Richards said, for example, that the success of HESA’s use of Tableau “isn’t because my skill, but because of my evangelism”.
He added:
There are two buzzword phrases that we use. The one is that we like to think that it lowers the bar for access. And by lowering the bar, having access to interactive dashboards, it means that we are getting a lot more people from a lot more different departments, a lot more different roles, having an interest in accessing the data. That could be planners, marketers, senior staff, finance teams.
We also talk about the democratisation of the access to data as well. The impression I get is that in the past it has been one person in the organisation has access and they’re the privileged person to be able to have that. Whereas now, we can set different users up and set everyone up to have access to the data.
And the key is to be out there with the people in the business helping them to make the most of it. Radburn said that at Leicestershire County Council he spends his days wandering around with a laptop, sitting in meetings with social workers, or sitting in porter cabins with roader workers, showing them the data. He said:
That’s how you break down those barriers. The way we solve it is that we go out to people. We are not some distant, cold, tech team that sits in an office and never comes out.
Radburn said that he believes the key is to not let IT get hold of the tool and own it, because they often focus on the wrong priorities towards BI and data visuals. For example, he said that he often gets calls from other organisations that speak about the ROI, or procuring Tableau when it hasn’t even been tried – Richards believes this is the wrong culture and attitude. He said:
I think the bottom line is that you can’t let IT buy the product. We are all users of the product. In the past IT would buy the product and roll it out. The phrase I hate at the moment is, how are you rolling out Tableau? It’s not Windows 7. You’re not rolling it out. I hate it.
When are you going to train us on Tableau? If you can book your holiday on the Internet, you are pretty much done. It’s this mentality I just don’t get sometime. If you let IT buy the product and roll it out, that’s when you get all the problems. We evangelise.
Radburn said that he reckons his success rate when it comes to evangelising Tableau to business users is about 50%, where he acknowledges that half the time he works with people it doesn’t go anywhere. He said that this doesn’t matter too much, as Tableau means that he should only have to spend a couple of hours with the data and people involved to give it a go. It’s not resource intensive.
However, what he finds is that when he is successful, teams are simply looking for quick wins to try and help them make their jobs easier. He said:
I showed 50 social workers last week that we could see how many children were in care, and it would update over night and get an email, just a bar chart – and I nearly got a standing ovation. So the bar is quite low. You’re always grounded by the fact that people want quite basic stuff to just do their job effectively.
Image credit - Tauziehen in der Gruppe © Christian Schwier - Fotolia.comRead more on: Analytics planning and data analysisDigital government and public servicesUse cases

