
Devops and IT automation company Puppet Labs has today announced a new $22 million credit facility. But CEO Luke Kanies told me last week he has no plans to use any of that money, as there’s still plenty left in the bank from the venture-backed startup’s last funding round. Instead it provides an extra buffer as the company continues to mature and add scale, he says.
The credit facility is really about risk management. We aren’t going to spend that money. More than half what we raised in our last round is still in the bank.
We’re at a scale now where it’s reasonable to expect we can fund growth with earnings.
We expect to lose very little money this year and we’ll end the year cashflow positive.
The company’s devops and continuous delivery tools, which automate the process of setting up and configuring systems within a data center, are part of a trend that’s becoming more mainstream as enterprises adopt this more agile and industrialized approach to IT. In response, Puppet will have to grow up over the next couple of years, says Kanies.
2015 and 2016 are kind of our teenage years. For us this is really about beginning to transition on to the go-to-market model that’s going to work for us for the next few years.
We’re transitioning from the early adopters to the early mainstream. There’s just a real change in customer expectations.
Packaging devops
A big part of the transition, he believes, will be to package Puppet’s devops functionality so that customers can get results without having to put in as much effort as it currently requires.
I do think it’s time to ask what can we do as a company to ask less of our customers.
You’re not doing this because you love technology, you’re doing this because you have a real problem and you don’t have a lot of time to solve it.
So Puppet needs to look at how customers are using its tools and work on simplifying the way they work, he explains.
If it took this company six weeks and 15 steps, how can I make it so the next company takes two weeks and 5 steps to get to the same point? It’s obviously an iterative process.
Kanies acknowledges that evolving the commercial Puppet Enterprise product in this direction has to bring the community around Open Source Puppet along with it.
You have to be sufficiently coherent that you have an identity but sufficiently diverse and accepting that you can grow. How do you build in the company a shared perspective on how to find that balance between inclusivity and diversity in the community and the user base?
It is going to be interesting to see how it evolves. I think it’s just a healthy part of growing pains.
IPO on hold
Puppet also announced today that it is expanding its headquarters office in Portland, Oregon, to accommodate staff growth and has appointed former Genentech CFO Lou Lavigne to its board of directors and audit committee chair. Lavigne already fulfils a similar role at high-flying digital signature business DocuSign and Nasdaq-listed games maker Zynga.
The new credit line means that Puppet can afford to postpone plans for an IPO that some had expected early this year. The company has previously raised a total of $87 million from venture and corporate investors.
Kanies says he’s pleased to have secured the credit ahead of the current outbreak of market nerves.
Bankers and investors are always very happy to give you money when you don’t need it.
But whether the wider economy starts tanking or continues to grow, he sees a bright future ahead for Puppet.
In a bull market people are investing in innovation and expansion. In a bear market people are investing in productivity and cost reduction. We do well in both scenarioes.
My take
In negotiating this credit line, Puppet has avoided the past fate of others that had to accept funding on less-than-ideal terms while waiting out a delayed IPO. It has bought breathing space to weather any setbacks in the economy this year while it continues to scale out its business.
Like its main rivals, Chef Software and recent Red Hat acquisition Ansible, it continues to see fast-rising demand for what it offers as the devops bandwagon continues to gather momentum. As Kanies says, this market is now at an interesting juncture as it emerges from the early adopter phase and begins facing up to the demands of the early majority.
Image credit – Bearded puppet red cloak blurred background © plexitude – Fotolia.com. 
Read more on: DevOps NoSQL and the open source stackInfrastructureOpen source 