
It is not uncommon to hear people utter phrases such as ‘storage is storage is storage’ and repeat until insomnia is cured. But as was apparent at Pure//Accelerate, the San Francisco conference hosted by Pure Storage, the task of storing data is starting to change, really quite fast, and the name of the game is moving up the value chain.
But achieving this could be something of an uphill struggle for the company, not least because it has to get the acceptance and understanding not only of its end user community – a community that it is about to start buying not storage systems, but more business-oriented solutions – but also of its channel partners, to which it is committed 100% for the sale and delivery of product to those customers.
Pure is now taking its part in an experiment that is growing more widespread – where vendors of specialised corners of the overall IT spectrum start moving up the value-chain, looking to supplant the old guard of legacy systems vendors via ever-deeper bites into their established, ‘top-down’ approach to delivering business solutions.
It may well be one of the ironies of life that, as users shift to a strong top-down approach – shifting from an historical ‘what can we achieve with what is available?’ to one of ‘we need to achieve `X’, let’s find the elements which make that possible’ – the newer members of the vendor community are not just providing those elements, but are starting to grow them to take a bigger share of what the users are seeking.
Since the arrival earlier this year of AIRI, the appliance-like Artificial Intelligence Ready Infrastructure cooked up by Pure and Nvidia working together to combine the latter’s expertise with GPU-based AI processing systems and the former’s clout with large, fast solid state storage systems, the Pure model now very much maps onto the increasingly popular slogan that data is the new oil. The company is now pitching at new, higher value systems based on an over-arching data-centric architecture that positions the company as creator of higher value sub-systems for managing and exploiting large volumes of data.
Channelling a stumbling block
In Pure’s case, however, there may be a fly in the ointment. It is not the idea or direction that is the problem – and the following may sound harsh, but – with the company’s commitment to 100% of sales through it partner channel it may find its stumbling block.
The problem could be seen at the conference which was, as is quite common, divided into two parts, one for the end user customers, and the other for the channel partners. The end users showed every sign of ‘getting’ the story of rising up the value chain, with associated outbursts of whoops and cheers. The channel partners, on the other hand, met the news with stony silence, unless cajoled into desultory cheering by a presenter.
It was as though the idea of turning a, say, $50,000 storage sale into a $150,000 solution sub-system sale was completely passing them by, unrecognised and unloved. Maybe the collective thought process was `how do we sell that?’ and this was perhaps already recognised by Pure, which introduced a new partner tiering structure, where the top-level ‘Elite’ tier will be recognised not just on sales volume but more on their creation of a `practice’ based on selling Pure systems.
The only other tier now – called ‘preferred’ – may of necessity find themselves ‘unpreferred’ if they don’t look lively.
The likely solution may well end up with Pure building an end-user sales organisation that at least concentrates on pre-sales and project management, while fulfilment comes via the channel partners, for the signs were clear that the company and the end users are capable of talking the same language.
According to the company, research business Gartner says 80% of businesses will deploy AI by 2020, a prediction that puts AIRI (which combines Pure FlashBlade storage systems with four Nvidia DGX-1 GPU-powered computers) in a good position to fulfil a need for a standardised `commodity’ AI platform.
Working with commodity AI
One thing that is clear following the introduction of AIRI is the need the company now has to build a suite of reference architectures for how to use the company’s data-centric architecture and its core FlashBlade and FlashArray systems with other hardware and with specific applications services. This will certainly help the channel partners get up to speed in building specific solutions for end user businesses.
It will also help other third party vendors to take up the Nvidia position of working with Pure to build new solutions where utilising large data volumes of data are essential. There are a large number of possibilities here, but one alluded to by the company’s EMEA CTO Alex McMullan, is a future appearance of a multi-protocol database system.
It could also attract interest from some of the larger systems vendors. The initial AIRI design uses Arista switches, but Cisco has already joined in, offering its own switches, and looking to use AIRI systems in its own solutions offerings.
According to Pure CEO, Charlie Giancarlo, the potential for AI and data analytics opportunities is huge, if only because it is estimated that only 0.5% of all data is ever analysed:
There is a need to pull the gold out the data that companies hold.
He believes in the three-legged stool model of compute advancement – processing, networking, and storage, and that all have to advance together for computing to advance:
Data center infrastructures are designed to cope with the three legs of the stool. But a complete change has now occurred. It used to be a case of big applications working on small data volumes. Now it is a case of huge data volumes worked on by lots of small apps. It is why there is now a need for new architectures, based on data centricity and running on stateless machines. This can cope with most scaling issues.
This also requires a new breed of data hero that can bridge the gap between C suite expectations and the ability to get the three-legged stool to deliver such services.
Matt Kixmoeller, Pure’s VP of Strategy, talked the delegates at the conference through how the new non-volatile memory host controller protocol, NVM Express, has rapidly taken hold in the storage systems world:
Gartner calls it Shared Accelerated Storage and it provides massively parallel operations. It can democratise data, and data centres, and leads to vast arrays of solid state storage being coupled with networking and compute. Get the design right and it becomes possible to effectively print out complete racks.
As an example of this, Keith Martin, Director of Cloud Capacity Engineering at ServiceNOW told how the company used to have some 30,000 hard drives, of which around 2,000 failed every year. He found that backing up was taking longer, to the point where the business model was under threat. It opted for Pure as the replacement, which has resulted in a rack design that can, in his words, be ‘stamped out’.
This gives better density by using 1U servers compared to old 3U servers. Each rack now holds 30 servers, 1,000 compute cores and 1.5 Petabytes of flash storage:
It can look more expensive to begin with, but comes into its own at scale.
Pure used the conference to introduce the new FlashArray IIX family, described as ‘all in’ shared accelerated storage. It allows fluid, dynamic upgrading from earlier Pure product ranges, and its dual-mode controllers can cope with running old and new together. This means there is no hard-stop rip and replace point in the upgrade process.
The new datacentric architecture itself allows both consolidation and simplification, real time and on-demand operations and is architected with multi-cloud operations very much in mind. The goal is to allow users to deliver data-as-a-service that utilise containerised applications as well as the company’s newly introduced Pure Service Orchestrator.
The company sees this as the first modern Data Hub – a vast array of universal data based FlashBlades offering multi-dimensional performance, S3 Object protocols, and massively parallel operations.
My take
Always important, of course, but storage is growing up and realising it can play an important role in helping end user businesses get to their business objectives faster and more effectively. The downside is that this brings with it the counter-balance of the primary delivery mechanism – the channel partners – finding themselves less than able to handle the task. Pure is starting to move away from selling single-function boxes, and the channel needs to get its head round the change…… sooner rather than later
Image credit - © Oleksiy Mark - Fotolia.comRead more on: Cloud platforms - infrastructure and architectureInfrastructure 