
Last week’s UBS fintech challenge announcement got me thinking about how the financial services sector is responding to  the many threats coming its way. The UBS example is an interesting proxy for what I expect to see in the next few years. Will the challenge work? First, the announcement.
The challenge falls into four areas:

Challenge 1: The Client Experience Challenge: – How will banks deliver the ultimate client experience?
Challenge 2: The Superior Offering Challenge: – How will banks create superior financial products?
Challenge 3: The Banking Efficiency Challenge: – How will banks step-change their efficiency?
Challenge 4: The Secure Banking Challenge: – How will banks secure their operations and their clients’ assets?

Oliver Bussmann, Global C-Level Executive & Board Director, Information Technology, Banking, Insurance & Asset Management UBS is leading the charge. He posted the story in a number of places but it was at LinkedIn Pulse that my eye was first taken. The deal on offer?
We are offering the regional and global finalists cash prizes and accelerator places worth over USD $300,000 and over 300 hours of dedicated coaching from UBS mentors and partners. We hope that through our contribution we can help to maintain the momentum of the FinTech startup community.
Hmm. That doesn’t seem generous when set against the $1 million on offer at the Dreamforce hackathon of 2014. But then UBS is not claiming any IP rights for content submitted to the challenge, although they do say that:
 Each Participant grants UBS a non-exclusive, worldwide, irrevocable, perpetual, royalty-free right and license to:
(a)        to process and evaluate each Proposal and the Content therein along with other Participants for the purposes of the Competition and for UBS’s own evaluation purposes; and
(b)        to display, publish, transmit, edit, store, re-format, reproduce and distribute the Content on this website and any other media now known or in the future invented in order to publicize and market the Competition.
7.2       Each Participant acknowledges and accepts that
(a)        UBS may have been and/or may already be developing or licensing (whether independently and with third parties) products and/or services with functionalities similar to those described in a Proposal; and
(b)        nothing in this Competition will restrict UBS’s independent development or purchase of competing products and/or services or give a Participant any right with respect to such products and/or services.
In short, UBS will not steal the IP, but can use it in pretty much any way it wants – for free. The problem with these types of rule are that even with the best intentions in mind, it is hard to see how any developer who has a great idea will submit a killer application. The reason? The free usage clause alone is enough to put them off at this level of reward. There are better potential rewards from other systems. For example, the recently launched Apple Pay provides an enticing way into a ready made and growing global ecosystem.
Next, if I am thinking fintech, why would I want to help UBS solve on topics like customer experience? In comments to one version of the story, some argued that UBS is already challenged on customer service and needs to deal with this for itself.
UBS needs to discover customer service first, before it embarks on this type of foolishness
That should not surprise when so many of my colleagues complain that large banks in every major nation state provide a sub-optimal experience. Others were more caustic:
UBS is famous like many other large financial institutions for its appetite “to be first to be second”. Accordingly this initiative feels like a great PR stunt. The Swiss Government didn’t bail out the bank for it to disrupt itself and fire a bunch of Swiss employees. So the reality is that any really disruptive ideas will remain just that. Ideas. But then again, we can live in hope.
UBS chose not to answer those critiques in the comment threads.
UBS is trying to spice the challenge up by referencing cool technologies like the blockchain and broader cryptocurrencies. It is also including some that are tangential to banking right now such as ‘immersive virtual reality.’ In one sense it looks like they’re throwing the kitchen sink at the challenge areas to see what sticks. That’s not a bad way to proceed but it detracts from the focus areas the fintech challenge identified.
UBS already knows the blockchain is an important area for exploration. From everything I see, the real invention around blockchain is happening outside the traditional banking and financial services sector. Others argue that since anything going on inside the blockchain has to default back to a fiat currency then UBS highlighting this is at least a firm recognition of their need to take advantage of this technology. It’s a fair point except for one big issue.
I don’t see evidence of how this is working out in the real world.  Instead, I view applications built upon the blockchain and its principles as directly competitive to the legacy banks. So again, while it is interesting to see these references,  I’m scratching my head to figure out how the UBS fintech challenge will attract the most innovative ideas.
I give UBS credit for at least trying. The challenges it has identified are common enough among banks. Recognizing those and articulating them in plain sight is welcome. I just don’t believe they’ve gone anything like far enough in providing the right incentives for bright minds.
Image credit: UBS
Read more on: DevOps NoSQL and the open source stackFintech 