
With the all-important Holidays season kicking off, the latest data from the quarterly Salesforce Shopping Index tee up the prospect of a good retail run up to the end of the year, with Q3 to 30 September turning in the strongest ever buying signals for a non-holiday period.
For context, the Shopping Index tracks 927 digital commerce sites with 500 million shoppers across 29 countries.
Globally, digital commerce growth ran at 17% over the past three months, but there are some significant national variances. The Nordics saw the largest growth rate at 48%, followed by Canada on 30%. Then there’s a big drop to 18% for the US.
In Europe, Germany reported 18% growth with 13% for France. The UK meanwhile came bottom of the pile with 7%.
 
Source – Salesforce Shopping Index Q318
That said, global shopper spend per digital visit was down in Q318 to $2.47. That’s up year-on-year for the comparable period, but sequentially down from the $2.59 in Q218. That sequential decline is repeated across all vertical retail sectors.
In terms of those verticals, the luxury apparel sector was up 37%, reflective perhaps of the embrace of online shopping in this market. Home goods was the next most active growth sector on 26%, following by General Apparel on 17%.
Use of site search increased from 9% to 11% of all visits over the past two years, but revenue contribution from site search is flat at 25%. This is interpreted as indicating a need for brands and retailers to fine-tune their ‘searchandising’ strategies. Jamie Merrick, Director of Strategic Solutions, Salesforce Commerce Cloud, says:
Search remains an important tool for retailers online, we’ve seen the use of site search increase from 9% to 11% of all visits over the past two years. Albeit a small increase, there is an opportunity for retailers who focus on their searchandising strategies to engage the customers who are increasingly turning to search to shop.
It also highlights the importance of Artificial Intelligence in all aspects of online retailing, from product recommendations to smart search results based on each individual’s activity and preferences. It’s becoming more and more important to observe the unmet needs of the customer and always be one step ahead.
Computer and mobiles have reached parity in terms of order share, both on 46% for the quarter. Sequentially that’s 2% down on Q218 for computer use and 3% up for mobile devices. Tablet use remains flat on 9% of orders.
When it comes to traffic share, there’s a more stark divide with mobile devices making up 63%, followed by computers on 30% and tablets on 7%. That’s a 2% sequential increase for mobile devices and a 2% decline for computers.
For both order and traffic share, Apple iOS mobile devices effortlessly dominate, on 66% and 65% respectively. Android devices come in at 34% for both order and traffic percentages. Merrick comments:
The majority of retail growth continues to come from mobile, while PCs and tablets are in decline. Clearly, a truly mobile-first digital strategy is key to increasing digital growth. Brands that deliver consistent and customer-centric interactions on any channel, at any time, can build trust and efficiency with their customer that doesn’t just make a sale, but can lead to loyalty and advocacy.
My take
Loathe though I am to engage with the idea that Christmas is coming, I’ve been forced to accept it by the overnight disappearance of the Halloween menu at Starbucks and the sudden arrival of red cups, Gingerbread lattes, candy canes and mince pies. That also means it’s time to start thinking about buying presents and contributing to the online retail economy. These latest stats provide a glimmer of hope that amid the ongoing retail sector meltdown, there’s room for some online optimism at least.
Image credit - Salesforce/PinterestDisclosure - At time of writing, Salesforce is a premier partner of diginomica. Read more on: CRM and customer experienceMobileRetail e-commerce and the omni-channelSocialUser experience 