
The airline industry is a tough business to be in. Costs are high, margins are low and profits are often dictated by the price of fuel over any given period. However, one area that has proven to be an effective way to differentiate from competitors, drive down costs and encourage brand loyalty is to focus in on technology investments and digital strategy.
Quellle surprise!
We have seen this to be true for British airlines, such as Ryanair and EasyJet, and it seems that Australia’s national carrier has similar objectives.
Qantas has just announced a return to profits, having undergone an aggressive ‘Transformation Program’. The airline has just reported an underlying pre-tax profits of 975m Australian dollars (£457m; $717m), which compares to a loss of 646m Australian dollars a year ago.
Whilst a lot of this is down to the company’s cost-cutting programme, low fuel prices and job reduction, it has also placed considerable emphasis on technology investments, customer loyalty programmes and its digital strategy.
Chief executive Alan Joyce said:
The driving force behind this turnaround is the $2 billion Qantas Transformation program – the biggest step change for our company since it was privatised two decades ago. To date, $1.1 billion of cumulative transformation benefits have been realised, including the $894 million of benefits unlocked in FY2015 alone.
This means that if it wasn’t for our transformation program, Qantas would not be announcing a profit today.
Customers have always been at the heart of the Group’s strategy. For that reason the transformation program has been accompanied by ongoing investment in aircraft, lounges, training, and technology.
[We] are rolling out new technology, including SMS check-in, a new system to improve handling of flight delays, and a mobile travel app. Both Qantas and Jetstar will be re-launching their websites in 2016.
 There is frequent reference to the important role of technology throughout Qantas’ full year results, particularly with regard to front-end, customer facing systems and the airline’s loyalty programme.
It said that its digital innovation has focused on “improving speed and ease of travel including auto check-in on mobile for Qantas Domestic and next-gen online retailing and boarding at Jetstar”.
Qantas said:
The significantly improved performance was led by the delivery of $38 million of benefits from the Qantas Transformation program, including the introduction of new technology to improve productivity and customer experience.
Jetstar-branded airlines continue to focus on a differentiated low fares product offering and service standard with innovation and investment in new technology and B787 roll out. Greater self-service, including automated bag drops and kiosk check-in, is improving the customer experience while also delivering cost benefits. Investment in next-generation booking engine and online retailing capabilities will drive the next wave of ancillary revenue growth.
Qantas’ Aquire loyalty programme for frequent fliers, which are becoming increasingly important to airlines that want to use customer data to offer a personalised service and track the customer journey, also grew from a small to medium-sized business during 2014/15.
It has also purchased a controlling stake in actuarial and data analytics consulting firm Taylor Fry, which Qantas said adds to its “customer insights capability and provides a new revenue stream”.
According to a presentation shared with investors upon the results being announced, Qantas is also planning to invest heavily in technology and digital throughout 2016 to continue with its transformation strategy.
The presentation makes reference to future investments in digital loyalty programmes, online and mobile technology and a new PROS revenue management system. See the slides below:

 

My take
As I said, it’s a tough business to be in, but digital investments and customer loyalty will take you a long way.
Read more on: Digital transformation - frictionless enterprise 