
Social media doesn’t work the way many marketers think it does. The mere act of endorsing a brand does not affect a customer’s behavior or lead to increased purchasing, nor does it spur purchasing by friends.
That’s the conclusion of authors to What’s the Value of a Like? With that a whole generation of social media marketing expertise, or what passed for it, went poof! If you read the whole article, in the March-April issue of Harvard Business Review, it might lower your blood pressure because the news is not that social media doesn’t work at all, it just works differently from may of our assumptions.
The work concentrates on Facebook as the preferred marketing platform, which the authors say 80 percent of Fortune 500 companies actively use for marketing. Interestingly, they also quote a survey of 427 marketers at U.S. companies showing that 80 percent
…are unable to quantify the value of their social media efforts.
And to back that up,
…in a study of Fortune 500 companies, 87% of CMOs acknowledged that they can’t document that social media creates new customers.
Yikes!
The authors of the study, Leslie K. John (Harvard Business School), Daniel Mochon (Tulane’s Freeman School of Business), Oliver Emrich (University of Mainz), and Janet Schwartz (also from Freeman School of Business) all hail from top-notch business academia and their scholarship looks solid. It reports on 23 experiments conducted over four years involving 18,000 people trying to ask and answer basic questions about social media and marketing.
The marketing challenge centers on the amount of weight we give to likes and endorsements by friends and colleagues to brands.
The conventional thinking has been that the strongest endorsement a brand can get is when one person tells a friend. Indeed we’ve said for years that people tend to tell a limited few others about a success but also tend to blast out negative stories.
It’s a cautionary tale about why social should be important to all businesses and brands. That rule of thumb is correct, but its opposite isn’t necessarily so; taken to its logical conclusion a like is received as not much more than a meh?? and getting all the way to a recommendation that sticks still takes work.
The authors say their research indicated there’s more work to do because conventional wisdom about likes confuses cause and consequence,
It’s possible that getting people to follow a brand on social media makes them buy more. But it’s also possible that those who already have positive feelings toward a brand are more likely to follow it in the first place, and that’s why they spend more than non-followers.
Getting to the bottom of this dichotomy is important because millions in marketing budgets hang in the balance. The research shows that likes, or endorsements of brands, do not by themselves drive increased purchasing but it also shows that supporting endorsements with branded content can.
The conclusion the study’s authors draw is that the most effective approach to social media marketing, at least on Facebook, is to combine the endorsements with conventional advertising that delivers information and a call to action. So much for the prognosticators who said the end of push marketing was near and that the world was going to the pull side. It now looks like social media endorsements might be able to do a better job of helping to identify likely prospects but it’s still up to the brand to ask for the business in one form or another such as advertising.
This makes perfect sense. The assumption that so many of us were working on for so long involved one of the oldest and most closely held beliefs, the free lunch. We subscribed to the “If you build it they will come” philosophy and didn’t quite understand why the seats didn’t all fill up.
This further disproves one of the fundamental tenets of classical economics, Say’s Law also known as the law of markets says supply creates its own demand. To an extent supply does create demand especially when a new product category is introduced, then there’s a stampede for the new thing but the rush eventually settles down and the market thus formed settles into a zero sum situation where supply can easily exceed demand such as during a recession. For much of the 19th century Say carried the day, but starting in the Great Depression, John Maynard Keynes successfully disputed the principle, which brings us to today.
My take
Not that long ago we spoke of social media as something new and different that would enable us to slip the bonds of convention and talk directly to customers, and close more business. But the reality has been different. Social is valuable and worthwhile for identifying the people we should appeal to but we still call a part of marketing demand generation for a good reason.
On balance this is good news because it clears up some misconceptions that were obviously causing problems. But it also gives us a more realistic approach to successfully using the new social tools for maximum effect and, at the same time, rather than doing nothing more than disrupt, we have a chance to see social taking its place among other tried and true marketing solutions.
In this we see in microcosm how the hype-cycle works itself out. In the data concerning 87 percent of CMOs not being able to document how social media helps to create customers, we see at least latent dissatisfaction with social. Typically this kind of thing happens after the initial rush to implement the new technology and it leads to buyers’ remorse.
But now we have a better explanation of how social works for us that’s data driven and it should lead to better and more enlightened use. It just won’t be the use we thought of initially.
As an aside, it seems ironic that Hubspot, the doyens of pull marketing have a large call center that does gobs of outbound marking. Go figure.
Image credit - via YouTubeRead more on: Analytics planning and data analysisCRM and customer experienceDigital and content marketing 