
Michael Feindt
For most people, going from exploring the origins of the universe to stacking shelves in a supermarket would be a downward career path – a meteoric fall. But not for Prof. Dr. Michael Feindt, founder and Chief Scientific Officer of Blue Yonder.
The German data scientist – quietly spoken, self-effacing, and funny – set up the machine learning company in 2008 while he was at CERN in Geneva, home of the Large Hadron Collider (LHC). He had already been working with students there on other ML projects.
The largest machine in history, the 27km-long LHC smashes particles together at just under the speed of light to recreate conditions that existed moments after the Big Bang. Feindt found himself at a nearby desk, trying to make sense of the reams of particle data on a computer screen.
Ten years later, he’s still staring at a screen, but this time to help Morrisons keep its shelves stacked – not too tightly, he says – to battle the likes of Tesco and Sainsbury’s with fresher and more innovative produce. The UK’s fourth largest supermarket chain is just one of Blue Yonder’s clients – and winning back customers of its own with the aid of AI, after years in the doldrums.
Blue Yonder’s other customers include Matsu, Globus, Orsay, Otto, Ernstings, Selgros, and Bon Prix, but that roster may grow as the company becomes more closely integrated with JDA – which is itself forging a closer relationship with Microsoft, via Azure.
So from quarks to Quorn: what happened to bring Feindt so down to Earth? Onstage at JDA FocusConnect 2018 in Barcelona last week, he told delegates:
We had to gain knowledge and insight from petabytes of raw data at CERN. That’s the heritage of Blue Yonder.
Feindt claims that the 70 neural networks he and his colleagues built at CERN achieved results that were four times better than the work of 400 leading scientists – and he manages to sound modest saying it.
The seed funding he secured for his work in Geneva helped him set up the company in Karlsruhe, Germany. It adopted a platform and application approach in 2011, switched to Software as a Service a year later, then won private equity investment in 2015. From that point on, Blue Yonder began to focus on the retail space, until supply chain software giant JDA bought it this Summer.
So why the new focus on shops and shoppers? Feindt told delegates:
Because it’s very low margin and very high competition. Every retailer is afraid of the dominance of Amazon, which is a data science-driven company plus some logistics. Every one of its decisions is data driven.
Fizzy drink time
After his presentation, diginomica pulled up a chair with Feindt for a one-to-one chat in the conference’s media centre, overlooking the Balearic Sea. There, Feindt filled in the details of his journey from physics to fizzy drinks:
In physics I was very successful with my research group, because we used sophisticated mathematical methods – neural networks – instead of the standard methods that most of my colleagues were using. We were simply very successful. And after one topic was done, I immediately took the next one on, and so on, but that was because of my curiosity. I really like solving complex problems.
Then I invented a special algorithm, called Neural Base. That was a neural network that can predict complete probability distributions for single observations, and for many observations. The funny thing is, this can be individualised, because for each observation, there are many, many input variables.
I did this for physics, but then I realised, my God, I could do this for insurance, for risk profiles – for this person there is a larger or lower risk, and so on – or for financial markets.
“There were some personal things that happened, too. I had saved some money and wanted to build a house. This took some time, and I parked the money in the equity market. My financial advisor told me, oh yeah, this is completely safe. And of course, when I needed the cash, I had lost 20% of it!
He added:
So I thought, ‘My God, you’re spending the whole day doing statistical analysis for others, but when it’s for your own money, you trusted a bank advisor!’ That was really something, and I said, ‘This cannot be’. So I started to download historical equity prices and just used the software that I had written for CERN to see if we could predict things from that. And what came out of it was, yes, actually we can.
You see, probability distribution is not exactly centred at zero. Sometimes it’s higher, sometimes it’s lower, and this was really the start of using the software to do other things.
So why the focus on retail, rather than, say, curing diseases or reversing climate change? Feindt explained:
We were a project company for a long time, and we did several things for industry, for finance, insurance, and biology – all very different things. To concentrate on retail was a decision that was taken later when we had a new CEO, who really had the ambition to make something big out of the company.We decided that we didn’t want to do only projects, because you can scale only linearly with the number of data scientists that we have, but instead products that can be reused for many customers. We decided on retail because of its low margins, so to improve a little bit there can make a big difference – the difference between success and bust.
Among its offerings today, Blue Yonder Demand Forecast & Replenishment is a machine learning solution for automated store replenishment. The company claims that it can reduce out-of-stock rates by up to 80% “without increasing waste or inventory”. Meanwhile, Blue Yonder Price Optimization delivers pricing decisions for every product, while (the company claims) improving revenue and margins by more than five percent.
What all this boils down to is that a retailer could use this type of technology to change its business from one based on averages for different seasons, demographic groups, or buyers, to one driven by granular insight and probability across a range of different variables.
As long as the source data is there, the system could predict the probability of X happening, or what would be the probable result if a retailer ordered fewer units of A, B, or C, or ordered more of product D instead.
But of course, all of these factors are – like the world of retail itself – not certainties. All any leader can hope for is the ability to make the best decision with the information available to her. So how big an education challenge is it for a data scientist, such as Feindt, to help an old business rethink its assumptions about the world? He explains:
That is quite some work. It requires a lot of change management. But time is playing for us. We started relatively early for the market, before it was really accepted, believed, and trusted, when it was still seen as a large risk.
But of course, this is really a core process for a retailer. If someone comes from outside and says, ‘We are managing your stuff now automatically and it’s better’, not everybody embraces it immediately. But with time… it’s very clear now that machine learning and artificial intelligence are so powerful, they are in the media every day. There is no company that can simply neglect them.
And of course, anyone at C-level sees how Amazon is threatening all the retailers in the world – and they do everything, of course, data-driven everything, algorithms… that’s why they are so good. So in that respect, AI is now becoming easier to sell. But still, for many retailers, it is quite some change. And it’s absolutely necessary that it is completely understood from the top as strategic. But even if the CEO wants it, there are often people at levels two and three who are fighting against any change.
That is still happening. It really needs education – and for us to talk on a level that is understood by retailers, rather than pure mathematics.
Amazon
There is the inevitable retail question –  is Amazon – the hyper-competitor – also a threat to Blue Yonder and JDA? Feindt argued:
Not very much, because not many retailers like Amazon, they won’t work on the Amazon cloud, they won’t take Amazon’s service too much. They see Amazon as the main threat. Most retailers I’ve seen say, ‘Cloud, yes, but not Amazon’. That’s also why we chose Microsoft as a cloud partner. The fear for retailers is not so large.
Indeed, the world’s biggest retailer by revenues, Walmart, recently deepened its own partnership with Microsoft, signing a five-year cloud and AI deal in July.
But more and more companies could now be defined as retailers of one sort or another. Even oil giant BP used its platform at JDA FocusConnect to explain how it is morphing into a convenience store network for electric vehicle owners. For BP, fuel is becoming a marginal business to selling coffee, snacks, and – in the long run – battery charging services.
So is it easier for ‘new’ retailers to rethink their businesses around data, machine learning, and AI, than companies that have been in retail for decades? Feindt agreed:
Yes, I think if the leadership has grown a business successfully with gut feeling or strength, then it is so much in their genes, in their DNA. Then there is usually a large amount of distrust for new methods. But even in science it’s like that. New ideas often mean that the old professors have to die. So it’s much easier for online retailers, because they are much more used to data-driven business, because they have all the data and they use it naturally. And young startups in retail, they say ‘Of course, we need artificial intelligence.
So are there still opportunities for older retailers, for bricks-and-mortar focused businesses to survive and thrive in this new world? Or is it already too late? Feindt concluded:
I am convinced that the high street will survive, because people don’t want to buy only online. Shopping is an experience, people want to touch stuff and try it on. Augmented reality may be nice, but it’s simply not the same. I am quite sure the high street will never die out. The other thing I see, particularly in the US, is that bricks and mortar stores are figuring out more and more about their customers. They can identify about 80 or 85 percent of all receipts down to who, to which person it was, and profile them. So the big advantage of the online world is disappearing.
My take
The question is this – as its name might suggest, is Blue Yonder itself disappearing – into JDA? Does this data science and machine learning company now find itself limited by a narrow focus on retail and the supply chain, as it leaves behind a history of more diverse applications?
Feindt says no:
No, it’s the opposite. We have done so many things. But two and a half years ago we decided ourselves to just do retail, but the JDA portfolio is much broader – from manufacturing, the whole supply chain, up to retail. And the latest products we are now working on with JDA are about extending retail to the end customer. That’s a new dimension in size – 10 million, 50 million – in terms of knowledge. So for Blue Yonder, the opportunity is there to spread, to grow much larger.
And perhaps, as the relationship with Microsoft deepens, who knows what may happen in the future for privately held JDA. Perhaps someone should do a probabilistic analysis of that.
Image credit - Blue YonderRead more on: Analytics planning and data analysisCloud platforms - infrastructure and architectureMachine intelligence and AIRetail e-commerce and the omni-channel 