
Despite having yet to reach a deal with Ireland’s DUP to support a minority government through the next parliament, the Queen’s Speech finally went ahead to outlining the government’s plans for the next two years.
The Queen’s Speech is written by the government itself and is intended to lay out the laws that ministers want to pass over the next parliamentary period.
Understandably the content of the speech was very focused on Brexit, given that negotiations began on Monday and that the UK’s exit from the EU will dominate lawmaking for the foreseeable future.
Diginomica/government has written about the implications of Brexit n the digital and technology sector extensively, including recent developments that the Chancellor of the Exchequer is hinting towards a softer Brexit than anticipated and a deal with the EU that values services over goods (which is promising for the digital sector).
However, aside from the Brexit debacle, the Queen’s Speech also hinted at a number of other digital investments and laws that are looking to be made over the next two years, with a strong focus on infrastructure, technical skills and data protection.
The commitments
During the speech the Queen outlined that the government plans to focus on its Industrial Strategy. It’s not entirely clear whether this is going to be a new or updated one, following on from the release of a Green Paper version of it just at the beginning of the year.
The reason that I say this, is that MPs recently heavily criticised the strategy as it stands for ignoring Brexit and asked for it to be updated and for it to become a “dynamic document” – a quite sensible recommendation. Today the Queen said:
My government will continue to improve the public finances, while keeping taxes low. It will spread prosperity and opportunity across the country through a new modern, industrial strategy.
My government will work to attract investment in infrastructure to support economic growth. Legislation will be introduced to ensure the United Kingdom remains a world leader in new industries, including electric cars and commercial satellites. A new bill will also be brought forward to deliver the next phase of high-speed rail.
Not a great deal of detail, but at least the emphasis on an Industrial Strategy is there.
The other two major points focused on skills and data protection. On skills the Queen read:
My government will continue to work to ensure that every child has the opportunity to attend a good school and that all schools are fairly funded. My ministers will work to ensure people have the skills they need for the high-skilled, high-wage jobs of the future, including through a major reform of technical education.
The 2017 Budget announced a £500 million investment in technical education, creating a so-called T’ level for 16-19 year olds to be introduced from autumn 2019. Students will be able to choose from 15 different course ‘routes’. Formal training hours for 16–19 year olds will increase by 50% and students will be able to undertake industry work-placements. Maintenance loans will also be provided for students doing higher-level technical courses at National Colleges and Institutes of Technology.
The government has acknowledged recently that it has a shortage of technical-level skills and ranks 16th out of 20 OECD countries for the proportion of people with technical qualifications. It has a particular shortage in sectors that depend on STEM subjects, with 40% of UK employers reporting difficulties recruiting staff with the relevant skills.
So again, the emphasis and commitment from the government today on this will no doubt be welcomed.
Finally, the Queen outlined how the government is going to boost data protection laws in the UK. Her Majesty said:
A new law will ensure that the United Kingdom retains its world-class regime protecting personal data, and proposals for a new digital charter will be brought forward to ensure that the United Kingdom is the safest place to be online.
It is unclear whether this will extend beyond what is anticipated by the imminent GDPR rules which are due to be applied by May 2018 and are EU regulations. The government has already committed to sticking with the GDPR framework, but further plans for the UK’s data protection laws could be considered.
GDPR has a number of requirements for businesses and it has been widely reported that many are not ready for the change. These include:
• a requirement for consent – businesses will need to ensure that all customers know that you have their data and that they consent to the business having that data
• businesses will have three days to report data breaches to both the authorities and customers
• the Right to be Forgotten – customers will have the right to ask businesses to delete all of their data, and to prove that they have
• data portability – the aim being to create an environment where businesses can easily swap their data between different providers, whilst ensuring the data is erased from the old provider’s systems.
• hefty fines for data breaches will be introduced – up to €20 million or 4% of global annual turnover for the preceding financial year, whichever is the greater.
It makes sense for the UK to follow the EU’s lead on data protection, however, if it wants to be able to consistently maintain data flows between EU businesses and consumers.
Response
The technology industry is beginning to respond to the details in the Queen’s Speech, and we will updating this section of the story as we get more in.
UK lobby group for the technology industry, techUK, has warned that the government shouldn’t let Brexit sideline its plans for digital investments and lawmaking, but welcomed what was hinted at in the speech today. CEO Julian David said:
The Government cannot focus on Brexit alone. techUK welcomes measures to radically reform technical education and give people the tools they need for the high skilled, high wage jobs of the future. Invention is in the UK’s DNA so plans to support the space industry and electric vehicles will keep the UK at the forefront of innovation.
We support the Government’s commitment to maintain the UK’s world class protection of people’s personal data. This will include implementing the General Data Protection Regulation, the biggest transformation of data protection rules in a generation. The Government must have a robust plan to support businesses through this process.”
The tech sector shares the Government’s ambition of making the UK the safest place to be online. It will work closely with the Government on its plans for a Digital Charter and counter extremism measures. However, there is a fine line between strengthening protection and over reaching rules that constrain the creativity of businesses and citizens. Collaboration, cooperation and trust are key to creating a safe and secure digital world.
Beaming, a specialist business ISP, conducted some research earlier this year that found that cyber security breaches cost British businesses almost £30 billion in 2016. As well as this, more than half (52 percent) of UK businesses fell victim to some form of cybercrime in 2016, at a cost of £29.1 billion.
Sonia Blizzard, managing director of Beaming, welcomed the comments made today. She said:
We welcome the Government’s commitment, articulated in today’s Queen’s speech, to introduce a digital charter and making Britain a safer place to be online. Cyber security breaches cost businesses almost £30 billion last year and small firms, in particular, are accelerating investment in security technologies to protect themselves and their customers from threats online.”
Making the UK the best place to start and run a digital business requires much more than a commitment to boosting security though. As customer expectations and data usage grow, factors such as speed and service resilience become ever more important, so it is vital that the Conservatives keep their manifesto pledge to accelerate rollout of the full-fibre technology that will improve service across the country and establish the clear path to national fibre coverage they’ve promised over the next decade.
My take
My concern is that digital – as broad as a topic as it is – has gone particularly quiet under Theresa May’s government. We haven’t seen the high profile commitments or the leadership required to get things done in recent years. In addition, Brexit is truly a major distraction for the whole of government and will continue to be so for the foreseeable future.
That being said, the government’s commitments today, as part of the Queen’s Speech, highlight that perhaps digital will take a higher profile going forward. However, the key, as always, is follow through and execution. We will have to wait and see.
Image credit - Images free for commercial use Read more on: CentralDigital government and public services

