
There’s good news for customers. Infrastructure costs just got cheaper than they were a week ago. Here’s why.
It’s official, AWS is the enemy—mostly because it’s the one to beat in IaaS or infrastructure as a service. Amazon made its chops on providing cloud infrastructure services many years ago when nobody else either had product or inclination. Recently however, things have heated up nicely thank you veddey much.
Earlier this year, and only after a pitched battle at Salesforce,  Salesforce anointed Amazon it’s preferred infrastructure provider—when it isn’t deploying its own that is.
This makes sense for Salesforce (and you as paying customers) because spinning up datacenters around the world to support its utility computing model is time and resource consuming. Amazon is in that business and Salesforce can presumably off-load the effort and semi-forget about it turning its attention to higher value added activities.
Pitching battle tents
So last week Larry Ellison went on an extended rant at OpenWorld about how superior Oracle is in the infrastructure game and provided his benchmarks about how slow Amazon’s databases ran on AWS, even pointing out that Oracle database runs well on AWS but that it runs better on Oracle gear. He does have a point because his infrastructure is so incredibly optimized with solid-state disks and tons of memory. Ellison said,
Oracle’s new technologies will drive the Cloud databases and infrastructure of the future. Amazon are decades behind in every database area that matters, and their systems are more closed than mainframe computers.
This week Adobe announced at Microsoft Ignite in Atlanta that it was getting cozy with Microsoft Azure for deploying some of its SaaS products. According to a story in Forbes by Alex Konrad:
Adobe committed to making Azure its ‘preferred cloud platform’ for its own cloud suite in a move that [Adobe] CEO Shantanu Narayen said can “bring together the cloud horsepower and end-to-end capabilities brands end to design and deliver great digital experiences…”
The announcement gave Microsoft a needed win in the infrastructure space which it needed due to some of the commentary coming out of Oracle and Amazon’s leadership in this large emerging market.
So now some very big players—Amazon, Oracle, and Microsoft are going to duke it out over infrastructure and when that happens do you know what follows? Lower prices. Good news right? We’re embarking on a price war as infrastructure takes the next step in commoditizing IT.
Commoditization is good – right?
If you’re wondering why the information industry doesn’t generate the great jobs it once did, part of the reason is commoditization. This is a good thing; it’s what a capitalist economy does. Build an outrageously expensive product that everybody needs and over time you force economies of scale and efficiency into the paradigm until every potential customer can afford to have some, though few people make money at that point. This is all good and the way things move.
The big players will do well enough during a commodification phase because they have the economies of scale. In IT, infrastructure is rapidly becoming something they throw in for the chance to get all of your business. They’ll make it up on volume as the saying goes. But that doesn’t sound like fun to me.
This looks a lot like the database wars from the late 20th century. Then there were many vendors including Ingres, Oracle, DB2, Sybase, Microsoft and many others. Most of the freestanding vendors became products on a hardware vendor’s price list as the market consolidated and price became a competitive issue due to a plethora of competent product offerings.
What’s more fun is doing the higher value-added things that have to do with getting very close to the end customer and to helping IT customers to make money, not just save it, which is what commoditization is really about. Now recall who’s making a strategic retreat from infrastructure—Salesforce. They don’t unbundle infrastructure and their focus is increasingly how to better support business processes.
Infrastructure as a Service is no place to make money and I doubt if it ever was. There were many well funded providers going all the way back to the turn of the century, companies with big data centers that would host your conventional software for a fee. That didn’t work very well, the economics of VPNs and expensive gear that couldn’t scale, made IaaS’s first effort lame.
But even now, with browser based apps and apps running on handhelds, the story is not much different. You might be able to get a lot more users on cloud systems, but chances are good you’ll need to rewrite them to take advantage of the architecture. But who has time to rewrite?
At OpenWorld executives including Larry Ellison, Safra Catz, and Mark Hurd were talking about the transition to cloud taking a decade or more for some customers and that’s a reasonable estimate all things considered. That’s why conventional vendors are touting their expertise in cloud infrastructure. They know that the conversion will be less of a migration and more of a placid shift. IaaS is the new lifeboat for enterprises that need to move but who have to do it to a deliberate cadence.
My take
You don’t generate your own electricity, the saying goes, so why run your own datacenter?
So for the short run at least, IaaS might be a good way for conventional vendors to make money but it’s fraught with risk and there are multiple ways to not make money.
For instance, there is the issue of over-building due to projecting demand that doesn’t show up. Humans tend to do this. This could also happen because CIOs of the future decide they like the idea of a private cloud that they manage in their, gulp, data centers. It could happen.
Once security and cloud deployment issues are no longer central because every vendor has them and they’ve commoditized, there might be little reason to choose a public cloud over your own.
More likely, businesses will see that by moving to the cloud they free up labor that can pivot to more value added activities rather than simply keeping the lights on in the DC. That’s where most of them want to be and it’s where big software companies want to be.
For the moment they’re running infrastructure for their slowly migrating customers. As with databases and possibly social media in the future, you don’t make a lot of money on infrastructure but you can’t live without it either.
That’s a commodity if ever I saw one.
Image credit - via stock photosDisclosure - Oracle and Salesforce are premier partners at time of writingRead more on: Infrastructure 