
Taylor Rhodes
Wall Street was taken by surprise by Backspace yesterday. In the hours before the firm reported its third quarter numbers, pessimistic projections predicted the firm would fail to impress.
But in the event, the firm reported a profit of $36.5 million compared with $25.7 million a year earlier, on revenue up 11% to $508.9 million. That sent the share price up nicely, although it’s still a long, long way from its January 2013 high of $79.24.
CEO Taylor Rhodes says the firm benefitted from the signing of some large enterprise deals that had failed to close in the previous quarter as well as “slightly higher growth” in public cloud.
But the reality for the firm is that the longer term OpenStack public cloud growth rate has slowed down. Rhodes comments:
We see that the OpenStack public cloud appeals to customers who value open technologies and who are concerned about long-term vendor lock-in. OpenStack is also the best fit for those who want their public cloud to work well with their dedicated hosting environment via our RackConnect product.
The growth rate for our OpenStack public cloud has slowed over the past year. We expect it to continue to grow albeit at a slower rate than in the past, because of the appeal of other public clouds. Many customers prefer AWS or Azure as their public cloud platform, which presents us with the opportunity to add value by managing those clouds for them as part of a comprehensive multi-cloud strategy.
To be crystal-clear, we expect the OpenStack to be an increasingly important part of our future growth, as the market for OpenStack shifts towards large, private and hybrid cloud environment. The demand signal here is encouraging and is accelerating. No other vendor is as focused as we are here. And no one else has the experience in OpenStack engineering and operations that we have. The demand for OpenStack private and hybrid clouds is heating up and we will lead this market.
He adds:
OpenStack is changing shape to enterprise private and hybrid clouds which take large deployments. We see that demand signal heating up and being a good source of growth in the future. But, ultimately our strategy around managed cloud has not changed. We see managed cloud as being the path that most enterprises and mainstream companies will take as they come out of their corporate data centers. They’ll look for multiple types of infrastructure to include AWS and Azure. They’ll look for private clouds in addition to public clouds, and they want someone with credibility around SLAs and service to manage them.
Changed directions
This has led to changes in direction for Backspace and some strategic partnerships. Rhodes explains:
We have focused this year on expanding our portfolio with offerings that make us more competitive. These new offers position us to lead in large high growth markets, and they will drive our growth in 2017 and beyond.
First we worked with Microsoft, our long-time partner to offer our expertise and Fanatical Support to customers using Microsoft Azure, the Microsoft Private Cloud and Office 365. We’ve already landed several new large accounts for each of these products.
Second, we partnered with Intel to create the OpenStack Innovation Center at our headquarters in San Antonio. This center is staffed by engineers from both Rackspace and Intel and we expect their work to accelerate the adoption of OpenStack by enterprise users of private and hybrid cloud.
Third, we’ve launched Rackspace Managed Security services. For years, we’ve built deep expertise and experience in cyber security. Now, we’re productizing all the investments that we’ve made in securing our own infrastructure and are offering our expertise and tools that help customers secure their companies with Managed Security as a service.
In addition, there’s the Fanatical Support for AWS and Backspace’s status as an AWS Managed Service provider. Rhodes says:
When compared to others in the AWS Managed Services ecosystem, Rackspace brings a global scale and heritage in cloud operations that none can match. We are well positioned to be the leader in this fast-growing market. We’ve been pleased by our progress in the first month since our launch of Fanatical Support on AWS. A large majority of the customers are new customers to Rackspace.
Many others are established Rackspace customers who are bringing incremental AWS workloads to us. We couldn’t support those workflows in the past, but now we can. The majority of the customers have also chosen our highest service level, which we call Aviator, and they are awarding us high Net Promoter Scores. These trends indicate to us that we are adding significant value in the services and technology innovations that we provide on top of the AWS platform.
The firm will also benefit from CenturyLink, Verizon and AT&T all reportedly looking to sell hosting assets, says Rhodes:
The more people who give up the ghost, because they’re not specialists, who don’t have the scale, who aren’t good at these things then the more market opportunity there is for us. I’ve heard the same rumors and, frankly I think it’s very difficult for non-specialists to compete in this space and in this era because, one, they’re not known for great service particularly in this space, and two they’ve struggled to make their cloud strategies work.
They really haven’t developed cloud. They’ve just developed virtualization platforms which don’t have the same attribute. So, I think I like it, and it opens up more space for us. For Managed Cloud, you compete with those telcos and tech conglomerates who are all getting really disrupted and feeling the full force of the Amazon and Azure world on their businesses. So, we view it as an opportunity.
He adds:
On the higher end, you can see companies like HP Enterprise, the HPE that just split out, they’re exiting OpenStack public cloud and talking about providing services to their customers across AWS, Azure, and private cloud. So it sounds very similar. And I think that’s a natural move for them in their sort of Fortune 500, Fortune 1,000 installed base because that’s where their customers will push them. But I think it remains to be seen how they’ll do there and there’s a lot of change going on in that company.
My take
Still a lot to do, but taking Wall Street by surprise every so often doesn’t do any harm.
Read more on: Cloud platforms - infrastructure and architectureInfrastructure 