
The elephant in the room as Rackspace announced its latest quarterly numbers was of course the scuttlebutt that the firm is seeking a buyer, with Apollo Global Management emerging as the current favored candidate. 
Inevitably senior management at Rackspace were tight-lipped yesterday, although the company did confirm it is selling its Cloud Sites web hosting unit to Liquid Web. Whatever the outcome of any private equity talks, Rackspace managed to post a 26% increase in profits for the second quarter. 
For CEO Taylor Rhodes, it’s business-as-usual, with plans for a major new marketing push to create differentation in the managed cloud space: 

Businesses today are being told that the cloud is simple, that it’s easy to manage on your own, and that whatever platform the vendor is selling or supporting is the complete solution for every workload. What these businesses are learning, however, is that different workloads require different platforms across public cloud, private cloud and dedicated servers. They are finding that the cloud is complex and fast changing, that they need help in managing it and that expert engineers are expensive and hard to find.
These businesses are also finding that the managed cloud services industry today is populated mainly by providers who can’t provide the help they need. Some of these providers are traditional, slow moving technology vendors and systems integrators were being disrupted by the cloud themselves. Others are small scale providers who focus on migrations and offer a little help with architecture, security and ongoing operations. 

He adds: 

We are the only managed cloud services provider, that has created and operated a leading cloud. The capabilities we developed as a cloud tech company, provide a major differentiation for us as we expand to provide managed cloud services on AWS (Amazon Web Services) and the Microsoft Cloud. We’re finding that our strengths are clear to prospective customers when they compare us to our competitors in the managed cloud space. And they’re even clear to customers, who have experienced the capability gaps of those competitors from whom we are sourcing and increasing number of our deals.

Demand for Rackspace’s own OpenStack Cloud public cloud is slowing down, admits Rhodes, but this is balanced by growing demand for the AWS and Microsoft offerings. This is in line with Rackspace’s strategic assumptions, he insists: 

The rates for established businesses to move workloads out of their corporate data centers is well underway. Most of those businesses are finding that managing a single cloud is complex and managing multiple clouds is even more difficult. Those businesses want the help of an expert and seasoned partner who can operate at scale across all their needs from architecture and migration to security and ongoing operations.
What we face is a huge opportunity to the lead here. Some of you may have wondered at times whether Rackspace matters in a post-AWS world. Our answer is that not only do we matter, we face a bigger opportunity than we have at any moment in our 17-year history and we are executing against this opportunity at a quickening pace.

Brexit ahead
Amid the upbeat messaging, the firm has chosen to flag up concern about the impact of the Brexit vote on business in the UK. Rhodes says: 

We expect negative impact from the Brexit vote in the UK. Gartner’s post Brexit forecast for IT spending growth in the UK indicates 2016 spending growth will drop by 2 percentage points to 5 percentage points into negative territory. Gartner notes that 2017 IT spending growth in the UK will almost certainly be negative as well.
We’ve seen somewhat higher churn rates and some slowdown in spending among our UK customers, some of whose businesses have suffered from the currency fluctuations and uncertainty that have followed the Brexit vote. One of our large customers in the travel business, for example, has recently sought bankruptcy protection, creating an unforeseen churn event for us. We expect this slowdown in spending and uptick in churn due to several specific customers to affect our business in the second half of the year.

Longer term, there’s the question of whether Rackspace would need to open up data centers in continental Europe after a formal Brexit split. Rhodes has given some thought to this: 

The majority of our business outside the US comes from the UK itself, it’s literally a much, much larger base of business than our continental European businesses today. Those data centers are primarily designed to meet the demand in our UK business. We don’t see that changing going forward in a material way. We do think it’s too early to tell. I think Brexit’s got some shake-out to do. There are different rulings coming out of the EU around data sovereignty and treaties etc, so I think it’s all still evolving. 
Ultimately I’d like to reiterate one of the reasons we are excited to get into our AWS and Azure offers is that we have a very capital-light way now to enter new geographies versus our old model, where it was, go, put a lot of capital on the ground, build a data center or lease the data center, fill it up with our gear, et cetera. So we view us being able to have optionality in a capitalized manner to get into continental Europe, if that needs to become the base of where our infrastructure resides.

My take
The ‘business-as-usual’ mantra from Rhodes doesn’t conceal the fact that Rackspace appears to be at a pivot point in terms of its destiny. The AWS and Microsoft alliances are clearly paying off, while the plans for investment in more aggressive marketing are sound. Once the elephant in the room is addressed, we’ll get some more clarity on the next phase of the firm’s development.
Image credit - YouTube Read more on: Cloud platforms - infrastructure and architectureDevOps NoSQL and the open source stackGoverning identity privacy and security 