
Taylor Rhodes
Rackspace paid the price for a lackluster outlook this week, despite turning in a 77.5% year-on-year net income increase. 
Net income was $49 million on revenue of $518.1 million, up 8%. But with the outlook flat for the current quarter, Wall Street wasn’t impressed and beat up on the share price. 
The message from Taylor Rhodes is the old standard of ‘keep calm and carry on’, positioning the company as being mid-transition. He cited a number of achievements to back up his claim, beginning with good traction on the Microsoft and AWS cloud services fronts as well as Rackspace’s own OpenStack private cloud. 
The AWS partnership was only announced in October last year, but the two firms now have more than 187 joint customers, says Rhodes: 

The bookings for our AWS service have been roughly evenly balanced between these customers and the ones who are new to Rackspace. The large majority of the existing customers who have signed up for our AWS service are bringing us incremental workloads. 
This effort is an important part of our strategy to reinvigorate our installed base growth. More than 60% of customers for our AWS offer are choosing our highest service level, called Aviator, which indicates that our expertise and support in our proprietary software tools are adding significant value on top of the AWS infrastructure.

Meanwhile 178 Microsoft Cloud customers have been signed as of the end of April: 

We see strong demand for our Microsoft Private Cloud offer, particularly among enterprise customers who are using both public and private cloud platforms for different workloads. Our new customers of this type in Q1 included two of the world’s largest professional services companies and a global aerospace leader. We are also gaining increased traction with our Microsoft Azure offering. We have won several large Azure customers including one of the world’s biggest retail companies and a global giant in commodity distribution.

But there is a strong element of ‘jam tomorrow around both sets of partnerships. The firm has landed its first six-figure a month customer on AWS as well as several large enterprises whose contract values are expected to increase over time. Rhodes admits: 

These new enterprises that have signed up for our AWS and Microsoft Cloud services tend to start relatively small, but we expect revenue from those deals to ramp-up over time.

These alliances are also critical to building brand differentiation, he adds: 

Our number one goal in marketing is to build market power behind the managed cloud business led by our leadership position in AWS and Azure. So, a lot of our marketing program spend has shifted toward driving brand awareness and demand generation in those areas. We’ve also done field marketing in the quarter with AWS in certain regions where we’re actually out together generating demand from prospects in the field. So, the primary shift there has been really putting the emphasis on the leading-edge of being the dominant managed service provider in AWS and Azure.

OpenStack
Back in OpenStack-land, the firm has now launched OpenStack Everywhere, which is intended to speed up adoption of OpenStack private clouds. Rhodes explains: 

It allows customers to deploy Rackspace managed OpenStack private clouds in our data centers, our customers’ data centers or colocation facilities around the world. OpenStack Everywhere enables customers to ring maximum value from their own DCs as they modernize their infrastructure. It helps them comply with data sovereignty laws in various countries and put their cloud resources close to their users and customers.

It’s part of a wider goal of making it easier to sign up to the OpenStack offering, says Rhodes: 

Until now the biggest obstacles to enterprise adoption of OpenStack private clouds have been concerns about complexity, reliability, and scalability. The skills we learned by co-founding OpenStack and creating the world’s largest OpenStack public cloud now will enable us to breakthrough these barriers for enterprise private clouds. We lead the market in the power and simplicity of our OpenStack offering. It is delivered as a service as clouds were meant to be delivered, without burdening the customer with complex and expensive setup and configuration projects.

Rhodes insists that he has seen what he calls “a significant tipping point” for OpenStack private cloud adoption over the past 6-9 months: 

The last couple of years have really been hallmarked by large enterprises trying to build and roll out their own private clouds. Those have been expensive efforts, skill sets are scarce, the ability to operate OpenStack at scale on your own is hard. Yet there remains this big pent-up demand in the market particularly from large enterprises who are running maybe an alternative stack today, who are looking at private cloud architectures, but wanting to get to what’s the next thing that’s going to drive productivity. 
Some of our largest deals that we closed in March were OpenStack private cloud deals and some of the largest deals that we have in our pipeline today are OpenStack private cloud deals.

In all this, the work done previously on OpenStack public cloud has not gone to waste, he notes: 

While our OpenStack public cloud has become one of the world’s at-scale public clouds, we’ve said in the past that we see OpenStack changing shape toward enterprise private clouds. But the capabilities we’ve developed by having to push OpenStack to scaling, that other players haven’t had to push it to, is we now get to apply a lot of that learning, that technology, that operating model into OpenStack private cloud. That really separates us from other software vendors out there or other service providers. So we think we’ll be really have an unfair advantage in this space.

Not that this is something that seems to bother him too much. Rhodes go on:


Frankly, when you look at the universe of competitors, we bring several things that really make it stand out. The first is, we think that the data that we see that’s indicating what buying patterns are going to be, is that customers are going to be using multiple clouds. So our portfolio as being one of the only players out there that can help with your dedicated hosting workloads as well as AWS, Azure and then manage those across the portfolio is very differentiated.
The second thing is that when we look at companies out there that we’re competing with in the AWS and other ecosystem, is we have scale both in numbers of certified technical experts and global footprint, and in other important elements that are differentiated.
When we look at certain companies we’re competing with, they have never had to build and run cloud technologies at scale. First of all, many of them are professional services-type companies, so they don’t really come from an operations heritage like we do. Second, even of those who come from more of a managed services ops background, they come from an historical, what we call, system administrator mindset, very pre-cloud. They don’t have people who have built and done things like scaling cloud applications across multiple availability zones and data centers, like having to do continuous integration, continuous deployment, like having to do DevOps. 
These are very, very differentiated things. So our Rackers who grew up in these environments, first of all, they’ve been available and that’s why we can quickly shift and build numbers in this business. But the second is they really kill it compared to other managed service providers, and primarily because of that heritage of having to run these things and build these things at scale.

My take
Rackspace is doing the right thing. The hybrid, multi-cloud roadmap is pragmatic, but as Rhodes notes, it’s going to take time to scale up into meaningful revenues. Whether Wall Street is prepared to let that ramp-up journey work itself out remains to be seen, but there’s rich opportunity here to be tapped into if the company is given the chance. 
Image credit - Rackspace Read more on: Cloud platforms - infrastructure and architectureDevOps NoSQL and the open source stack 