
A stark reminder of what happens to a bank when things go wrong and you lose focus on the customer.
A sobering assessment from Ross McEwan, CEO of Royal Bank of Scotland, of his bank’s current predicament. It’s hardly a surprising one though, given that the troubled financial institution remains under-investigation for its conduct in the years leading up to the financial crisis. In pursuit of rehabilitation and addressing that loss of customer focus, digital investment is going to play a critical role.
The goal, according to McEwan is simple: by 2020, RBS will be a a simpler, safe, customer focused bank that delivers for its shareholders. Pursuit of that simplicity has resulted in the decommissioning of 30% of the bank’s legacy IT infrastructure to date and a shift towards more digital focus. McEwan sees early wins here, citing RBS’s victory at the British Bank Awards where it won in the category of Best Mobile App.
Today RBS reckons to be able to meet 80% of commercial customer needs via mobile or online channels. McEwan wants that figure up to 95% in a few years:
We are determined to serve customers the way they want. Our innovation agenda is about giving customers more control. For the majority that means more self-service for our digital channels and great customer service when they need to have a conversation with our highly qualified colleagues. We believe that our continued investment in how we serve customers will deliver long term value in each of the franchises.
Digital innovation is improving productivity in our postal business as well, and mortgage processing times has reduced by 40 minutes through increased automation and 42% of existing customers remortgaged online in 2016. It takes about two minutes. And in addition the introduction of the telephonic signature has reduced the mortgage switching process from seven days to less than two. It is no wonder we are wining business.
We’re also investing in a mobile sales and service proposition which will connect customers no matter where they are to the right specialist. This provides the trust of being able to see somebody combined with the convenience of being able to do it from your own home, office or in our branches.
A case in point is the launch of a new automated investment service for personal customers called NatWest and West, which McEwan explains is:
a fully digital service accessible through customers’ normal internet banking accounts. These innovations are responding to how customer’s preferences are changing. We interact with our customers over 20 times more through digital channels than physical ones. In Personal and Business Banking (PBB), 35% of all product sales are now digitally delivered and rising. We now have 4.2 million mobile users in PBB that’s up 19% on last year. We are the largest commercial bank in the UK and our ranking is joint number one on net promoter school.
Fabric
Ongoing investment includes the development of an Enterprise Data Fabric build on MongoDB which will reduce functional duplication across system stacks that have been the result of decades of new systems evolving alongside business lines. Across RBS as a whole, 600 there are 600 Oracle databases, 300 from Sybase and an astonishing 12,000 SQL Server databases. In total, there are 40,000 Compute Cores, wth multiple copies of data abounding. Going back to McEwan’s goal of a simpler bank, that level of complexity and duplication needs rationalising.
Source – MongoDB presentation here
 
The intention is to rationalise the data layer behind a common API, implemented by a multi-tenant PaaS. This will result in cost-reductions, with the decommissioning of hundreds of the Oracle and SQL Server databases, and simplification, with the data needs of dozens of applications being met by two foundational applications. McEwan says:
Data Fabric will help reduce cost significantly and dramatically increase the speed at which we can deploy new capabilities for our customers.
All of this costs money, of course, but it’s a price worth paying. Despite ongoing headline losses, McEwan says he’s confident that the bank is hitting its financial ‘clear-up’ targets and getting better placed to deliver digital results:
The next three years will not be the same as the past three years. Despite the political and economic uncertainties, our customers, our cost base and our plans for returning to headline profits will be our core priorities. In 2016, we met all our financial targets for the third year running and grew both in. We are now in a position to go further on cost and faster on our digital transformation and to help us deliver increased productivity for colleagues, better service for our customers and ultimately sustainable profits.
Back in 2014, I set out a vision to make us the number one bank. The results feature a tough headline loss, but that figure matches the sheer strides forward we’ve made, the long list of legacy issues we’ve dealt with and most importantly that we are now a more simple, safe and customer-focused bank than we once were.
This bank has great potential and we believe that [by] going faster on the cost reduction and faster on digital transformation, we will deliver a simpler, safer and even more customer-focused bank with a compelling shareholder investment case.
My take
Progress perhaps, but far from out of the woods yet. The bank is still vulnerable to potential criminal and civil actions, while the long term impact of Brexit has yet to be felt. Against that backdrop, RBS is doing the right thing in investing in digital simplification, with programs such as Data Fabric being commendably pragmatic use of digital budget. It’s great to have a flashy award-winning app, but it’s sorting out the back-end that will deliver genuine long-term benefit.
Image credit - RBS/MongoDBDisclosure - At time of writing, Oracle is a premier partner of diginomica. Read more on: Cloud platforms - infrastructure and architectureCRM and customer experienceDevOps NoSQL and the open source stackDigital enterprise in the real worldFinancial services and fintech 