
The Royal Bank of Scotland (RBS) has once again grabbed national headlines this week after a major IT glitch on Wednesday meant that 600,000 account payments were disrupted and customers expecting their wages, tax credits and disability allowances have been left without access to their funds for days.
RBS finally said this morning that the IT problem had been fixed.
This is the second time in recent years that the bank’s creaking IT has left customers without access to their money for days on end, following a batch processing problem in 2012 that resulted in the bank admitting that it had “unacceptable weaknesses” in its systems.
The incident resulted in RBS being fined £56 million by regulators, £1.2 billion in restructuring costs and having to commit £750 million until 2015 in upgrading its systems.
Following this week’s incident, RBS has again said that it has made significant improvements to its resiliency, following multi-million pound investments in simplifying its underlying architecture.
But, despite this, the bank will face a challenge in getting customers to recognise that things are getting better and its technology is capable of holding up under the weight of the expectations that digital banking brings.
Not only this, but RBS and other traditional financial institutions recognise that they are no longer untouchable and that new digital challengers are growing quickly and are picking up disillusioned customers.
No guarantees
Fortunately for us, superb and coincidental timing meant that RBS’s executive team had planned a live webcast on Thursday for an update on the banking group’s IT strategy. Just a day after the latest disastrous glitch.
Taking the lead, Chief Administration Officer Simon McNamara admitted that it was “somewhat ironic” that he was going to spend the next hour talking about the bank’s improvements in technology when thousands of customers were still currently left waiting to get hold of their cash.
Thankfully McNamara addressed the issue head on, instead of pretending nothing had happened, and said that RBS had a “number of people who are working around the clock, using the skills and tools [it has] acquired to address [the] issue”.
However, I’d argue that a lot of his other comments would not be of much comfort to those sitting at home
RBS mobile
needing money to pay bills and buy food. First of all McNamara insisted that RBS had “benefited from this incident” because it required that it invest in tools and techniques to manage the problem.
Feeling reassured?
Not only this, but when talking about the bank’s long-term strategic vision up until 2017, from the point of the last banking failure in 2012, McNamara said that customers should “take comfort in the fact [that RBS] is delivering what [it] said [it] would deliver”.
Finally, McNamara added that RBS has invested a substantial amount in improving the resiliency of the bank’s platform and that it was beginning to see results. For example, RBS’s mobile platform failed an impressive 34 times in 2014, but has only failed once in the last year. Equally, the bank’s international payments network had failed 29 times prior to a recent investment, but has since been stable.
However, although these are tangible benefits, as long as customers are experiencing failures that leave them without access to their hard earned cash, they will likely go unnoticed. Let’s face it, if a mobile platform fails it is somewhat annoying to have to use another channel, but if you don’t receive your wages on time, the knock on effects can be far more difficult to manage.
And, understandably, McNamara stressed that although the bank had committed an additional £150 million a year to improve stability, he could not say that this would be the end of technical problems for customers. He said:
I’d love to say we will never have a technical failing again. If you find somebody that tells you that I’ll tell you you’ve found a liar. It is not feasible to run 100% faultless systems.
Technology will on occasion fail. If and when that occurs, we need to ensure we can mask the impact on customers and recover as quickly and effectively as possible. It is important that it is handled well and competently.
Legacy is a problem that’s not going away
Digital-first banks and banks that have been born without the problem of legacy infrastructure are growing rapidly in the UK. For example, during 2014, challenger Metro Bank saw deposits soar from £1.3 billion to £2.9 billion and saw customer accounts increase to 447,000 (up 63% on the previous year).
Capgemini estimates that traditional financial institutions spend as much as 90% of their budgets maintaining and managing legacy systems – effectively keeping the lights on – whilst new institutions are ploughing money into innovative new services and customer experience.
And during the webinar on RBS’s IT strategy, an accompanying PowerPoint presentation highlighted just how real the bank recognises these threats to be. The slide (see below) outlines how customers can now carry out core banking functions across a number of innovative new platforms.

RBS said that it is attempting to address this by strengthening its scouting network around the world improving its ability to pilot new ideas. For example, it has put an RBS solutions outpost in Silicon Valley.
However, the head of the UK’s banking body, the British Banker’s Association (BBA), said yesterday that the payments failure at RBS was “unacceptable” and that the UK’s banks have “creaking” computer systems. Speaking to the BBC, the BBA’s chief executive, Anthony Browne, said:
The banks are all very aware of this as an issue. A lot of them have creaking IT systems. They are spending £3bn a year upgrading their IT systems. It’s one of the biggest IT upgrades Britain has ever seen.”
Browne also said that customers would not be willing to put up with such failures in a digital age and that expectations had shifted. He said:
Just maybe five years ago or so if you had to go to your branch to make a payment, or you had to go to your branch to check what your balance is, or you had to pay by cheque which went in a lorry and was driven round the country, if you had an outage of a few hours then most people probably wouldn’t have noticed.
Unhappy customers
And if we needed any evidence of how dissatisfied customers are with the latest failure, a quick glance at Twitter shows a lot of angry people left without their cash.

Thanks for my money RBS. Now to take it elsewhere.
— Nicola (@littlesundress) June 19, 2015

@RBS_Help I’ve woke up with money in my account? yay. But you’ve charged me overdraft usage and I’m not paying it for your mess
— Rebecca Polson (@RebeccaPolsonx) June 19, 2015


@RBS_Help will be moving all my account to somewhere more reliable, no pay, overdrawn, impacting credit rating and no money 4 sons 1st bday
— Jason Smith (@JJSmudger) June 18, 2015


Mum just told me the RBS branch in the high street got held up yesterday! I said I wouldn’t worry they won’t get any money until Saturday!
— Andrew (@thegilf) June 18, 2015



Payday without pay is just another day…!! Please can I have my money @RBSGroup and @RBS_Help?? Bet your staff bank with @Barclays!!
— James Worden (@JamesWorden85) June 18, 2015

My take
This isn’t just a worry for RBS in terms of losing customers, but also terms of gaining new ones. These sorts of failures will inevitably stick in people’s minds when going through that decision making process. And when you’ve got the option of the likes of Metro Bank that are proving to offer unrivalled customer services, and with easier bank switching rules in the UK, each technical glitch creates a big loyalty problem for RBS. Or any other bank for that matter.
Not only this, but telling customers that failures on certain services have reduced from dozens to just a couple a year will literally mean nothing to those that have been left without access to their money. There’s no alternative service – if RBS has your money, you can’t get it elsewhere.
As one RBS customer on Twitter pointed out, the banks are very quick to charge consumers late fees when they owe money. Should the same rules apply vice versa?

Read more on: CRM and customer experienceUse cases 