

We can’t possibly envisage a situation in which 2 million customers get lost in translation.

It’s a scenario that clearly appals Howard Davies, Chairman of Royal Bank of Scotland (RBS) and one which explains the drill-down focus on extricating and migrating critical IT systems as part of the bank’s divestiture of its Williams and Glyn brand. 
Williams and Glyn was taken over by RBS back in 1985, but has been compelled by the European Commission to spin off its 308 branches in England and Wales and 6 in Scotland as a condition for the £45 billion state-funded bailout of the bank in 2008. 
Getting the technology migration right is critical. On the RBS website, the progress report on the divestiture notes: 

Customers have told us that the reliability of our technology is really important. It’s a huge focus for us and we’ve now completed our technology design and commenced extensive testing.

This focus is hardly surprising given that RBS has suffered some of the most high-profile IT-related outages in recent times. Last year, 600,000 customers were left without payments due in their accounts from wages, tax credits and disability allowances, while in 2012, 6.5 million customers were locked out their accounts for days. Meanwhile on New Year’s Day this year, customers found their debit cards being declined. 
RBS was fined £56 million relating to the 2012 incident after regulators concluded that it had failed to keep its systems up to date, despite spending £1 billion a year on technology.
So the need to get the new independent Williams and Glyn up-and-running on a sound technology platform is an obvious strategic requirement. RBS Chief Executive Ross McEwan explains that the bank is acutely aware of the challenge it faces: 

Our plan – we’re taking Williams & Glyn out of the RBS systems stack.

He adds: 

I’ve always said this is probably the most complex thing of taking a bank from inside a bank, and we are finding that. Just to give you a level of the complexity of this thing, there’s something like 50,000 to 60,000 project pieces associated with getting this out. So if anyone’s got any other ideas about getting banks out of banks, send them our way. 
There are 700 systems, there’s 190 product sets coming out. This is retail, right through to commercial. So it’s highly complex, and that’s what we’re working with. 

Progress is being made, insists McEwan, even if the original timeframe has slipped: 

To date, we’ve had the first level, I think, it was about 400-odd of our main systems that have come out and gone to testing; and then, we’ve got about 103 of our mid-range systems that have gone now in to testing. Each one of those shows you how close you’re getting to getting it out. 
The next major stage in point for us is getting them from testing in to production, which will be later on in 2016. But each time we do a piece, we learn more.

There is a clear roadmap of next steps, says RBS Chief Administrative Officer Simon McNamara: 

This is a big program with a lot of moving parts. There are about 70,000 milestones that make up this project. A number of them are behind us. We’ve already stood up the mainframe environment, and we’ve started this test environment.
What’s ahead of us is the establishment of the full production environment, and that’s the work that’s currently underway. So that’s setting up, essentially, the destination in a full sense. That’s what we’ll be doing over the next few months, looking to complete by the end of the summer.

And running through all this is that nightmare scenario envisaged by Davies of millions of customers dropping out of the system in transition. That’s why RBS is taking very careful steps, says McNamara: 

If you can imagine taking 2 million customers from our business today over a weekend and having them fully functional and operating on a Monday morning in a new bank, there’s a lot of testing and proving.
We’ll spend a significant amount of time making sure that as we migrate those customers from the existing systems to the destination systems, that they fully function on the Monday morning, hat the 190 products that they have with us are fully functional through that transition.

Simpler times
Away from the Williams and Glyn initiative, RBS continues to invest in tech as part of a digital transformation and simplification program, says McEwan: 

We’re making targeted investments, aimed at winning more business from our customers. These brands have been undersold during the crisis, and we’re now resetting each one to deliver deeper, more targeted customer engagement. I know from experience that good customer service and increased advocacy is delivered by engaged colleagues. Actions like our banking skills program and the wide range of leadership training are helping us to improve this engagement.
And I’m happy to see evidence of the service time improvements in both our business bank and our commercial bank for our customers. There’s still a lot to do here. Our highest-profile product launch in the last year was the NatWest Reward current account. In my view, it is actually the best product in the market now, purely because of its simplicity. This is where customers get 3% back on their household bills. It couldn’t be much simpler than that. A high quality current account is essential to building deeper customer engagement.

Mobile banking is also a top priority, he adds: 

Our mobile banking app is market leading. It’s good for engagement, but it’s also an efficient sales channel for us as well. That’s why we’ve improved the NatWest app this year to offer loans and savings products at the touch of a button. We’re also the first to introduce touch ID, with over 1.5 million logons to date. All the points I’ve mentioned were examples of the many investments we’re making to become number one for customer satisfaction, service, trust, and advocacy. By winning the loyalty and advocacy of our customers and serving them efficiently, we can build more sustainable, higher quality returns for our shareholders.

All of this is paying off, he insists: 

We are simpler. Our systems are now less complicated and more robust. We’ve cut operating costs by over £2 billion in the last two years. And we’re better for customers.

That said, RBS this month came bottom out of a customer satisfaction ranking of 30 UK banks conduced by consumer group Which?, while its NatWest arm was also placed in the bottom ten. So that “lot to do” might more accurately be expressed as “a hell of a lot to do”. 
My take
There are so many examples of mergers and acquisitions in the finance sector that were brought low by IT systems migrations that RBS is well-advised to a take a careful and methodical approach to getting this right with Williams and Glyn. 
But the results of the Which? study are a timely reminder that day-to-day work needs to continue as well. The message from the public here is that RBS customer service sucks, no matter what McEwan reckons. 
And that’s before we get the small matter of this bailed-out bank still turning in losses north of £2 billion. 
Read more on: Data privacyDigital transformation - frictionless enterpriseFinancial services and fintechMobileSecurityUse cases 