
While it may not always be apparent, we consume a tremendous amount of research content. These are things I’m reading right now I think are important in the context of the enterprise buyer. Enjoy and do consider the notes that have been added to the excerpts. As a side note, I include many of these pieces in our digiDaily. Consider subscribing so you can always be assured of getting the TL;DR of the most important modern enterprise analysis.  That’s the system of reference!!

Mind the Gap: HR Tech 2018 – Bersin by Deloitte 
“HR technology is increasingly heating up (capabilities are so advanced they might have seemed like science fiction just a couple of years ago) and chilling down (even these capabilities become commodities quickly, as it is easy to copy them).” < a more nuanced view than Brian Sommer’s but still useful
Top Takeaways From #HRTechConf – TMP Blog 
“No matter what you learn each year, HR Tech is THE place to get the whole picture of the HR technology market. As technology and innovation continues to grow and drive the HR and recruiting industry, we can’t wait to learn more and see what next year brings!” < an alt POV that’s very light on detail
What’s behind the growing divide between tech and government – SiliconANGLE 
““It’s really obvious that there’s a lack of understanding about how technology works,” Jennifer Pahlka, executive director of Code for America and a former White House official, said during an appearance at the Lincoln event. “But it has the seeds of getting better.”” < Really? I’m not so sure.
Artificial Intelligence Can Reinforce Bias, Cloud Giants Announce Tools For AI Fairness 
“Unfairly trained Artificial Intelligence (AI) systems can reinforce bias, therefore AI systems must be trained fairly. Experts say AI fairness is a dataset issue for each specific machine learning model. AI fairness is a newly recognized challenge.” < I call BS on this.
Keep Your Email Safe From Third-Party Apps 
“Whenever you click that easy “Sign in With Google” button on a company’s website, you’re granting the app or service access to some of your information. While in some cases that might just be access to your name and email address, for others you’re giving that company the ability to read your email as well.”< It’s complicated
How Your Brain Decides Without You – Issue 19: Illusions – Nautilus 
“The structure of the brain, she notes, is such that there are many more intrinsic connections between neurons than there are connections that bring sensory information from the world. From that incomplete picture, she says, the brain is “filling in the details, making sense out of ambiguous sensory input.” The brain, she says, is an “inference generating organ.” ” <- Fascinating stuff in an AI-driven world.
Facebook’s attempts to fight fake news seem to be working. (Twitter’s? Not so much.) » Nieman Journalism Lab 
“Still, “the fact that Facebook engagements and Twitter shares follow similar trends prior to late 2016 and for the non-fake-news sites in our data, but diverge sharply for fake news following the election, suggests that some factor has slowed the relative diffusion of misinformation on Facebook,” the researchers write. “The suite of policy and algorithm changes made by Facebook following the election seems like a plausible candidate.”” < OK…go figure. 
How AI & Machine Learning Are Redefining The War For Talent – Enterprise Irregulars 
“Of the five companies Gartner names as Cool Vendors in the field of Human Capital Management for Talent Acquisition, Eightfold is the only one achieving personalization at scale today. Attaining personalization at scale is essential if any growing business is going to succeed in attracting, acquiring and growing talent that can support their growth goals and strategies.” < Think about that for a moment
Forget the new iPhones, Apple’s best product is now privacy 
“I now believe the best product Apple offers is intangible, yet far more valuable than a flagship smartphone. The best product Apple has–and the single biggest reason that consumers should choose an Apple device over competing devices–is privacy.” < I’m all in, you?
Alibaba looks to arm hotels, cities with its AI technology | ZDNet 
“Alibaba A.I. Labs’ general manager Chen Lijuan said the new robots aimed to “bridge the gap” between guest needs and their expected response time. Describing the robot as the next evolution towards smart hotels, Chen said it tapped AI technology to address painpoints in the hospitality sector, such as improving service efficiencies.” < They’re thinking way ahead of what I see elsewhere. 
Cyber security: Your boss doesn’t care and that’s not OK anymore | ZDNet 
“Departments like finance and HR will bear the brunt of opportunistic attempts to steal funds and data, and time and resources need to be put in to ensuring that these areas understand the threats they face.” < How do you see this issue?
Build DevOps Teams, Start Your Digital Transformation – The New Stack 
“Vodafone, for example, which is at the early stages of its digital transformation, is relying on DevOps teams to boost its pace of delivery, responsiveness and its ability to innovate, Connolly says.” <Rght long-term strategy?
“Shadow IT” Goes Mainstream | Enterprise Alliance 
“Over the past ten years or so, we have seen a shift from chronically under-served business needs spawn the practice of shadow IT. The next phase was an ever-growing understanding that this outlaw practice represented positive innovation. The final step, collaborative investment strategy between business and IT, is the most promising evolution that directly addresses the chronic failures of business and IT alignment, where business interests were underrepresented during the buying process.” < Ever it was so.
Legitimate Interest vs. Publisher Consent: Routes to GDPR Compliance 
“Legitimate interest remains the dominant position among publishers, with an Adzerk report indicating that so far, only a quarter of the top 10,000 US domains selling programmatic ads use a CMP. Sovrn data substantiates this figure, with just 27% of the EU requests we receive currently containing a recognizable consent string.” < Not going to work in my view. Your POV?

Image credit - © ra2 studio - Fotolia.com plus public imageRead more on: Best of Digital enterprise in the real worldBest of HCM and the digital future of work 