
Bo Bandy of ReadyTalk
One of the challenges for advocate marketers is tying their initiatives back to ROI. Bo Bandy of ReadyTalk has wrestled with that issue more than most; she’s been doing “advocate marketing” for a lot longer than the phrase existed. At Influitive’s Advocamp show, I had a chance to find out what she’s learned about measuring success.
As ReadyTalk’s Director of Marketing, Bandy manages the team that’s responsible for all of ReadyTalk’s marketing initiatives, from inbound marketing to PR. With 8,000+ customers and 70,000 end users, ReadyTalk has established itself as a technology platform for collaborative meetings and large scale web events.
I’ve already published use cases focusing on key advocate marketing benefits:

Referrals: How Blackbaud turbo-charged referral revenue by upping their customer advocate game(Advocamp)
Peer review programs: Peer reviews matter – how QuickBase built its advocacy and reviews initiative – (Advocamp)
Moving beyond references: How BMC moved from static references to customer advocacy ROI (pre-Advocamp)

Bandy has already done plenty with referrals and references. Our interview was a chance to look at the problem that plagues digital marketing projects of all kinds:

Are we measuring the right things?
And if not, how do we develop the metrics/processes/analytics tools to move beyond “vanity metrics”?

Bandy’s team at ReadyTalk has already developed some revenue-based metrics, but like most companies, advanced metrics is a journey not yet finished.
Jon Reed: When did advocate marketing come onto your radar screen?
Bo Bandy: We are very much a customer-centric organization. We’ve been looking at Net Promoter Scores (NPS) scores for at least eight years. At the time, we weren’t calling it advocate marketing, because that term didn’t exist yet. About five years ago, we started formalizing our onboarding, referral, and reference programs. We started using Influitive to centralize that almost four years ago.
Reed: So if you already had these programs underway, what was the benefit of an advocate marketing solution like Influitive’s?
Bandy: To put the bulk of it under one roof. We needed a way to gamify it, to better organize the programs, and start to see some return on it. Even to understand who was doing what – that was really cumbersome prior to using Influitive.
Advice from a seasoned advocate marketer
Reed: Now that you’re an experienced user of advocate marketing software, what’s your advice on getting the most out if it?
Bandy: It’s about making sure we’re asking. Our customers are so willing to help us, to work with us, to step up and offer up their expertise. We just have to make sure we continue to ask. We’re always trying different things within our “hub.” We always try to maintain that kind of personal element of it with our advocates – the relationship piece has been really important.
Reed: In the “fundamentals of advocate marketing” certification class, a big debate was about whether new customers should be included in an advocate program (Influitive typically recommends bringing new customers in). The advantage is new customers may have that “honeymoon period” enthusiasm. But there is also a risk, because those deeper relationships are not in place. 

Bandy: I can definitely see both arguments. We’re going to start trying to use our advocate platform to onboard new customers. Until now, we’ve waited until a deeper point with our customers before we bring them into the program. Now we’re looking to reverse that, and start to capitalize on that honeymoon period. 

Measuring success – moving beyond vanity metrics
Reed: You and I both know that types of programs work, but measuring their ROI is another matter. What kinds of numbers are you using?
Bandy: We measure all the basic volume metrics, which you might call the vanity metrics – right? But we’re starting to expand beyond those. We look at the number of referrals, but we also look at the influence on revenue from those referrals. Did they become MQLs [marketing qualified leads], did they close, and what rates are they closing at?
Reed: Are you doing the same with references?
Bandy: Yes, with our references, we’re looking at reference-influenced revenues.
Reed: And how is that determined?
Bandy: We track it based on looking at when a reference was involved in a potential deal, what percent of those deals close, and what’s the influence on revenue for that. We also spend a lot of time looking at how customers are involved in usability feedback sessions.
Prior to having an advocate hub, our process was, the product owner saying to us, “Hey, I’d really like to talk to a customer.'” Then we had to dig around and find the right customer for them to talk to, and that took hours – or sometimes days. Now we can source customer interviews for a product in a half hour to an hour. We’ve had examples where we changed or pivoted on our road map based on those interviews.
Reed: So that “turnaround to customer interview” time is actually an important metric for you. Just to be clear for our readers, when you talk about “vanity metrics,” are you referring mostly to volume numbers like “number of advocates who joined the community this month/quarter/year” and things like that?
Bandy: Yes. Even things like, “The number of challenges completed,” or “Number of references completed” doesn’t mean anything, if those references didn’t convert to anything. Number of case studies doesn’t really mean anything. [Editor’s note: the main way an Influitive customer involves their advocates on projects is through “challenges” issued to a group of advocates.]
Reed: Are you able to primarily track those numbers within Influitive, or do you need to pull in data from other systems, be it Marketo or what have you?
Bandy: We can track all those volume numbers in Influitive. It’s going the step further that means tying in different systems, or going beyond what we’re capable of doing now.
Reed: What would be another example of that type of advanced, or impact metric?
Bandy: Here’s one we are working on: we want to look at our customers that are advocates, and we want to compare their churn and their spend to non-advocates. The second step is we want to start segmenting our customer hub based on our target use cases, our segments and our verticals, and start understanding, “Where is our hub being especially effective?” Those would be really impactful metrics.
Reed: Would that mean Influitive builds out those capabilities for you, or would it be about pulling in data from other systems?
Bandy: Some of it’s on my end. We’re working on a better way to look at churn internally. But it would require a much tighter integration with Influitive and Salesforce.
Reed: Yes, I heard from several customers hoping Influitive would build on its existing Salesforce integration.
Bandy: That’s just a challenge with every platform, right? We track the top of the funnel in Marketo, and the mid and bottom of the funnel in Salesforce. We don’t have a data warehouse, so how do we get past the vanity metrics when it means getting into all of the data?
Reed: It sounds like there’s a couple of phases to it, right? First, you have to come up with the criteria and process, such as the best definition of churn. Then you need to go to the vendors you work with, and say, “Here’s what we want to do, how are we going to make this happen,” and challenge them to pick up the ball and run with it.
Bandy: Right. Or we go to a third party, such as a data warehouse that you can basically build your own application with. We could go to somebody and say, “Here are my data sources – help me figure this out,” and just have something custom built. If I do that, I’m going to turn around and resell it, because I will have solved a problem for a lot of people.
The wrap – new frontiers and ex-customer loyalty
Reed: A worthy challenge. So what else is next?
Bandy: This year, our team’s going to spend a lot of time revamping our referral experience, and how we can drive more new revenue that way. Also, we have a lot of end users that are advocates, but not as many decision makers. One of the things we are talking about is, “How do we take these great end user advocates and make them internal champions who are very vocal to the decision maker?” Then they can influence churn.
Reed: As far as churn goes, does that mean you have ex-customers who are no longer part of your advocate hub?
Bandy: That’s the really interesting thing. We actually have advocates in our hub that are in a group called “No longer ReadyTalk customers.”
Reed: They didn’t want to let go of the relationship then?
Bandy: Yes, these are folks that still love our company, but they aren’t customers because they didn’t have a choice; they were acquired or moved to another firm. They want to continue to advocate for us, so we have them in their own little group.
Reed: That’s pretty cool.
Bandy: Sometimes, a prospect will ask, “I want to speak to somebody who’s no longer a customer.” Even from that standpoint, it’s nice to tap into this group. They love us and they don’t want to go away.
Image credit - Photo of Bo Bandy at Advocamp, by Jon ReedDisclosure - Influitive paid the bulk of my travel expenses to attend Advocamp 2016. Salesforce is a diginomica premier partner; Marketo is a partner.Read more on: CRM and customer experienceDigital and content marketingUse cases 