
In November last year, Shannon-based laboratory products manufacturer Reagecon was one of four Irish companies to sign big export deals at the inaugural China International Import Exhibition (CIIE) in Shanghai.
In Reagecon’s case, the five-year deal with its largest Chinese distributor, Beijing Thorigin, is worth around €10 million. As well as Reagecon’s existing products, which are standards and reagents used in laboratories for measurement tasks such as calibrating equipment, Beijing Thorigin will distribute new products from the Irish company that are targeted at the life sciences, environmental and geology markets – all big growth areas in China.
In digital terms, this deal has significant implications for a B2B e-commerce initiative currently underway at Reagecon. A total newcomer to the world of online selling until last year, Reagecon rolled out an e-commerce platform from Sana Commerce during the first half of 2018 and is now focusing on building up this new channel. According to the company’s founder and managing director John Barron, speaking back in November:
We expect within six months, as part of the roll-out of our e-commerce facility, to have a full translation in Mandarin of the rich technical content of this new site.
Specialized products, specialist customers
In other words, Reagecon has set itself some ambitious expansion goals and knows that B2B e-commerce is essential to meeting them – but as a company dealing with highly specialized products and highly specialist customers, it had some very specific needs when it came to picking an e-commerce platform, according to Reagecon sales manager Tom Neylon.
For example. customers need a great deal of information about the company’s products in order to pick the right product and manage it correctly, he says:
A lot of the products we sell are very particular to a certain application in a laboratory environment, and some of them are quite dangerous, they’re hazardous in nature. Customers need regulatory and technical information, information on product safety, information on the right handling and shipping – and we wanted to be able to bring as much of that kind of information out of our SAP Business One ERP system and onto the product pages of the e-commerce site. That was extremely important.
Also we needed the flexibility to customize shipping options to suit the exact requirements of products and customers. It’s not as simple as products being ‘hazardous’ or ‘non-hazardous’: there are levels of hazard, there are products that can’t be shipped together, there are some that can’t go on boats and some that can’t go on planes. There are a lot of complications.
Neylon says that the project team spent a couple of weeks scoping out what they thought the e-commerce website should look like and how it should function, and then worked backwards from there in order to pick out a software provider. That brought them to Sana Commerce, a small Rotterdam, Netherlands-based supplier of e-commerce software that integrates directly with SAP and Microsoft Dynamics systems.
Mind the gap
In a recent evaluation of B2B e-commerce suites, analysts at Forrester Research classed SAP, Intershop and Insite Software as the market’s frontrunners, but had the following to say about Sana Commerce:
Sana Commerce fills the gaps between e-commerce and ERP. Unlike others in the market that define an end user’s shopping experience and force-fit it into other enterprise systems, Sana Commerce has started where most of the business requirements reside: the [ERP] system. The company’s philosophy is to start from the ERP and add the digital experience and shopping functionality around it. While the digital experience piece comes secondary, Sana Commerce is able to optimize the operational side of customer experience more effectively.
While the company has a long way to go to match the content management and personalization capabilities of rival systems, they add,
…it’s a good fit for businesses currently running a Microsoft or SAP system that elect to manage most of their business rules around customers, products and transactions from that system.
Aggressive growth plan
Customers, in fact, like Reagecon, where Tom Neylon says that the company’s been very pleased with the results it’s seen so far, in terms of enabling customers to browse and purchase products at any time, regardless of their geography or timezone. The company has already made around 30,000 products available online, he adds, a figure that will rise to around 40,000 in time.
Right now, the proportion of overall revenues that online sales account for at Reagecon is very small – in the low single digits, Neylon reckons. But he sees that rising rapidly over the course of 2019 as sales increasingly shifted to the online channel, perhaps to as much as 30% by mid-year and 80% by the end of 2019. Says Neylon:
We have an aggressive growth plan and we want software to do as much work as possible for us. A lot of our growth over the next three to four years, I expect to be able to attribute directly to Sana – or at least, to the e-commerce capabilities it supports.
 
Image credit - ReageconRead more on: Digital enterprise in the real worlde-commerceRetail e-commerce and the omni-channelUse cases 