
Chet Kapoor
It was good to see. What might have been expected to be a heavy, tech-oriented conference turned out to lean heavily towards what tech can achieve for businesses, rather than concentrate on its stupendous `coolness’. But that is the way the ‘I Love APIs’ conference tipped its hat this week.
Staged by API specialist Apigee, the company fortunately avoided the temptation to go for the hard-sell approach to concentrate on what CEO Chet Kapoor defined as helping businesses become digital and to have a connected digital experience with its customers, business partners, suppliers and staff:
To quote Gartner, the issue now is not about disrupting business, but about remastering it. And this is going to happen to every business, so the question is `how do you manage this issue?’ How do you perceive your colleagues and customers? With the combination of APIs and predictive analytics, you will end up knowing more about your customers than a typical marketing person. And that is a natural by-product of what is now happening.
Up the food chain
The underlying theme of the day was pitched at demonstrating the business advantages of adopting the use of APIs as the way of creating communicating, collaborating applications, as well as the business of advantages of engineering significant changes in culture in even the largest businesses.
Kapoor pointed out that to get the best out of the technology having a driver as high up the corporate food chain as possible is an important first step:
The leading users have a CxO level individual driving it from the top, across functions. That person must have the ability to simplify things so that colleagues can readily understand and the ability to change and adjust goals as the process goes through. It will not go as planned, that can be guaranteed. So business and management agility is now more important than an agile applications development process.
Some of the changes needed will include a move from centralised planning to edge management, which is where the real innovations are likely to come from, and the nouse to exploit the way APIs are becoming the new system of engagement between existing business systems and the new applications. This, he suggested will require some new thinking and approaches:
Don’t start by exposing the back-end functions. Look at how the marketplace wants to consume the back-end functionality you have available and work to expose that in ways that make consumption easy. It is a consumption-led world now. And if you think there is a lot of data now you ain’t seen nothing yet. Every time you see a device, we see an API. And the big app that will exploit this is predictive analytics. It is no longer about creating data lakes, because they are static. Now the data has to flow to be useful.
Fail fast, not forever
More business pointers came from a panel session featuring Jack Ramsey, Accenture’s director of global technology delivery, Paul Clark, ITV’s controller of online pay and interactive TV,  Kevin Gallagher, the CIO of Channel 4 and Alberto Prado, VP of digital innovation and consumer lifestyle with electrical goods maker, Philips.
Suggestions here included accepting the chance of failure, but being ready to fail fast. The trend now is towards fast and complex issues, not big and difficult ones. As Ramsey put it:
The next 10 years will see dramatic transformations. Many big, established IT companies are likely to go bankrupt because they don’t understand the mind-set they will need.
Internal cultural silos are a key issue to overcome in businesses with large legacy systems estates. The legacy systems can be wrapped in APIs so the data and functionality can be leveraged, but only if the internal cultural barriers will allow that to happen.
Prado identified a particular challenge with makers of hardware `things’ – getting their managements to understand the need for change. For example, getting them to see that adding communications capabilities to a product is not just adding a new feature but making a fundamental change to many areas of business such as maintenance and finance. In this way, every company is moving towards being a software business.
Get developing
As another example, Ramsey suggested that Tesla does not actually produce an electric car, but rather a digital car, permanently on the Internet and fully equipped for autonomous driving.
The universal need now is to understand the business from the customers’ point of view, and then use that understanding to help customers, by predicting what they want. Companies like Amazon, it was suggested, learn much more about their customers than anyone thinks they do through actions such as logging where people stop reading in a book on a Kindle, or which products they hover the mouse over on screen, even if they don’t click on them.
The big trick, they all agreed, is to think big, but start small. Do anything that gives a quick and effective demonstration of what is possible. There is a need for someone to say, Trust Me, and then get on and do it.
Elsewhere, Forrester analyst Martha Bennett used taxi-tackling Uber to demonstrate how businesses can not only use its data to advantage but add the `human touch’ can help make or break a brand name.
What really makes Uber different is its use of data and the ability to analyse it. Not only that but it also exploits the ability to have a human override the system. For example, there is a real need to override surge pricing when there is a disaster situation that would cause a surge in demand a purely data-driven service would respond to. The ability to override the system to protect the brand image is important.
There is also a need to pay real attention to the data, to make sure it is clean, up to date and appropriate. You need to have the right information about customers. For example, don’t be a food retailer that sends vegan customers emails containing meat recipes, as US company Whole Food Markets did. So it is about understanding what data the user will need, how often it needs to be updated, how near to real time is an up-to-date picture of the business or business process required and being ready to quickly extend the range of information delivered as the need arises.
And when it comes to using predictive data, businesses must remember that the ‘what is happening’ question is more important than the `who is doing it’ one. A typical ‘what’ will start with a user reading about something, then maybe tweeting about it, then doing some other research, and then buying the product. Limiting data collection to the ‘who’ – knowing that it is a 25 year old male from Tooting called John – is supporting information, but of almost no value just by itself.
My take
Here is further evidence of both the swing away from the `T’ of IT being the dominant factor, and the growing understanding that it is what the customers want and need in terms of information and services are now moving centre stage in corporate thinking. There is also a strong hint that those businesses which do not adjust quickly or fully are likely to face a bleak future.

Read more on: Analytics planning and data analysisCollaboration sharing and digital productivityCRM and customer experiencee-commerce 