
RAM clinic in action
A non-profit’s mission grounds to a halt if its financial systems are unsustainable. When Don Mackay, CFO of Remote Area Medical, joined the organization in March of 2014, he was faced with the immediate challenge of upgrading the organization’s financial systems. There could be only one outcome: ensure the growth of Remote Area Medical’s field clinics – or get swamped by legacy systems and resource-draining processes.
Mackay knew one thing: he did not want to let Founder and President Stan Brock down. Brock’s vision for Remote Area Medical was sparked by a personal injury he suffered in 1985 while living among the Wapishana Indians in Guyana, South America. Brock found himself isolated from medical care. He saw entire tribes devastated by simple or minor illnesses that modern medicine could have treated.
Today, Remote Area Medical (RAM) treats thousands of patients in portable medical clinics. 30+ clinics will be offered this year, spread throughout the U.S. from the south to Seattle. Their upcoming clinic in West Virginia will treat upwards of three thousand people (More than 25,000 people were treated across clinics in 2015). In addition to the U.S. clinics, Remote Area Medical provides international disaster relief; they’ve been on-site after typhoons in the Philipines.
A different kind of triage – modernizing your accounting systems
But when Mackay joined RAM, he had to perform triage of a different kind: on RAM’s accounting systems. As he told me:
The previous controller had been gone for five months; they were way behind on getting their books caught up. We were on Great Plains; I’d worked in ERP, but not with Great Plains [Microsoft Dynamics GP]. It was a learning experience all around. I had to understand the books, understand Great Plains – plus we were trying to do some new things with the organization.
Mackay found GP difficult for remote access:
I could dial in by VPN, but it was never simple – it was not an easy process.
A meeting with RAM’s implementation partner, LBMC, Technology Solutions, was eye-opening. LBMC advised that a major Great Plains upgrade was looming:
LBMC are the ones that installed Great Plains. They came in and told us that we were coming due for an upgrade to the next level. We were looking at a fifteen to twenty thousand dollar upgrade. I wasn’t real happy with what I saw with Great Plains. It does the things that you need it to do, but it’s cumbersome.
Don Mackay, CFO
In June 2014, Mackay was doing a bit of a juggling act: first, he was getting RAM’s books up to date. He was also preparing the company for an audit. Given the upgrade issue, he also initiated an accounting software evaluation. LBMC’s demo of Intacct stood out:
We did look at some other applications, but Intacct seemed like one of the best from our standpoint. For one thing, it’s much easier to create and view reports than it was within Great Plains.
Ease of remote access was critical:
One of the reasons we decided to move to Intacct was ease of access. From time to time, we had to work remotely. If we’re on-site at one of our clinics, it would be nice to be able just to punch in and have access to our information.
Intacct could give visibility into their affiliate organizations:
We were trying to think of ways to have our affiliates keep their books with us, but not necessarily have us have keep the books for them. For example, we have one affiliate in Virginia. They are now on Intacct as well, and it gives us visibility into what they are doing there.
Implementation, training and go-live
When the Intacct implementation began in the summer of 2014, Mackay was still wrapping the audit. Still, they were able to go live within a few months, flipping the switch in October of 2014. One of the toughest decisions? Determining how much information RAM wanted to bring into Intacct. Mackay decided to carry over the balances from the prior year and some of the transactions from the current year.
Balancing between two systems through the end of the year proved to be the biggest challenge of the transition. Given that Mackay found reporting withing Great Plains difficult, I was curious about training and reporting on Intacct. Mackay told me training new users on Intacct did take some time. Only two people managed the accounting system, but Mackay did provide RAM executives access to dashboards inside of Intacct:
If they don’t use Intacct all the time, you’re still showing them how to do it, but it is definitely easier. I didn’t even try to do something like that with Great Plains.
After go-live – assessing the benefits
When 2015 rolled around, Mackay’s team was really cooking on the new system. Now, almost a year and a half later, have the benefits panned out?
One move that paid off: the executive dashboards. Mackay:
One of the first things we did was to provide log ins to all of the board members and the executive team. They also have some limited ability to go in and look at reports as well.
Mackay found an unexpected benefit during board meetings:
Instead of going and printing financial statements for everybody – which I can still do of course – I put them up on the screen. I can go right into Intacct and review the financials directly with the board members. If somebody asks a question about something, I can drill into the application right there. I think they’ve all been very impressed with that.
Month-end closing has moved from a struggle to a breeze:
With Great Plains, it was a struggle to get the thing closed. There was just a lot of information we were pulling from different sources. I’ve got it down now to where I can basically be closed a day after the month end – it’s really that simple. We’re not a real complex organization, so I don’t want to lead you into thinking there’s that much to pull together, but it’s still a much easier process.
I asked Mackay what made the close so much easier:
Just getting the information into Intacct is easier. I don’t have to do as much of journal entry as I previously had to. Before, everything had to be journalized… Now I can book entries immediately. The entire process has been streamlined.
Another nifty result? Mackay RAM now uses Intacct’s project-based accounting functionality to assess the profit and loss of individual clinics:
We’re not using the full feature, but we use Intacct’s project accounting to track all of our clinics and the costs associated with them. It gives us a better idea of how much our clinics are costing.
I asked Mackay for an example:
We had a new clinic that started last year… We spent a lot more money on that clinic than we have on other clinics in the past… We were able to track it down and see exactly why. I can show that to the board and say, “We spent a lot of money on this clinic, and here’s why.”
The wrap – more analytics ahead
Next up: integrating Intacct with other applications, including the donor database, Sumac (Sumac has now developed an integration for RAM into Intacct). After the integration, all the donations will automatically post from Sumac into Intacct. That should also lead to new donor insights via Intacct’s reporting:
We’re already tracking that to some degree already, but we hope to analyze that data better than what we’ve done in the past.
What donor questions would Mackay like to analyze? A big one is: what triggers donors to give a large donation, seemingly out of nowhere? RAM also puts out a magazine twice a year: “We want to do a better job of tracking how that impacts our donors.” Mackay, a big fan of mobile enablement, is also hoping Intacct will make it even easier to access the system on tablets.
RAM clinic action shot
Meanwhile, it’s full speed ahead on clinics, with a first-ever New York City clinic coming up. I asked Mackay if he ever feels like he’s missing out on the field action:
I try to make it a point to go to some of the clinics every year… I think it’s important to be out in the field and see what’s going on.
On-site work leads to amazing stories:
It is an eye opener, I can assure you. Usually what happens is people start lining up the night before. We open the doors at 6:00 am; sometimes we’ll have long lines of people waiting then to get in the door.
Sounds like a mission worth fighting for. For Mackay, along with his colleague and operations lead Chris Hall, that means repeatable processes with cost control, reporting visibility – and a sustainable plan for growth. So far, so good.
Image credit - Clinic photos from Remote Area Medical web site, including feature image. Head shot of Mackay provided by RAM. Disclosure - Diginomica has no financial ties to Intacct. I was approached by Intacct's PR about the Remote Area Medical story and pursued it. Read more on: Analytics planning and data analysisCloud ERP financials and supply chainFinancialsHealthcare transformationUse cases 