
Steve Strout, live at ASUG/Sapphire Now
Steve Strout is no stranger to SAP; I first interviewed him in his tenure as CEO of SAP’s North American User Group (ASUG) back in 2007. Since then, his career has taken him to interesting places, including leading Blackberry through an implementation of Workday Financials.
A year ago, Strout joined Sabre Corporation as VP of Corporate Systems, with the mission of overhauling their technology platform. This wasn’t my first S/4HANA case study – we’ve done a slew of them pulled from our video shoots at Sapphire Now 2016. But Strout’s story caught my attention for the emphasis on building a digital platform, not just a technology upgrade. Strout didn’t sugarcoat how they’ve managed the inevitable change that comes with that type of move.
Replatforming the business – bring your own white board
Change is no small thing when you’re dealing with 10,000 global employees. By their count, 1 billion people worldwide use Sabre Corporation technology to plan, book, and get to their travel destinations. Since being spun off from American Airlines in 2000, Sabre has become the largest global distribution systems provider for air bookings in North America, But the business pulled ahead of their internal tech platform. That’s how Strout described his mission to me:
Sabre brought me in to help replatform the business operating platform, to try to catch up, actually, to the product side. Our product side has been driving new innovations and new products much faster than historically.
Strout couldn’t resist the challenge of an architectural white board:
From a strategic perspective, what were we putting together that was going to drive change for our organization? For us, it was how to create a revenue growth platform. How do we actually manage our business by data?
Strout’s team began by assembling a solution for project portfolio management. Once they nailed the big picture view, they moved on to workforce management. Strout selected SuccessFactors as their HCM platform, adding Employee Central, Onboarding and Recruitment to their existing SuccessFactors Compensation, Learning and Performance Management systems. Then, integration with Fieldglass to manage their contingent workforce (20 percent of their software development group are contractors).
The S/4HANA decision
That left the customer engagement and financial platform. Strout is still working out the customer engagement side, where Salesforce and Siebel are the current solutions. For the financials platform, Strout turned his attention to S/4HANA:
On the financials side, we wanted a platform. We took a look at what’s out there in the marketplace, but we also looked at what’s core for us: the data. We can use that as the center point to bring everything back, because it all needs to revolve around financial transactions. For us, HANA made more sense than anything else.
The question became: move to Suite on HANA first, or move all the way to S/4HANA? Sabre had been running SAP ERP since 1994, but Strout was conscious of managing resources and risk. He opted to move directly to S/4HANA:
My thinking at the time, was, “If I’m going to make this migration, I’d rather do it once than twice.” Use that opportunity to simplify call centers and work structures and business processes and those kinds of things. We were using best practices as of 1994, and not really taking advantage of today’s best practices.
But S/4HANA isn’t the only product with good financials functionality. So what stood out?
It was having the ability to get data in a real-time model, and to be able to feedback from other systems that weren’t necessarily just SAP. Having a platform where all the data can come together- that was what I was looking for.
Sabre signed the contract with SAP at the end of September and went live on April 1, 2016. How did it go?
As my CFO says, it was a non-event event. We had one issue around split billing where SAP had to come in and help. It was a very tactical thing, and I’m not so sure it wasn’t our issue. SAP solved it inside of three days.
The S/4HANA private cloud – part of the cloud-first push
Another big piece of the puzzle: this was a (private) cloud implementation. Strout selected Virtustream to serve as their private S/4HANA cloud provider. This version of the S/4HANA private cloud comes with limitations on how you can customize the solution, but that was fine with Strout. His architectural plan involves cloud-based solutions, and it’s about integration, not excess customization. Strout has been down that over-customization path before in the past:
That’s one place where you don’t want to go. If you get the opportunity to get away from that, stay away.
Strout has imposed an organizational rule: the only customizations allowed on any system are those that provide a marketable difference – “something you can go and sell.” This fits in with his SaaS-first philosophy:
One of our strategies was to make sure we moved to as many SaaS providers as we can get away with. That changes the culture of the organization. Every provider’s doing upgrades on a regular basis, and they aren’t orchestrated.
Culture change is part of the cloud puzzle
This invokes a new approach to change management, focusing on serving the business:
What’s the consequences associated with the software changes? Do I bring that change in-house or do anything with it? How do I actually make the business better? It starts to change the culture of the organization.
But there’s a catch – that kind of culture change ain’t easy. Strout:
It’s about changing the culture of the business to be looking at the future on a regular basis, so you’re not always focused on transactions… That’s the hard part. We’re in the middle of it, I’ll be blunt. It’s a change we have to go through.
Change management never goes out of style:
We have to build the organizational change management around that. You’ve got to grow both soft skills and hard skills, so you have to incent the right behaviors. It’s a little bit of carrot, a little bit of stick. We continue to focus on: how does that change help drive the business?
Strout says transparency is key:
We reinforce the “why” on a fairly regular basis, and then engage employees into what could it be, or what should it be? We’re always asking ourselves: what’s the art of the possible?
He also made an unconventional leadership decision:
I picked somebody that was a couple levels down in the organization to actually run this. Everybody has to listen to her. She runs it. I have to be held accountable on those teams. I’m just a team member, just like anybody else. You have to empower everybody in the organization. That’s a very different model for some people, and so, they have to figure out, what does empowerment really mean?
But wait – I thought “empowerment” was a good thing? Perhaps, but as Strout points out, it puts people in the spotlight:
You have to build a safe environment for them to make mistakes and go, “Oh, you probably could’ve done this one a little differently,” and help them learn.
The wrap – integration and results
It’s too early after go-live to speak to business results, but the next few months should tell the story as more data gets pulled into S/4HANA and Strout focuses on pulling insights/reports. But there are some immediate payoffs:
One of the things we didn’t have before is profit and loss at the product level, or at a customer level, et cetera. We just didn’t have that capability in our old hierarchy.
The Universal Ledger gets the view of the P&L quicker, compared to the old days of separate FI and CO modules. Oh, and the speed thing:
It’s definitely faster. I was assuming that benefit out of the box. New hardware, in-memory – that’s the meat and potatoes.
To realize his data-driven vision, Strout knows that cloud-to-cloud integration must be conquered. That will guide the next few quarters as integration and reporting milestones are reached. Sabre is using Dell Boomi to integrate S/4HANA with other cloud systems, whether SAP or not. Strout says integration hasn’t been the easy part. He thinks it might have been easier with HCI (HANA Cloud Integration), but their team had experience with Dell Boomi.
Strout told me he challenged SAP’s Bill McDermott and Jennifer Morgan to make integration easier:
I had that conversation with both Bill and Jen. That’s why she brought it up on stage at Sapphire Now/ASUG. I told them, “You’ve got one shot at this.” Going up against, whether it’s a Boomi or not, I don’t care… You have to make integration dead simple easy, and you have to do APIs the same way.
The good news for SAP is that Strout does see S/4 HANA as their go-to data platform. But that means playing very nice with heterogeneous systems:
Much to the chagrin of SAP, I’m not in a religious war on whether it’s Oracle or SAP or Workday, or any of the players. You want to pick the best thing for what’s in front of you at the time. We’ve also got Salesforce. We’ve got ServiceNow… All of those have to feed into [S/4HANA} because it’s a platform.
Strout’s still drawing on his ASUG lessons also. He credits his time with ASUG for teaching him about the power of professional networks. Sabre is encouraging its employees to build their networks to help them grow into these changes. I’m looking forward to the update on this one.
Updated 6:45pm ET Tuesday, April 16 with minor formatting tweaks for readability.
 
Image credit - Photo of Steve Strout by Jon Reed. Disclosure - SAP is a diginomica premier partner. SAP covered the bulk of my travel and expenses to attend Sapphire Now 2016. Workday and Oracle are also diginomica premier partners. Read more on: Analytics planning and data analysisCloud ERP financials and supply chainCloud platforms - infrastructure and architectureDigital transformation - frictionless enterpriseFinancialsUse cases 