
As talk about hybrid clouds captures the imagination of some, Gregory Belt, Senior Director of Oracle Practice for Fujitsu Consulting weighed in with an extraordinary set of arguments under the moniker Cloud v. On-Premise: The Battle for Corporate ERP.
I say extraordinary because by the time I finished reading it, I wasn’t certain what was being argued other than ‘it all depends.’ Buyers hate that from consultants because it puts the onus upon the buyer to figure out what’s going on when they already have incomplete information. Perhaps it was link bait? Who can know? But for this purpose I want to zoom in on some of the oddities I see in the general thesis.
…here’s the problem with trends: They can disappear as quickly as they came. As technology evolves in our personal lives, so do the options for businesses. With what seem to be limitless opportunities, many executives believe that organizations need to be all-in for cloud, but there are distinct advantages and disadvantages to being completely in the cloud or exclusively on-premise.
In which case I guess that the 160,000 registered attendees at Dreamforce 2015 should be worried about their cloud world collapsing. There may well be competitive reasons for Salesforce to be concerned for itself but with ambitions to be a $10 billion player, ‘trend’ doesn’t fit the patterns they have executed against over 16 years of existence.
The author then talks about the advantage of taking up cloud ‘best practices’ as an advantage. I cringe at that. Best practices are about looking at the world through the rear view mirror and nothing I see on the ground persuades me that forward thinking leaders want that start point. Instead, I see certain frameworks of practice representing the foundation for getting other things done going forward. In the scenarios I see, only the most competitive processes stay on-premises and it sure as heck ain’t ERP.
But it is when the author talks about cloud disadvantages that things start to unravel:
One disadvantage is that cloud customers need to play by the provider’s rules when implementing their business process in cloud applications. Cloud ERP suites cannot currently be modified to suit all customer needs, which might adversely affect a customer’s competitive advantage.
To say that cloud ERP “cannot currently be modified to suit all customer needs” is a denial of what happens in the real world and is a guaranteed no-win argument.
As MindTouch CEO Aaron Fulkerson noted last week and which I am sure Accenture will verify, every Salesforce implementation has its  own nuances. Every Workday implementation will be different. NetSuite talks about extensive customization but done safely on its platform. And I am sure as heck that every Oracle and SAP cloud implementation will have its own flavor of nuance.
Let’s just pause here and ask ourselves – is there anything fundamentally new about ERP (as in the pure admin side of things, not the UI, analytics etc) that could not be replicated from the 1990s? I don’t think so. If you agree then the argument for competitive advantage from ERP doesn’t stand scrutiny.
Put another way, I have never heard a buyer convince me that their ‘flavor’ of order entry, customer acquisition record or payroll payment method is a competitive advantage that compelled them to buy an ERP. It therefore makes sense to see these commodity elements as a foundation that needs managing at minimal cost. That’s one of the cloud operator’s most important arguments because they have learned from the past and mostly applied modern techniques to bringing functionality to the end user.
Many other things have changed. We see that best demonstrated by the unifying and aligning of IT to operations and having that expressed initially through shadow IT but increasingly through strategic rethinking around business application landscapes. In those scenarios, the technology no longer matters but its operational effectiveness, fitness for future purpose and cost impact absolutely matter. Moving on.
Another advantage of on-premise solutions is that companies have complete control and access to their information internally. Companies don’t need to go through their provider for access and are able to manage everything in-house. On-premise is becoming more attractive to companies now that there is no practical limit to affordable storage capacity.
All of that is fine if it wasn’t for the fact that most large enterprises have significant shared service arrangements in place that already conform in some measure to what ‘cloud’ means. Again, I see little appetite for running services yourself when the authors acknowledges there is a cost burden.
In the end, the author states the obvious for where we are today namely that a mix of services is probably the right decision for most businesses. I won’t disagree with that as a statement of a static position. But that’s not what I see business leaders contemplating as a viable strategy going forward. And that is where Fujitsu’s arguments disintegrate. If you’re not leading then you’re following. I don’t know any other than the most conservative of buyer who wants that as their secondary title.
Simon Wardley puts it more succinctly:

This isn’t a battle, this is a one way street with people denying it’ll happen … https://t.co/TziqtVE5va
— swardley (@swardley) September 15, 2015

Or maybe, just maybe, all of has something to do with the recent catastrophic failure at Fujitsu’s own data center? #justsayin.
Read more on: CRM and customer experienceFuture of work 