
Ganesh Bell, GE Power
GE’s future rests firmly on the success of its Predix platform – a cloud service that allows companies operating in industries such as aviation, healthcare and transportation, to leverage their assets by connecting them to the internet, giving them access to data that can help drive efficiencies, productivity and create new revenue streams.
Predix is being dubbed as the platform for the Industrial Internet, and since it was officially launched early last year, it has drawn lots of attention for its potential to rethink how industries with large scale assets operate.
One such industry, which is going through a difficult period of transition, is energy. Energy companies find themselves facing the difficult task of no longer having the monopoly on utilities that they once did, as we move towards companies and consumers producing their own energy, and are finding that people are consuming less, thanks to new renewable alternatives.
As such, the business model needs rethinking. And GE Power’s Chief Digital Officer (CDO), Ganesh Bell, believes that the Predix platform and greater insight into data could help guide a path to a new model for the future.
I got the chance to sit down with Bell at GE’s Minds + Machines event in Berlin this week, where he said that although he didn’t have a previous knowledge of the energy industry when he joined GE four years ago, he holds a firm believe that every industry will be reimagined with software. Bell’s previous roles were deeply embedded within Silicon Valley.
Speaking about the changes in the energy industry, Bell explained:
If you think about electricity, what’s happened is very simple. This is a 100 year old business model, where electrons get generated in a central power gen somewhere. It travels through transmission and distribution lines and eventually gets to the consumer, whether they’re residential, commercial or industrial consumer. It’s a one way, linear business model.
What has happened in the last decade is that the things that we use to generate electrons have changed. It’s no longer coal, no longer gas or nuclear, which are big capital expensive things. We have moved to wind. We have moved to solar. And hydro, off-shore wind. So many different forms. And soon we are looking at things like energy storage.
That’s just on the generation side. What’s happening on the consumption side is actually way more interesting. Consumers of electricity are becoming producers of electricity. And so when consumers become producers, they are going to consume less energy.
Bell said that this consumption scenario leaves utility companies feeling like those customers aren’t they best customers, because they’re consuming less. This is amplified when consumers start storing energy themselves and can potentially go off-grid entirely. Bell added:
The utilities have to think about a new business model way beyond selling electrons.
Need to come up with new ideas
GE believes that there are many scenarios that energy companies could come up with to counter these changing market behaviours and to position themselves back at the centre of the relationship between the consumer and the energy supply. However, Bell added, whatever the new idea, it is going to be enabled by software. He said:
Whether it’s being an energy sales provider, or a smart city infrastructure, or maybe being the smart transportation provider with energy – any of the scenarios, you need to understand the data. You need to think about, how do I connect every electron with the data? That’s the real value.
Utilities are starting to think about the fact that their commercial side, which may represent the biggest consumers of energy. They know that those consumers are going to do something on their own to reduce their energy consumption. Or they’re going to get smarter about their energy consumption.
What Bell has found is that these customers are now extending beyond connecting Predix to their own assets and are connecting up to their customers’ assets, allowing them to give insights and partake in the energy efficiency conversation.
GE is so confident about the capabilities of its Predix platform that it is actually selling outcomes, rather than solutions, to its customers. For example, GE will commit to a customer that its Predix platform will deliver X% of savings over a certain number of years, which Bell claims can then be used to reinvest in innovation across the business. He said:
We have done that in the past based purely based on material science and engineering. Now we are doing it based on data. We are doing that based on algorithms with millions of hours of operating data. We have actually delivered these outcomes, so there’s a big confidence factor in a lot of this data. Yes it’s a risk, but it’s a risk based on data. And that’s what makes us unique.
A customer in Pakistan cares about fuel efficiency. And we modelled and we said we can guarantee 4% fuel efficiency. And that 4% fuel efficiency is worth $240 million. I’m effectively guaranteeing that they can access to that money – so they don’t have to wait for 10 years and they can spend that money on things that make their business better right now.
And we actually have upside if we over-perform. We have created a business model, which we call outcome-as-a-service, where there is a baseline subscription to that outcome. But when we outperform that outcome we get upside on that.
Industrial asset graphs
One of the most interesting components within the Predix platform, which is being applied to GE’s energy customers, is the use of Industrial Asset Graphs. GE is following the idea of social graphs – which are critical to the user experience on the likes of LinkedIn and Facebook – but is taking it further to model best behaviour across all assets.
Bell explained:
Imagine a network of all assets, all machines. How do we behave on social media? I will post something when I feel like it, it’s not that predictable. Whereas machines are more reliable and are sharing their status on a regular basis. Imagine an invisible feed of machine data, where they are constantly posting their statuses.
The difference now is that I can follow you on LinkedIn and Facebook and click like on your post. But just because I click like on your post doesn’t make me model your best behaviour. Whereas, when a machine says ‘I like you’ to another machine, it can actually start modelling its best behaviour, because of algorithms and machine learning.
So a best performing wind turbine in a wind farm – other turbines can look at it, learn from it and adopt their behaviour. We are just on the cusp of that journey. Think about power plants learning from another power plant. That’s the power of the industrial graph.
Driving change
However, my main question to GE today was: “how are you getting these companies to change their business models?”. In my experience, companies that have relied on high barriers to entry and long-standing business models, often don’t have the foresight to take a hit on existing revenue models to fund future ones that could be more lucrative. Shareholders rule.
However, Bell believes that the shift from old models to the new doesn’t have to be mutually exclusive. For example, using Predix to gain efficiencies from existing assets, using existing models, can create funds to explore newer revenue streams.
But Bell did admit that for true change to take place, it typically has to come from the top and there has to be a belief that the threat exists. He said:
I think the biggest struggle they have, and this is not just across energy or power – I talk to a lot of CEOs and CXOs about digital transformation – is about having a belief system. A simple belief that your industry will be reimagined with software. It’s so easy for incumbents to think, ‘nope it’s not going to happen in our industry’. I hear this all the time. Even inside GE, when I first came in. “Nope, we make big assets, nothing is going to displace the value of the big assets”.
The assets do matter, but there is more value to be created using digital assets – it’s net new value, new revenue streams. If you don’t have the belief system, you won’t get there.
Anyone embarking on digital transformation, there’s one main job to do, make sure that your CEO and your chairman are the biggest believers in that. If they’re not doing that, your only job needs to be getting your CEO and your chairman that belief system, that digital is the biggest opportunity that they’re going to embark on.
Image credit - Image sourced from TwitterRead more on: Analytics planning and data analysisCloud platforms - infrastructure and architectureInternet of ThingsMachine intelligence and AI 