

Marissa Mayer
I have no intention of stepping down.
That’s Marissa Mayer’s statement of intent as articulated by the Yahoo! CEO to the Financial Times yesterday. But after the events of the past week, the big question now is whether she’ll have a choice in the matter.
Earlier this week we looked the latest scuttlebutt surrounding both the fate of Yahoo! and Mayer herself. What’s now about to happen – if approved by shareholders and regulators – is that Yahoo! will bundle its core assets into a new listed company, after the board abandoned plans to spin off its $32 billion stake in Chinese e-commerce group Alibaba.
It’s a total reversal of strategy by Mayer and her board of directors and a clear victory for activist shareholders, most notably Starboard Ventures, who had warned that spinning off the Alibaba stake would result in a massive tax hit for investors.
Mayer and Yahoo! chairman Maynard Webb insist that even though the core assets will now be spun-out as an independent entity, there are no plans to seek a buyer. Webb says:
There is no determination by the board to sell the company or any part of it. We believe the business remains very undervalued and we’re focused on realising that value.
But he added that Yahoo! did have a “fiduciary obligation” to talk to bidders, even if “we are not proactively trying to do any of that”.
The reverse spin-off will take a year or more to complete – if all the necessary hurdles are jumped in the meantime.
The sharks are already in the water scenting blood. At an investor conference in New York earlier this week, Verizon CFO Fran Shammo admitted that her firm would have interest in making a bid if the right circumstances arose. Verizon has form here, having acquired AOL of $4.4 billion earlier this year.
Analyst Robert Peck of SunTrust Robinson Humphrey reckons that a sale is inevitable now:
Given the simplicity & speed of a sale and the lack of a desire by investors to undergo a year-long spin process, we think a sale of the core or entire company is most likely.
We don’t think investors would need to wait until 2017 for value to be unlocked via a spin. In fact we think it’s likely a sale could be announced in 1H 2016.
For her part Mayer states:
A separation from our Alibaba stake, via the reverse spin, will provide more transparency into the value of Yahoo’s business.
My take
Well, it’s certainly spin, regardless of the direction!
This solves nothing. The Yahoo! share price went down on the back of this face/tax saving spiel.
Start the bidding!
Read more on: CRM and customer experienceDigital and content marketinge-commerceSocial 