

Gene Austin
One of the toughest years in the company’s history, but also the year where [a] new future anchored in profitable growth began.
That’s the review of fiscal 2016 from Gene Austen, CEO of data analytics and e-commerce provider Bazaarvoice. Founded in 2005, Bazaarvoice has been best known for managing online product ratings and reviews for companies such as Wal-Mart and Best Buy, but in recent years it’s had to deal with some major issues, not least a two-year anti-trust tussle with the US Department of Justice (DoJ).
The DoJ investigation followed a ruling by a federal judge that the company violated anti-trust laws and ordered Bazaarvoice to sell the assets of PowerReviews Inc., a rival that Bazaarvoice acquired in mid-2012. The DoJ investigation centered on claims that Bazaarvoice continued to use technology that it was required to divest. A settlement was reached in 2014, but the situation remains a poster-child for how not to carry out an acquisition.
While all this was playing out, Bazaarvoice was attempting to map out new directions for its future, hardly the most conducive of circumstances. The plan was to transform Bazaarvoice from being solely a ratings and review platform provider to a company with, as Austin explains:
a powerful shopping network rich in consumer-generated content, content that creates greater consumer confidence and converts shoppers to buyers. At the same time, we invested in monetizing the shopping behavior in data we gather each and every day.
That monetization goal is seen as critical for the success of the firm’s bounce-back from the troubles of recent years. Austin argues that there are indicators of success now apparent:
A year ago, we began to acquire the data rights to shopper behavior with new and existing customers. We have exceeded our own expectation and have amassed over 100 million targetable shoppers across our network. We now have the critical mass necessary to substantially build our Shopper Advertising business and other exciting offerings backed by this valuable asset. We expanded our consumer-generated content (CGC) offering to complement our reviews business, which have deepened many client relationships, allowed us to acquire more share of wallet and helped offset a tough pricing environment for ratings and reviews.
CGC is a big deal for the firm. In April, it launched a CGC index, which it pitches as the first of its kind in providing deep-dive analysis of the business impact consumer-generated content has on sales conversion, ROI and long-term customer loyalty in multiple industries. The benchmarks for the index have been drawn from client data from over 2,000 global brands.
The claim is made that harvesting CGC from social media results in nearly a 10x higher yield of visual content than passive collection via reviews. Austin argues that it’s work on initiatives such as this that will bolster customer loyalty to his firm:
Client satisfaction is rising based on our strong commitment to product quality, our improved on-boarding experience and our strong set of service offerings. Customers are excited about our roadmap. Our new CGC offerings combined with our move into shopper advertising has customers talking again about our commitment to innovation in an ever-changing digital marketing landscape.
In fact, he feels confident enough at this point to predict that the firm can double its revenues over the next five years:
We have learned a lot about how to make new product successful. And in fiscal 2017, I believe our new innovations will fuel the first year-over-year bookings growth for Bazaarvoice in 3 years.
Backing up the claims
Of course, it’s part and parcel of the CEO role to pitch the ‘onwards and upwards’ messaging, but Austin rolls out some stats to back up his claims:

Total number of active and network clients grew in fiscal 2016 to 6,500, an increase of 25% year-on-year.
CGC grew at an average of 145,000 new reviews a day, an increase of 25% year-on-year.
Over 10 million curations’ photos were processed for display, more than 3x the amount in the prior year.
Some 328 billion impressions of content were delivered across the Bazaarvoice network, an increase of 15% year-on-year.

Such numbers provide a solid foundation from which to build, claims Austin:
The insights, which can be derived from that volume of data and activity, are staggering and our opportunity to monetize is truly exciting and a foundation for the substantial growth we see in the years ahead. Given the massive footprint of our network, our strategy is quite simple – grow and maintain our strategic retailers and brands with a compelling lineup of consumer-generated content offerings and in turn monetize the huge amount of shopper data beginning with our Shopper Advertising initiative.
 
Shopper Advertising campaigns are pitched as campaigns that use granular insights from across the Bazaarvoice network to build highly-specific Shopper Segments that pinpoint active shoppers based on their actual shopping behavior. To date, only 40 Bazaarvoice customers out of a claimed client base of 3000 worldwide have run such programs, but Austin sees Shopper Advertising as an engine of growth to bigger ticket spending by advertisers, stating as an example that:
One large consumer electronics brand has spent $750,000 with us in the last 6 months.
Also on the cards for the coming months is a SaaS offering for retail clients, currently being trialled with an unnamed online retailer. If successful, Austin sees opportunity in the synergies between the core SaaS business and the network monetization push:
Our core CGC offerings allow us to build a large worldwide network of brands and retailers with hundreds of millions of shoppers engaging with rich content, creating consumer confidence in purchases. We believe this business alone can provide revenue growth in the mid to high single-digit range. As our network grows, the data inside gets more and more valuable and we will provide offerings via advertising and SaaS that allow both retailers and brands to engage shoppers based on their network behavior.
My take
There’s a long way to go before Bazaarvoice is fully back on track. The core SaaS business accounted for $191.5 million of the full year 2016 revenues of $199.8 million, up 5% year-on-year.
In contrast, advertising’s contribution of $8.3 million was actually down 9% year-on-year. So for all Austin’s upbeat talking, there’s clearly a lot of work still to be done on the advertising business front.
Worse still, for the fourth quarter of fiscal 2016, ad revenues were down a mighty 25% year-on-year to $1.6 million. This was attributed to disappointing performance from “legacy advertising operations”, AKA revenue from site monetization by a small set of retailers. The firm is betting that this legacy revenue has now flatlined and that the Shopper Advertising push will provide the revenue push needed.
Customer satisfaction levels are supposedly rising, but the firm still lost 60 clients in the final quarter of fiscal 2016, although that was its best quarterly number of the year. Meantime, 76 new clients came on board, which sounds good until the comparison is made with Q4 of fiscal 2015 when that same figure was 98.
This churn issue isn’t about to go away. Austin attributes what he calls “the bubble we have had in elevated churn” as being in part based on the DoJ situation, but while this is likely to continue into 2017, he argues that the impact is getting lower and that client retention for the fourth quarter stands at 95.7%.
Fiscal 2017 will be a critical period for Bazaarvoice. A lot will depend on how effective the monetization of data assets is. The firm needs to take that initiative beyond the US and into the European markets, potentially a far-from-friendly data regulatory market.
Image credit - BazaarvoiceRead more on: Data privacyMachine intelligence and AIRetail e-commerce and the omni-channelUX and application design 