
Stuart has already given us a run through of Salesforce earnings call, picking up on the ‘age of the customer’ meme that Marc Benioff, CEO and his leadership are developing. It’s an interesting idea and, as I read through the earnings transcript, I wondered whether we were listening to an earnings call at all. The opening remarks ended up as a protracted conversation between Benioff and Keith Block, Salesforce president on where the company is going next. It’s worth repeating what Benioff and Block had to say:
During the quarter, I met with hundreds of CEOs around the world. When we’re meeting with CEOs, they are not that interested in talking about the cloud or about social or mobile. They want to talk about their customers and they want to talk about their top line, they want to talk about how they’re going to grow that top line, and this is the really, really exciting thing that’s going on, which is this customer revolution.
Salesforce President Keith Block picked up this idea and ran with it:
There is a constant theme that keeps coming through here, and that is that we are clearly in this age of the customer and the time of cutting your way to prosperity is over.
When you think about it, the agenda for every CEO in the world is growth. And the reason why CEOs are coming to us is because they see Salesforce as that catalyst for growth, and we are also quite frankly a catalyst for customer success.
So whether it’s a company of all shapes and sizes, whether it’s a business model with B2B or B2C, large company or small company, regardless of the industry, these CEOs are really looking at us now to be their trusted advisor, and really help them define their new customer strategy, their digital strategy, their engagement model in really new ways to transform into a customer companies. That’s just become super, super important to them.
Rhetoric aside, Benioff is reflecting a topic that we’ve seen for some years now and which plays back to my oft stated distaste for buzzword bingo that starts with ‘cloud,’ continues with ‘Big Data’ and the current ‘IoT’ nonsense. In short, I’ve never met a CXO, let alone CEO who asked: “Can I have a pile of cloud/Big Data/IoT stuff?” That’s for the tech marketing crowd who need to bucket technologies under words they claim to understand and/or own. Instead, CEOs are problem solving. Benioff believes this is about sales growth but in many businesses it is about defending or adjusting business models which, in turn, may have something to do with growth but always has something to do with revenue.
Benioff clearly believes Salesforce is in pole position to help but is that a reasonable assessment? The company’s roots are in back office processes such as sales force automation and service. Those are what make up the bulk of its revenue, bringing in 72.5% of the total $1.6 billion in cloud revenue reported for the last quarter. Crucially, the sales cloud (traditional but inappropriately called CRM) only grew 10% year over year but service grew an impressive 38%. Marketing, analytics and platform plays are relatively new additions to the mix but the growth in the platform app element was also impressive at 40% while growth in marketing was closer to the overall average at 29%.
Based upon that analysis of Salesforce revenue, it is reasonable to assume that many existing customers recognize service as the key to retaining customers and using that as the springboard for improving revenue growth, which in turn will require marketing automation, omni-channel selling and business specific applications. Taken in those terms, Salesforce has a good enough portfolio from which CXOs can pick and mix. But to deny or rather downplay the importance of the individual technology components misses the mark. What Benioff forgets is that while CEOs may well state particular priorities, those same CEOs depend upon CIO/CTOs to acquire the right mix of technologies. That might mean Salesforce but it might not – at least not for everything that’s required in the modern age and especially not if we’re talking about the e-commerce element.
Equally, I think Benioff is mistaken in simply saying that functional areas like analytics are table stakes. From everything I have seen this year, analytics is still something of a Cinderella and too often confused with reporting. Here, Salesforce has a long way to go, having yet to find a business model that works for Wave Analytics across all its customers. Customers are struggling to find the right questions to which analytics can be applied. Even when customers find the right questions, the technology choices for answering those questions are not exactly easy to discern and certainly not set in stone. If anything, I see the analytics market as relatively immature and way more diverse than something that can be thought of through the lens of a ‘one stop shop’ to which I assume Benioff aspires.
In his report, Stuart noted the specific reference to Accenture. I’m sure Benioff has learned that the big SIs and outsourcers are among the most important keys to influence in the software acquisition decision chain. More to the point, they are the ones who see the detail in the problems that companies are trying to solve. Therefore, while Benioff’s ‘age of the customer’ message is well articulated as a theory, Salesforce doesn’t necessarily hold the power to unlock that at scale inside the very large accounts to which Salesforce now aspires.
Let’s take nothing away from Salesforce. It has single handedly upended the incumbent vendors with a deceptively simple message around cloud, which in turn helped cash strapped CTO/CIOs move from capex to opex for a set of processes that had become moribund. Swerving that messaging around to ‘age of the customer’ in the wake of a broad solutions portfolio and a focus on the office of the CEO makes sense when thinking about how Salesforce leverages the whole portfolio and the messages Benioff is hearing come back from CEOs. But Salesforce will need to be closely aligned with the SIs etc, so that the portfolio can be fleshed out to meet the new needs. In that context, it was good to hear Benioff talking about product investments, albeit in vague terms.
Even so, I am still left wondering precisely how Salesforce plans to tackle the ‘customer experience’ topic that is central to Benioff’s thesis. How for example will Salesforce help provide the end to end experience? I know of at least one major retailing case where that was the promise but which failed to deliver. In hindsight, it is easy to see why. An end to end experience is complex, requiring seamless integration between numerous systems and not just those that are directly customer facing. Holding the customer record as Salesforce does may seem like the place where power is also held, but that’s not the whole story. You need efficient linkages to logistics and supply chain to say nothing of commerce elements as well. That’s the kind of alignment that only an SI can realistically deliver.
Where to from here?
Benioff has proven time and again that he has the marketing nouse to capture the imagination and fire up an audience of buyers. Like Stuart, I have no doubt that ‘age of the customer’ will become the Salesforce meme du jour in the coming months. The question then comes, how will that message be articulated in a marchitecture diagram that the CIO/CTO can absorb and accept as viable? We don’t know the answer today but I have no doubt it is a case of ‘watch this space.’
Image credit: © iQoncept – Fotolia.com
Disclosure: Salesforce is a premier partner at time of writing
Read more on: Analytics planning and data analysisCRM and customer experience 