
Torn that?
Stuart Lauchlan and I are on different sides of the debate around the post-Safe Harbor position. Lauchlan is deeply concerned that Europe ends up in a technological slow lane and thinks Brussels should behave itself. I believe  there is an alternative solution.
Let’s be clear, I am not advocating for country by country rules that have to be threaded through like the tax laws of each European country. On the other hand I find it difficult to see how US and EU legislators can satisfactorily resolve a go forward situation without considerable industry help.
The way I am hearing things, and especially as it relates to the Microsoft case, the US government is winning on the implied grounds that national security trumps everything. When that is true then I have no problem. But that isn’t the problem.
Lauchlan refers to ‘post Snowden paranoia‘ but then citizens of any country have every right to be concerned that a single government might take to itself what are perceived as unfettered and all seeing power. EU legislators have recognized that through the Safe Harbor ruling.
Paradoxically, I sense that the inbuilt assumptions surrounding Lauchlan’s argument can be used by vendors who are concerned that business aspirations by US vendors might be crimped. Check out what is said:
Further, it could make non-US buyers wary of dealing with US cloud firms – who make up the overwhelming majority of the cloud industry – and as such end up in a cloud computing slow lane.
Just me being alarmist? Hardly. Last month Frank Jennings of law firm Wallace LLP, recognised as one of the most informed cloud legal experts, warned on his blog:
I’m not one to be dramatic, but this ruling could affect the whole of US cloud business in the EU. If the US government can get access to data simply because there is a US provider in the supply chain, that is likely to result in customers favouring non-US supply chains.
Which is fine, but we don’t have an enormous non-US supply chain to choose from.
Lauchlan and the lawyers are conflating the claimed superiority of US mastered functional cloud systems, with an inability to do business in a manner that satisfactorily secures customer privacy rights and without incurring significant expense. The argument suggests that EU business doesn’t get access to technology, ergo EU business is at a disadvantage. I’m not buying that. Color me stupid but isn’t that the vendors’ problem and not the buyer’s?
To some extent we already see a response to that through the scrambling for adoption of model clauses. But that can only be a temporary Band-Aid for what is a very real and difficult problem.
US vendors and global buyers are not going to stand around waiting for judgments to be delivered in one jurisdiction or another. This is why, when I was recently approached on the topic, my answer is that nothing we see happening today actually matters. Trade will continue albeit in a somewhat uncertain environment. At least for now.
This is nothing new. How many customers do we see who have little clue about the minutiae of their contracts with software vendors, only to find they are subject to audits designed to ensure the software vendor gets their pound of flesh? Is the post-Safe Harbor situation that different? Not really.
In my view it comes down to this.
Whatever the US government might claim about its need to access information, the overwhelming evidence to date and accompanying backlash is that it’s not very good at doing what it needs to without also doing things that are questionable at best. Let’s not just tar the US here. The UK government has plenty to answer for. It would not surprise me to learn that every government engaged in mass surveillance of one kind or another acts well beyond their security remit. Whether that is wittingly or not matters not a jot in the eyes of ordinary citizens.
As a vendor holding information on behalf of others, I should, at the very least, be given reasonable opportunity to understand where the lines of sight are being drawn such that a government agency of any stripe has good cause to access that information. I don’t need chapter and verse but I need more than the blunt instruments that are available today.
Defenders of national security will likely see this as abhorrent but it strikes me as the only reasonable pathway to creating conditions under which citizens can be assured while any vendor can, in turn, provide assurance to the 99.999% of customers who act in compliance.
That requires a concerted and orchestrated effort on the part of business to make its case on terms that can win it friends through the court of public opinion. That may sound counter productive but earlier this year, Marc Benioff, CEO Salesforce single handedly shamed the governor of Indiana into stepping back from bigot led legislation. For what it is worth, that is one of our most popular stories ever.
Imagine this. What if the tech leaders, who have no problem hosting POTUS, rallied together on behalf of customers and make the kind of case that I am suggesting? The conversation goes like this:
You know that the US technology business is the powerhouse for the US economy and represents one of its most important exports. The Europeans are signaling loud and clear they are not having our version of what needs to happen on security matters. We’ve spent billions establishing data centers to meet their requirements and all that could go to waste. As things stand, and regardless of what some judge says in this country, we could easily find ourselves at a serious economic disadvantage with a 350 million strong trading block that wants what we have to offer. We will be the losers if things continue on the current path. It doesn’t have to be this way but there are some things you’re just going to have to get fixed.
Hmmm.
Is that a stretch?  I don’t think so. It is, after all, in every vendor’s interests to see a good resolution to this seemingly intractable problem. One thing is for sure. The answer is not going to come from Brussels or Washington without considerable upheaval and, most likely, an awful outcome for everyone. And as if bang on cue, today’s report in WaPo provides a gloomy outlook.
Disclosure: Salesforce is a premier partner at time of writing.
Read more on: Data privacyRegulation 