
For the first time in a decade, Royal Bank of Scotland (RBS) has said that it will pay its first dividend to shareholders and has said that it is positioning itself to compete by driving forward its digital investments.
Chairman Howard Davies said that the board is “very pleased” with the progress the bank has made in the first half of the year in “both resolving legacy issues and also delivering a consistent operating performance”.
CEO Ross McEwan spent a significant amount of time during the company’s half year results call with investors talking about the bank’s mobile capabilities, operational efficiencies and AI enhancements, in the face of changing consumer behaviour.
The British government still holds a 62.4% stake in RBS, after it spent £45.5 billion bailing out the bank during the height of the financial crisis. The bank’s half year results saw it report a pre-tax profit of £1.8 billion, even after taking a £1 billion provision to settle with the US Justice Department over mis-sold mortgage backed securities.
McEwan said that the results are “good”, given a more uncertain and highly competitive environment. He said:
Our sector is undergoing significant change. We are positioning ourselves well to compete. We’re continuing to rebalance our investment from physical assets into our digital infrastructure. We still have a lot more to do to achieve our ambition of being the best bank for customers in the UK and the Republic of Ireland. However, with our major legacy issues largely behind us, we are able to fully focus on closing this gap.
Changing customer behaviour
McEwan said that whilst there is a very fast move towards digital and away from the traditional branch network, he added that the branch network remains a “very important part of our distribution going forward”. He said:
So as the growth in the digital channel is happening fast, quicker than probably we have already anticipated, we still do a lot of business through our branch network, and we will maintain a very large branch network.
There’s a lot of people who need to manage the changes that have been going through, well, they’re doing that. So there’s a real value in stability. And we believe at around 820 branches, that’s the size of the network that we see for the short to medium term. And there are some areas that we want to save some money on that network to make it much more profitable and much more productive and better for customers. So there’s value on stability, I suspect, in that area now.
That being said, McEwan was quick to admit that consumer behaviour is changing rapidly towards digital channels and that the bank is investing to keep up with the pace of change. For example, branch counter transactions were down 7% and volumes of calls into RBS call centres have reduced by 11%. He said:
In the last year, we’ve seen — we’ve exited 35 non-branch properties, and we’ve retired a further 545 systems and applications.
And commenting on the shift towards digital, McEwan added:
We had 1 billion logins to the mobile app in the first half of 2018. That’s up 20% on the same period last year. And over 80% of our commercial customers now regularly interact with us through a digital channel. This investment in digital functionality is helping us lower costs, improve our controls, protect and grow income streams and most importantly, deliver a better customer experience. Delighting our customers is central to everything we aim to do, and we are committed to build on the solid progress that we have made.
As the shift to digital channels continues, we’re improving our core business and moving into new growth areas. Our mobile app capability improved in the first 6 months of 2018, and we now have 6 million regular mobile app users. That’s up 20% on last year. And the Net Promoter Score of the NatWest app is plus 41%. We now have 8.4 million digital customers in the personal bank.
The volume of conversations with our artificial intelligence chat box, Cora, continues to grow across the bank. From 360,000 interactions in the first quarter, we have doubled the number of conversations to 650,000 interactions, taking us to over 1 million conversations so far this year.
New investments
McEwan added that the bank is working on a number of new innovations. For example, he highlighted the recent £53 million acquisition of cloud-based accounting software company, FreeAgent, which will be offered to RBS business customers.
In addition, RBS has also launched a platform for lending to SME businesses. McEwan said:
In 2017, we launched Esme for small business customers. This is a new platform that can provide funds to small business in minutes. More importantly, we’re taking the learnings from these projects and applying them to our core lending proposition. NatWest Markets are currently piloting a new FX product with Business Banking customers, bringing them real-time rates through a simple-to-use app called CurrencyPay.
Digital innovation and automation are driving improvements to our core business. And our new innovation projects are providing us with helpful lessons as we go along. This is setting up a great future for this bank.
Image credit - Via RBSRead more on: Financial services and fintech 