
A Monday morning update on two items of interest from last week – the fates of Sears and HMV – that have moved on over the weekend.
Rumors of death
The former had a last minute glimmer of hope cast in its direction as Chairman Eddie Lampert produced an 11th hour rescue plan – or rather two plans. The first would see him buy up hundreds of stores and try to operate them successfully; the second was essentially a liquidation option.
But it looks today as though both options have been rejected by administrators at the stricken US retail institution. While no-one is making any official statements just yet, the scuttlebutt over the weekend was that Sears is now being readied for full liquidation and an ignoble end to a 125 year history. Creditors are said to believe there’s more money to be recouped from such a course of action than by taking a gamble on Lampert’s rescue bid.
The next stage in proceedings comes tomorrow (Tuesday 8) when Judge Robert Drain convenes a hearing to determine the ultimate fate.
My take
Not long to go now until this mess finally sorts itself out. The rumors of death look to be not exaggerated.
Rumors of life
Meanwhile UK music and entertainment chain HMV remains in administration as of this morning, despite reports in certain sections of the media last week claiming that a saviour has been found. HMV collapsed for the second time in six years after reporting a “dismal” Christmas.
Some media outlets have reported that BuyVia, a US discounting and coupon company, has stepped in as a rescuer with a plan to turn HMV into a “competitive and capable online retailer”. In fact, the firm announced that it had a plan and that it was talking to administrators about them.
A company rep from BuyVia was quoted in a press release put out by the firm as stating:
HMV has been a major player in the retail entertainment industry for nearly a century. While the company has undeniably struggled in recent years, we here at BuyVia feel that plenty of progress can easily be achieved. We are now engaged in talks concerning how some of HMV’s most significant retail presences could be saved from closing up shop forever. We also believe that BuyVia is perfectly positioned to turn HMV into a far more competitive and capable online retailer, as well.
The plan would involve “saving a number of retail stores and leveraging its expertise to overhaul HMV’s digital presence in order to make the modernized company more competitive in the contemporary market”.
Yesterday BuyVia updated its status by announcing that talks have “largely concluded” and that it expects to make an announcement early this week. It now talks about “the right management and digital presence” and being confident that “HMV.com” has a strong future “both in stores and online”.
My take
Sunday’s update appears to indicate that some kind of deal is in the offing, but quite what form it takes remains to be seen. The devil is in the detail – and despite the misleading impression given by many media outlets last week, that detail wasn’t been locked in place. There may be some form of partial salvation to come here, but let’s wait until we see what the strategy actually is before we strike up the band. Rumors of death may be greatly exaggerated…but so might the rumors of life.
Image credit - Sears/HMVRead more on: e-commerceRetail e-commerce and the omni-channel 