
A couple of years ago Ryanair CEO Michael O’Leary began to question whether or not a strategy of having the cheapest fares in the European airline market was enough to win customers from other airlines that may have slightly higher ticket prices, but a far superior customer experience.
And I think it’s fair to say that for the best part of a decade Ryanair developed somewhat of a reputation as the airline that will get you there for next to nothing, but that the experience wasn’t going to be particularly fun or comfortable.
However, at the beginning of 2014, O’Leary conceded that perhaps this wasn’t the best approach and said that Ryanair was going to focus on not only reducing costs but also on investments in digital and the customer journey. At the time, he said:

For too many years, we’ve relied on the fact that we have a huge price advantage over everybody else, and therefore, it doesn’t matter how bad our website is, people will simply stick on us all-day long.
Now we have 81 million people who will stick on it all day long, but over the next year or two, we intend to go after that floating 10 or 20 million of passengers who actually are willing to pay a premium to avoid a less-than-optimal website.
We’re going to continue to invest heavily in our IT platform, in our digital marketing, in the way we improve the website, and make it easier for our customers to get the lowest fares so that we can get them on and off the website quickly, which creates more opportunity for other customers to come on the website and secure the lowest fares as well.

Over this period, Ryanair has done exactly that. It introduced an ‘Always Get Better’ programme, which has not only focused on improving the in-flight experience for passengers, but has also made the digital investments in parallel.
And according to the company’s first quarter profits of 2015, it seems to be paying off. Compared to the same period last year, Ryanair’s net profits were up an impressive 25% to €245m (£174m). Revenues in the quarter grew by 10% to €1.5bn.
Not only this, but the company also advised that it expects profits for the year to March 2016 to be at the upper end of its forecast of between €940m and €970m issued in May.
O’Leary in gloomier times
Ryanair’s O’Leary said:

We are pleased to report strong growth in traffic and profits in Q1. Our mix of low fares, best on time performance (91% in Q1) and enhanced customer experience under our “Always Getting Better” (“AGB”) programme, continues to attract millions of new customers.
At the same time our focus on cost (Q1 unit costs fell 7%) enables us to pass on lower fares to customers. Q1 average fare fell 4% to just €45, due to the timing of Easter, weaker April yields and lower checked bag penetration as more families and business customers enjoy discounts on their luggage or benefit from our free 2nd carry-on bag policy.

The company added that the second year of the ‘Always Get Better’ programme “continues apace” and has seen an upgrade to the company’s mobile app, which it claims has resulted in improvements to the ‘My Ryanair’ customer registration function with faster and easier booking.
It added that enhancements have also been made to the Groups travel service, with the introduction of a dedicated groups page on www.Ryanair.com, and that it has also now joined Facebook, which it says “provides another channel to communicate with, and listen to our customers”.
Ryanair will also be introducing a new ‘personalised website’ in October, according to the latest results.
My take
Ryanair’s focus on customer experience and digital has been long overdue. Whilst you sometimes can’t beat a good price, when you’re travelling for more than an hour or so in the air, the experience of the journey significantly plays into the customer’s decision making. And that journey starts when you’re booking your ticket.
CEO Michael O’Leary has talked a big game when it comes to digital investments – and with these numbers, it seems that those investments are beginning to pay off. Let’s just hope that this is a continuous, long-term vision, rather than a ‘one-off upgrade’ situation.
Read more on: CRM and customer experienceDigital and content marketingFuture of workSocial 