
Sage CEO Stephen Kelly
As this year’s Sage Summit comes to an end in Chicago, CEO Stephen Kelly’s turnaround plan is beginning to get some meat on the bones. Last year’s event was interesting because of Kelly’s bold statements about the company’s direction, but it was difficult to see the wood for the trees. It wasn’t entirely clear how exactly he was going to turnaround Sage’s fortunes.
However, as the second user event under Kelly’s tenure comes to a close, the finer details regarding the strategy are becoming clearer. As noted in our interview with Kelly, he’s committed to transitioning Sage to becoming a ‘pure’ cloud company.
There’s obviously still plenty of work to do – you don’t turn a dinosaur into an agile cloud company over night – but we thought it would be worth highlighting the core elements of the strategy to date.
Consolidation
Anyone that has come across Sage over the years will understand the complexity that underpins the entire organisation. Whether that be the product line, the partner programme, or even the company’s own internal structures and systems. Sage has spent years without much of a razor sharp focus and as a result has become somewhat of a sprawling mess.
The result? Confusion. What product line do you sell to who and in what country? What’s the roadmap? How do you create roadmaps for that many scenarios? How do you talk to one customer base with that much confusion?
Kelly has been quick to recognise this. And whilst he is committed to protecting the install base, by not forcing migrations, he is also committed to simplifying many aspects of Sage’s business. Money is being diverted away from older product lines that aren’t going to be a source of growth and a narrower focus is being applied to the cloud line.
Equally, the partner programme has been consolidated into one programme, having been a fragmented mess prior. Kelly’s hope is that more business can be pushed through the channel and that the channel will do some cloud selling for Sage, as well as build up an ecosystem of apps for customers in specific verticals.
Opening up
Given that Sage wants to become a pure cloud business, Kelly has recognised that the company needs to do more to partner and collaborate with other cloud vendors. The nature of the cloud is connectivity and integration with other cloud-based systems. It doesn’t make sense for customers for these systems to operate in isolation.
We’ve seen plenty of evidence of Sage opening its doors to strategic cloud partners. It’s landmark Sage Live product is built on the Salesforce platform. It is fully integrated with Microsoft’s Office 365. It has taken a stake in HCM cloud vendor Fairsail. It has a partnership with Amazon Web Services. It is integrating with popular messaging apps. No longer a walled garden.
Not only does this give customers the opportunity to see how Sage cloud products could slot easily into their cloud portfolio, making the decision all the easier, it also gives Sage the opportunity to use these partners in cross-selling opportunities.
Innovation
Kelly is also incredibly keen for Sage to not be seen as a ‘legacy’ applications provider that is attempting to give cloud a go. He doesn’t want to play catch up with NetSuite, Xero, or whoever else. Which is of course exactly what Sage is doing at the moment – as much as Kelly would hate to admit it, in its current state Sage is playing catch up.
However, it is interesting to note that Kelly is also putting millions of dollars into R&D and attempting to innovate ahead of the curve. He doesn’t want Sage to be just a financials in the cloud company, he and his team are also attempting to rethink how financials are utilised within an organisation.
For example, whilst the bots announcement that we covered this week may seem minor in the grand scheme of things, the fact that Sage is beginning to apply machine learning and AI to how users interact with financials is an interesting hint at future direction. We haven’t seen a great deal of this from others just yet.
Having said that, I have spoken to users this week that commented that some of Sage’s cloud products aren’t yet operating with the full capabilities that its on premise products were. I’m sure that this is a matter of time, but it needs addressing. Bots and AI are interesting, but no one isn’t going to deploy a cloud financials system that doesn’t offer the full set of capabilities that they require.
The Channel
Sage’s addition of a full day for channel partners to the agenda at this year’s Summit is a clear indication that it is going to be doing more to push its products through third parties. Sage admitted this week that it has had to sit down and listen to partners, which have perhaps been less than impressed with the company’s efforts in recent years.
However, not only does Sage want its partners to figure out how to better sell its cloud products, its launch of a marketplace for third party apps to sell to customers suggests that it wants the channel to become an ecosystem of Sage products. Kelly told me specifically that he wants to utilise this marketplace to help verticalize the Sage product line. He doesn’t believe that Sage can skill up quickly enough to get the expertise to sell into specific verticals at present – partners will be key to this. And Kelly believes that this is where partners can make money from a subscription business model, incentivising them to move away from their lucrative maintenance revenue streams.
Branding
Sage is all too aware that it’s image isn’t what it once was in the marketplace. That’s a problem that needs addressing ASAP. Not only is it perceived to be an ageing software brand in the UK, its presence in other markets (including the US) falls behind more up and coming innovative brands.
Partnering with companies like AWS, Microsoft and Salesforce goes some way to address that. Aligning yourself with some of the market leaders is a smart move. Kelly is also a bit of a brand in himself – this is a man that knows how to network and work a room. His commitment to speaking to everyone and anyone at Sage Summit this year was quite impressive to watch.
Not only this, but the Summit itself has a very ‘Dreamforce’ feel to it. There were A-list celebs on stage throughout the conference, big bands were hired for the final night and the whole thing was very high energy. Sage is really trying. And in this day and age, a positive image in the market carries a lot of influence.
A balancing act
Finally, Kelly has a tough balancing act with Sage. On the one hand he needs to cater to his on-premise install base that are the lifeline are the company. On the other hand he needs to convince these customers to shift to the cloud and also attract a whole new breed of customers. This all needs to be done without scaring – move too quickly and the old customer base could feel isolated, move too slowly and you fall behind in the market. This all comes with the challenge of balancing customer expectations and investment decisions. It’s not easy and Kelly will be walking a fine line throughout the turnaround. That being said the company’s share price has doubled in the past two years, so it’s fair to say that this has been managed pretty well to date.
Image credit - Images sourced via SageRead more on: Cloud ERP financials and supply chainFinancials 