
Stephen Kelly, CEO, Sage
As of this morning, Sage is trading at a 17 year high, indicative perhaps that the turnaround of the UK software firm is delivering on expectations. Even our own Dennis Howlett was impressed at what he saw last month at the Sage Summit in London.
Of particular note in a half year trading update yesterday was a 30.5% year-on-year increased in subscription revenues. Operating profit for the six months ended 31 March was £180 million, up from £137 million for the same period last year, while revenues were up 22.7% to £840 million (helped by a weak pound).
In its statement, Sage points to the success in its Cloud First policy, highlighting:

Sage One annual recurring revenue (ARR) increased by 88% to £22m with an average annual contract value (ACV) of £70.
Sage Live customers at 889 with a March average ACV of £1,800.
Sage X3 revenue increased by 17% with 200 new customers added in H1.
Rolling out cloud accounting products in major geographies, with 52 product launches planned in FY17.

Back in 2014, said Sage CEO Stephen Kelly, the firm had aquired a reputation as a ‘cloud denier’. All that has changed, he insisted:
From virtually nothing two years ago, we’ve assembled a comprehensive set of cloud solutions that will underpin our competiveness in the market and fuel our growth for years to come. We have leapfrogged the competition with cloud products and are now seen as a market innovator, intregrating new technologies like Artificial Intelligence.
It’s also been confirmed that the firm’s US Sage Payment Solutions, is to be sold off, although the firm will retain its UK & Ireland and South African payments businesses. Kelly said:
 I want to reconfirm our commitment as a key participant in payments and banking services ecosystem, absolutely critical to our customers.
The technology industry today is increasingly built on open standards, platforms and partnerships, with customers demanding best-of-breed solutions. In order for Sage to compete successfully and grow, we must provide our customers with the best solutions whether they are Sage products or integrated with partners.
That means more partnerships with third parties, such as PayPal. MasterCard, American Express and various banks in different geographies. Alongside that, there will be exits from some areas, including the US operation. Kelly said:
The UK is one of the fastest growing e-commerce markets in the world, representing a good opportunity for Sage. For example, for Sage Pay UK, transactions alone grew by 26% in the first half of FY17 and in South Africa payments capabilities are deeply embedded in all our accounting solutions.
My take
The Kelly turnaround is working. There’s a long way to go, but that progress has been made, cannot be denied.
Image credit - SageRead more on: Cloud ERP financials and supply chain 