
It’s fair to say that bots have had mixed success in the market to date. Traditionally targeted at consumers, bots attempt to make use of natural language, machine learning, data and cloud to become useful online assistants.
However, given that bots require greater use to understand what people want, and take time to develop, it’s understandable that the market is still very immature. You’ve only got to look at the feedback of people trying out Facebook’s bots or the PR nightmare that was Microsoft’s Tay, which ended up tweeting racist and offensive comments.
Which is why it may be surprising to some that European software giant Sage believes that the finance market has an opportunity to make bots useful to SMBs. At the company’s annual user event in Chicago this week, Sage announced Pegg – an accounting bot that integrates with messaging apps such as Facebook Messenger and enterpriser-ready Slack.
Is this a gimmick? A PR trick to get some headlines? It doesn’t seem so. Sage CEO Stephen Kelly told me that he believes that natural language could be the future UI for enterprise finance apps. And I got the the chance to sit down with the company’s Global Director for Mobile Product Management, Kriti Sharma, who has been recruited in to specifically focus on how they could be used by businesses to make financial processes simpler.
Need to log an expense and attach a receipt? Want to find out how much you’ve spent or earned? Just ask Pegg when your inside one of your preferred messaging apps.
Sharma said that she believes that a company like Sage has the perfect opportunity to highlight the usefulness of bots in the business world. She said:
We are quite lucky, to be honest. We are very lucky that accounting is a perfect use case for creating a bot, because your problem is well defined. It’s an actual pain point. Creating expense reports, business admin, chasing for payments – there is an actual need for us to solve these problems.
Conversations seem like a great fit. From a technical perspective as well, it’s not a very hard problem to solve. Compared to creating Siri, where you can ask ‘what’s the meaning of life?’. Our bot is a lot more focused and the way we have designed it, it sets the expectation right. It tells you what it can do from the start, and if you say something completely random, it will tell you it’s not geared for that. If you swear at it, it doesn’t learn random stuff.
In other words, asking a system how much you’ve earned or telling a system how much you’ve spent is well suited to natural language queries, as it’s a very well defined and specific request. And while a bot might not be able to do some of the more complex financial tasks that a large enterprise requires, Shama believes that plenty of new features could be introduced. She said:
It’s moving really fast. One of the good things with bots, is that you can add new features and iterate really fast. Think about apps, you have to create a screen, you have to code the screen design, then you have to create the back end, the front end, then build it for iOS and then for Android, then go through approval cycles, then comes to the user phone.
It’s such a lengthy process. With bots it’s all about how we design the experience and we can push it out. You don’t have to install a new app, you don’t have to design all these things, I can just focus on the problem I’m solving for you.
A desire to be innovative
Sage CEO Stephen Kelly
Kelly told us earlier on in the week how that if Sage wants to succeed in the cloud market, it can’t spend its time playing catch up with the cloud-first players. It needs to be innovating ahead of the curve. And this is why it is investing in new technologies such as bots and blockchain. Sage is also recognising the shifts in the labour markets, which could drive demand for more consumer-friendly enterprise apps. Sharma said:
There is a lot of interesting innovation happening in the consumer world. Like we see messaging as one key big paradigm shift, What’s App, Snapchat, these solutions coming up. But when it comes to enterprise technology the experience is a bit ‘meh’. You have to go to an app and go to tab number three and drop down option number four, click here, click there.
It just doesn’t feel that intuitive. At Sage there is a huge opportunity for us to create great products for the next generation of people. As a young person myself, the way I run my life is quite different to the way I have to do my expenses, or data, or do reporting. There’s a big gap there and that needs to be filled.
At the same time, what we are seeing is the rise of the freelance economy. There are so many people who are just freelancing now. If you are an Uber driver, Airbnb host, a freelance content writer – this a new breed of businesses that did not exist in its current volume a few years ago. So Sage needs to move along with that at pace. These people expect different experiences and you can’t just give them a traditional enterprise model. It needs to change.
She went on to say that Sage can’t ignore that there are over two and a half billion people on the planet that use at least one of the main messaging apps available on the market – and that they log onto these apps at least nine times a day. Sharma said that this cannot be ignored.
These apps are where people are living and breathing now. These platforms now realise that their users want more, their users want more meaningful services. These platforms are opening themselves up for brands like Sage to provide meaningful services for people, right they are.
You just want to be told what you need to know, without ever having to leave where you are, you just want to stay there.
An evolution in UI
Sharma explained that the focus on bots is down to an evolution in how users want to interact with technology. She said that in the app or website world it was all about screens, colours, fonts. In the world of the bot it’s all about the design of the conversation. She said:
For bots it’s more important to pass the beer test, than the Turing test. The beer test is, would I go for a beer with this bot? Do I like it enough? It doesn’t have to be super sci-fi, it needs to be likeable, it needs to do a job that is an actual problem.
For example, if you’re saying you want to buy a t-shirt, find me a t-shirt, it might be a very lengthy process for a bot to find it for you, compared to going to a website. The conversation would be too long. That’s probably not a good use case today. But for use cases such as ours, we are in a sweet spot, people hate doing this task. They love messaging, so it was a no brainer.
Although Sharma is convinced that Sage can make Pegg work, she isn’t complacent about the challenges that lay ahead for convincing the market that bots are ready for useful use right now. She said:
There are a lot of misconceptions in the world. I get all kinds of questions ranging from, will these bots take over humans soon, to is there going to be a bot coup? There are trust issues. Not with our bot specifically, but in general with bots, due to the bad press that they’ve seen. Because it’s such a new technology, people are still figuring it out and a challenge is to educate them around them.
And given the nature of Sage’s business, there are security concerns. She added:
We are taking very controlled steps. We are not making payments. We are not saying ‘pay someone’. We are being very careful and taking one step at a time. There are some channels that are more comfortable for us than others.
Slack is enterprise ready, their data privacy is very supportive of people like us. We will see some shift happening there, we will see what makes the most sense. We are taking quite a risk averse approach because we are regulated and we care about our customers.
My take
More information, delivered to you in an efficient and useful way, inside an environment that you already understand and enjoy being in, is generally a pretty good idea. Is Pegg the solution to do that? It’s hard to know given how immature the market is and without testing it properly myself.
However, it’s noteworthy that Sage is figuring out ways to make use of AI and machine learning technology for financial applications – not something that you would assume an immediate fit. Let’s hope that next year they have some customers on stage talking about Pegg as a use case.
Image credit - Images sourced via SageRead more on: Cloud ERP financials and supply chainFinancialsIoT robotics and AIMachine intelligence and AI 