
Recently, I had the opportunity to speak with Sailthru’s VP of Marketing, Jason Grunberg, about the Sailthru Marketing Automation  (MA) solution. As a marketer myself, I look for features that can help me create better experiences for my customers and prospects, and while Sailthru has much of the same capabilities as many other MA solutions, it does offer some extras that will interest marketers struggling to engage and drive conversions.
Built to scale
Founded a little over ten years ago, Sailthru started out with the vision that every individual is unique, and that vision still carries through to today, according to Grunberg. Sailthru supports this vision through a single customer profile that marketers use across all their marketing channels – email, web, mobile.
Sailthru is custom-built from the ground-up and offers all the typical marketing automation capabilities including campaign management and personalization, plus more recent functionality that not all MA solutions offer such as predictive analytics and mobile messaging.
It started out as an SMB solution, Grunberg explains, but today over 80% of its customers are enterprise (many coming in the last 24 months). Although it focused on smaller businesses in the beginning, the solution was built to scale. Today it stores over three billion consumer profiles that contain up to ten years worth of customer data (that’s a lifetime of information).
Another stat demonstrating Sailthru’s ability to scale – one of its clients sends 15 billion emails a year and has over 200 million profiles in their account.
Makes you wonder how they help their customers support GDPR, doesn’t it? Grunberg makes it sound pretty simple. With all customer data stored in a single repository, it’s straightforward to find everything on a customer and delete it. Grunberg says that Sailthru doesn’t provide customers the ability to delete customer data but offers a service to do it for them. He says they had envisioned a global opt-out of all messages from the start, so they were pretty much ready for GDPR when it arrived.
Think personalization
Grunberg says personalization capabilities are embedded in campaign management across all channels and integrated with social platforms for retargeting. Sailthru provides several ways to personalize experiences, some of which leverage AI and machine learning:

Collaborative filtering: This is the “if you liked this, then you might like this” approach.
Interest-based: Show items and content based on past activity. This approach uses tagging and works for known customers.
Predictive – What is the visitor going to buy? E.g., there is a 90% likelihood this visitor will purchase item X in the next 90 days.

Grunberg argues that it’s important for marketers to try different approaches and use a combination that works best for them.
Marketers control customer segmentation by creating queries using any parameter in the data repository. A couple of examples he cites:

List the people who purchased an item during a certain period.
List the people who showed high interest in earth-toned clothing over the last two years and have actively engaged with the brand in the last six months.

Silo breaking
Sailthru takes the approach that mobile, web and email should not be done in silos. With mobile, Sailthru offers the standard capabilities including push, SMS and in-app messaging. Grunberg argues that it’s the messaging that makes Sailthru different from other vendors.
When a visitor lands on a web page, it’s often personalized to who they are (e.g., a female visitor will see content focused on women and a shoe size of 8). This level of personalization is great for the web, but it’s even more important on a mobile device (web or app) where space is limited, and attention spans are lower – you need to get to the point much faster.
By offering a single customer profile, all the action taken on emails or websites support the experience delivered in a personalized mobile experience as well. This is the omnichannel experience everyone wants, but few can achieve.
Sailthru’s Lifecycle Optimizer helps you build customer journeys that not only cross channels but adapt to changes by the customer. With it you can plan the directions you might want to take a customer, identifying any number of possibilities of how to engage them from one step to the next. You can also move a customer in and out of different journeys. Grunberg said the Optimizer was designed to optimize revenue across all channels, so it will reach the customer where they want and spend the most time.
Customer success
Every software company has a customer success team of some sort. They’ll help you get set up and work with you to resolve issues as they arise. For the most part, though, these teams are reactive, not proactive.
Sailthru has a different approach to customer success. It offers not just set up and implementation support, but also strategy and optimization, along with deliverability. Grunberg pitches the line that Sailthru believes its customers’ success is its success, so it proactively works to help customers do the right things to engage customers.
According to Grunberg, buyers are most engaged in the first thirty days, and they advise their customers to take advantage of that. Sailthru’s support teams will recommend campaigns to run and content to use. It wants to ensure its customers are successful, and that shows in the referral rates it gets. Sailthru’s growth has primarily been through customer referral; Grunberg said that customer satisfaction is what drives business.
My take
It’s one thing to talk to a vendor about its products and solutions and get a feel for what makes it successful; it’s another to talk to customers and see the product in action. I had heard of Sailthru before I spoke with Grunberg, but not to any great extent, so I was interested in learning more about them when the opportunity arose.
And I did learn some things that caught my attention such as the proactive customer support (I like that), the personalized mobile messaging and the journey mapping. It was enough to make me want to see it in action and talk to one of Sailthru’s customers about the personalized support services. So stay tuned, and if you use or have used Sailthru let me know your thoughts on it – how did it work for you?
Image credit - Marketing Strategy © patpitchaya - Fotolia.comRead more on: Digital and content marketing 