
It’s been six months since Neil Lustig became the CEO of Sailthru. It’s not easy to fill the shoes of the founder – especially when you’re expected to build on a forty percent annual growth rate. And you’ve got to pull it off without alienating your engineers, many of whom were hired during the freewheeling early days.
Suddenly, “personalization” is in every marketing vendors’ slide deck. But are they delivering on what the word implies, or stuck in “faux personalization”? As expected, Lustig had strong words. On the customer side, what are the obstacles companies must overcome to move from mass messaging to personalized/predictive approaches?

Jon Reed: Give us the short version of the Neil Lustig bio.
Neil Lustig: I’ve been in the technology space for my entire career, a good chunk of it at IBM. Prior to Sailthru, I spent the last seven years at a Mountain View-based software company called Vendavo, which specializes in price optimization software. We sold Vendavo at the end of last year. Around that time, I got a phone call: “Hey, meet with Neil Capel, Sailthru’s founder, and listen to their story.” So far, it’s been a lot of fun.
Reed: Why has “personalization” risen to the top of the buzzword heap?
Lustig: People are going to compete on the Internet based on customer experience. But the fundamentals of a great experience means that experience is tailored to them. You can’t expect to get away with a generic approach to all your customers anymore. You have to know your customers inside and out.
Personalization can create a compelling experience. You can drive that through retention, improvements in CLV, reductions in opt-outs, and increased engagement. All these things come from the simple act of listening to your customer, understanding what they’re interested in, and trying to reflect those interests in your engagement with them. Ideally, you do that in a highly automated fashion, so you don’t have to program it manually, or go through an elaborate setup.
Reed: But – a lot of companies use email personalization and segmentation these days. Most of the messages I get are still boilerplate and bland.
Lustig: That’s because segmentation isn’t granular enough. People are trying to move from basic emailing to some level of personalization, or they’re moving from segment-driven. They say “Well, let’s be out of segment. We have to get to one to one.”
From faux personalization to the real thing
Reed: True personalization, as in: “Send me just the right information or offer at the right time, and don’t bother me otherwise,” sounds good. But very few companies have figured it out. What stumbling blocks must companies overcome?
Neil Lustig, Sailthru
Lustig: This is a change in thinking. Yes, acquisition is terrific, but retention is profitability. If you can drive retention, that’s the fastest way to profitability. Somewhere in marketing college, they told us it’s all about acquisition, but in fact, 95 percent of the customers you acquire may transact with you once. That’s not a particularly profitable model. Five percent of your customers are driving all the rest of that traffic. If you can take that five percent, and make it ten percent because you created a compelling experience, it’s a huge difference in profitability.
In retail, for example, this is a shift from a traditional retail mindset. If you can use the data your audiences shares with you to create an experience in a thoughtful way, it’s going to build retention, and they’re going to come back over and over again. We see people like Country Outfitter – a use case you wrote about – using full combinations of content and product to do this.
Reed: But even with more companies investing in content, I still see Country Outfitter as the exception, not the rule. Aren’t marketers getting in their own way here?
Lustig: The number one impediment is having a thoughtful marketing strategist who gets this. The technical demands aren’t that huge anymore, and we’re getting better on ease of use. Training can help. In our case, to help get marketers up to speed on digital, we’re running classes for our customers. Predictive can help to create a better experience also. For example, our platform has a predictive layer built on top of it, which makes behavioral predictions at an individual level. We can predict, the likelihood that you’re going to opt-out if we send you one more email.
Reed: I’m opting out of excessive messaging all the time.
Lustig: Opt-out rates can drop dramatically if you do this right.
Reed: I can think of several big vendors who say they are already doing personalization at scale. I’m guessing you disagree?
Lustig: It’s very fashionable now to say “We’ve addressed personalization.” The vast majority of the time, this is just thoughtful segmentation. Your customer is much more interesting than six demographic tags. Demographic tagging is a very gross approximation of the interests and passion that your customers have. To me, an approach like that just says, “Actually, your system wasn’t designed for personalization. It was designed for segments.” You can tell they’re a generation behind in the technology stack, because it takes a different kind of stack to do this kind of personalization.
Personalization tech isn’t a cure-all
Reed: But even with the right technology, some companies struggle.
Lustig: That’s true. Vendors need to make personalization easier, regardless of the sophistication of the customer.
Reed: What would be an example of how you are working to make this easier?
Lustig: Our personalization works better when your content is well tagged. For a lot of small to mid-size companies, tagging is a chore. This week, we’re introducing automated tagging with a semantic engine. If you can’t tag your site, we’ll tag your entire site for you.
We’re also going to introduce something new: taking that same value proposition on-site, so that we can mirror our email personalization on-site. We’ll also announce integration with Salesforce, so that you can pull all that insight on interests and behavior into Salesforce. We’re trying to connect the dots, making it easier for our customers to create compelling experiences – regardless of the channel.
The rational technology buyer turns the tables
Reed: Before we wrap, you’ve written about the rise of the rational technology buyer for diginomica. Can you explain why you’re excited about this trend?
Lustig: The emergence of the rational technology buyer is tied into predictive technologies that are literally changing how they’re evaluating software. You can measure each of your strategies very discretely, and say “Okay, well I got this improvement in lift, or I got this improvement in engagement, or I changed the dynamic for this product measurably.”
Reed: So the technology buyer can now use technology to shine a light on the same vendors trying to sell it to them.
Lustig: With the data buyers have now, they can say, “This is the technology I’m buying, and this is why I’m buying it. I’m not buying technology because it’s cool or because it’s exciting. I’m buying it because I got four percent revenue lift out of it.”
End note: this interview makes reference to product announcements, including the Personalization Engine, that Sailthru made on October 20 at the Lift conference. Here’s the details.

Image credit: Business vision, competitors tracking or headhunters concept. © Your image – Fotolia.com.
Disclosure: Sailthru is a diginomica premier partner, as is Salesforce.
Read more on: Analytics planning and data analysisCRM and customer experienceDigital and content marketinge-commerce 