
If a brand engages with consumers, only to leave them feeling disappointed, would it be better not to engage at all? Let me give you an example.
Encountering a sudden dearth of my favorite chocolate desserts on a recent visit to my local Sainsbury’s supermarket, I was distraught. If you’re not a chocaholic you probably don’t realize the importance of these small, low-calorie pleasures in a person’s life. Even worse, another favorite had disappeared at the same time.
Not only was I suddenly deprived of the crisp chocolate layers and delicious mousse of Nestlé Aero Creations, I was also unable to fall back on the miraculous comfort of Sainsbury’s own-brand Be Good To Yourself Chocolate Muffin Dessert. It was a double chocolate disaster, alleviated only slightly by discovering a special reduction in the freezer cabinet on some ice-encrusted tubs of Ben & Jerry’s Chocolate Fudge Brownie Ice Cream.
I decided to try complaining on social media to see if it would get me anywhere. I was pleased to get an immediate response.

Sorry about this, what is your local store? Goldie
— Sainsbury’s (@sainsburys) 30 June 2017

So far so good. Goldie directed me to a product request form on the Sainsbury’s website. She even supplied the item code for one of the missing products.
This was just as well, because the product request form is not as user friendly as it could be. Asking a consumer to submit an “EAN/SKU/Item code” is a bit off-putting. Can’t I have a friendly search function that lets me pick the right product from a list of pictures and descriptions, just like an online shopping experience? At the very least, some on-screen help that explains that I’m expected to enter the 7-figure number that appears next to the item in the online catalog.
Is a stock apology enough?
Anyhow, a week later, I got my reply via email. In fact, having filed forms for two separate products, I got two versions of the exact same template email.

Of course it’s very properly apologetic, but it really says nothing at all. I’m an adult (albeit with a mild chocolate addiction). I already knew the store was making choices about what to put on its shelves. I could see it had removed my favorite product to make space for a new product that I have absolutely no interest in trying. So why not be a bit more honest? Sainsbury’s and I both know that the “difficult choice” didn’t come out of the blue. Why not tell it like it is?

“I’m sorry to say that your requested product has not been selling so well recently. So we decided to take if off the shelf to make room for something else. We’re not planning to bring it back.” Or:
“Nestlé have introduced a new product and are incentivizing us with a special discount if we put it on the shelf. So we took off your favorite to make room. If the new line doesn’t start selling after a few weeks, we’ll put your requested product back.” Or:
“We only recently took this product off the shelves at your store but we’ll consider putting it back if we discover there are a lot of customers that feel strongly about it.”

Any of the above would make me feel Sainsbury’s was actually taking the trouble to really explain what’s going on, rather than just fob me off with a template letter about difficult choices. I know this isn’t easy for you, but at least give me the feeling you care about how I’m feeling too. If we can work this out together, surely that’s better for everyone involved?
The real problem here is the lack of a proper link back into the core processes of the business. You can have a website and a social media strategy that goes through the motions of engaging with customers. But unless it’s empowered to actually converse with them honestly about the choices you’re making, it’s just a skin-deep pretense. You have to join up business processes end-to-end before you can have an authentic relationship with the customers.
Image credit - via the authorRead more on: CRM and customer experienceRetail e-commerce and the omni-channel 