
It’s been a tough a year for one of the UK’s largest supermarket chains, Sainsbury’s, which today reported a significant fall in annual profits, due to an increasingly competitive market and decreasing food prices.
Sainsbury’s said today that underlying profits fell to £587 million for the year to 12 March, which is down from £681 million in the previous year.
Chief executive Mike Coupe told the BBC’s Today Programme that “prices are actually 4% lower…than two years ago and that’s a reflection of the fact that the market is fiercely competitive”.
And if you dig below the surface of the numbers, it’s evident that Sainsbury’s understands the nuances of this competitiveness. It understands the challenges in balancing physical shopping outlets with investments in a diversified digital portfolio.
Part of this is Sainsbury’s plan to acquire Home Retail Group, which is being seen as an attempt to further take on Amazon, as it continues to push into the area of food delivery. On the results, Coupe said:
We continue to outperform our main supermarket peers and maintain market share in a competitive, deflationary environment. We deliver great quality products and services at fair prices, whenever and wherever customers want to shop – and with volumes and transactions up, it is clear customers are responding positively to our offer.
Our core food business performed well, underpinned by our quality investment programme, our simpler pricing strategy and lower regular prices. We also saw strong growth in clothing and general merchandise, as well as in our convenience and online channels. These results reflect the multi-product, multi-channel shopping experience customers are looking for today and our proposed acquisition of Home Retail Group plc will accelerate our strategy in this direction.
The market is competitive, and it will remain so for the foreseeable future. We believe we have the right strategy in place and are taking the right decisions to achieve our vision to be the most trusted retailer where people love to work and shop.
However, there is more to this than the Home Retail Group purchase, as Sainsbury’s points to a number of digital investments across the board, which are being used to complement its existing physical store portfolio.
Skills
 As I highlighted last week in a piece about companies increasingly looking to insource digital skills and having to fight for resource, Sainsbury’s too is planning to take on some 480 digital staff. It said:
Colleague training and development continues to be a key area of investment. We are growing our digital capability to prepare us for the future, hiring 480 new digital-focused colleagues.
And Sainsbury’s discussed in detail, across a number of areas of its business, why it believes that digital technologies and data are important to its future success as a competitive retailer in the UK market. It believes that those that don’t get this right, will fall behind. Sainsbury’s said:
The UK food retail landscape is changing rapidly. The disruptive impact of technology is empowering customers and heightening their expectations of how retailers will serve them in the future. Customers are increasingly developing deeper relationships with retailers, sharing a greater amount of data and insight about their purchases as part of more sophisticated loyalty programmes.
The grocery retailers in particular have an unrivalled insight into the weekly shopping habits of customers and will need to invest in customer insight tools to anticipate and better serve changing customer needs. In addition, the rise of the smart phone and increased levels of connectivity are enabling customers to research easily any planned purchase online. The transaction may then take place either in store or online, with a range of delivery options: in store, to home, or via Click & Collect.
Grocery retailers are again uniquely positioned to serve customers in all of these ways. As customer shopping habits evolve as a result of these new retail capabilities so too will their expectations. Those food retailers that will be successful in the future will need to develop new technologies increasing the speed, flexibility and convenience of their offer.
The detail
Sainsbury’s provided some examples of how it is investing in its diverse offer to the customer, to

try and meet those changing expectations. For example, it said that it has introduced a new customer database/insights system that gives it a “more holistic view” of its customers, allowing it to meet their needs in a more personalised way.
To complement this, Sainsbury’s has also launched an online consumer panel, Trolley Talk, which allows it to talk to 4,000 customers every week on a range of issues. It hopes that the insights gained from these conversations will help point its strategy in the right direction.
Another interesting piece of detail is that whilst Sainsbury’s Bank achieved £65 million underlying profit, it is also in the midst of transitioning to a “new, more flexible banking platform”. Sainsbury’s said that the total transition costs are forecast to be at the top of the £340 million to £380 million range.
In addition, Sainsbury’s provided some insight into how it has to balance the drive for more online purchases, with the continued availability of physical assets where some shoppers like to carry out their shopping. On the online front, Sainsbury’s has seen more growth. It said:
Our online business continues to grow across both food and clothing. Groceries online grew by nearly nine per cent with orders increasing by nearly 15 per cent. We had a record week in the run up to Christmas, delivering over 289,000 orders, both to customers’ homes and to the 101 grocery Click & Collect sites we have opened at our stores across the country.
These sites have proved to be popular with our customers and we are aiming to double the number of Click & Collect sites by the end of the financial year.
Interestingly, in a trend I’m seeing more and more, Sainsbury’s is by and large using its existing physical assets to support its online activities. It said:
We pick our grocery online orders from stores; this makes good commercial, logistical and operational sense as we are using existing resources that are within easy reach of where our customers live. As Click & Collect gains in popularity, picking orders in store saves time and minimises additional transport and handling costs.
However, demand for groceries online in the densely populated and fast-growing London area is so great that we will open a purpose-built online fulfilment centre in Bromley-by-Bow, East London this year. This will provide us with the additional capacity we need to meet this increasing customer demand.
However, despite the online trend, Sainsbury’s noted that it is has to continue to support the buyers that like to shop in store – which are still the majority. It said:
Shopping habits are evolving with customers choosing to buy their groceries more frequently and from the broader range of channels now available to them. We expect volumes will continue to reduce in the supermarket channel as consumers shop more often in convenience stores, online and with discount retailers.
However, we anticipate the supermarket will remain the most popular destination for customers. It is therefore important that this channel adapts to reflect and meet changing customer needs. With conflicting demands and increasingly busy lifestyles, consumers are seeking greater convenience in their shopping missions.
Grocery retailers need to respond to this by offering them greater flexibility in how they shop and making it easier for them to buy the products they need whenever and wherever they want, whilst enjoying great value.
With customer shopping patterns continuing to change, we believe there is great potential in tailoring our store formats and product ranges to meet evolving needs. We have been trialling new formats in our supermarkets, testing different store layouts to cater for a wider range of shopping missions. As part of this trial we are reviewing how we can offer customers easier and quicker ways to shop, checkout and pay in our stores.
My take
The weaker than normal results are a reflection of the competitiveness of this market. However, given the emphasis on multi-channel and use of data to personalise shopping to consumers in the company’s results, Sainsbury’s is making all the right noises. The next couple of years are going to be very interesting for the retail sector in the UK.
Image credit - Images via Sainsbury's websiteRead more on: e-commerceRetail e-commerce and the omni-channel 