
Christmas at Sainsbury’s
One of the biggest developments in the emerging online grocery wars in 2018 was the defensive move by UK supermarket chain Sainsbury’s to announce a planned £7.3 billion takeover of Walmart’s Asda business.
So impactful would such a tie-up be, that the deal has had to be referred to the UK’s Competition and Markets Authority (CMA) regulator for clearance, a move that currently leaves Sainsbury’s in a holding pattern with CMA not likely to report back until January next year.
For Sainsbury’s CEO Mike Coupe, it’s just something that has to be lived with:
As a customer, you have more choice than you’ve ever had. If you think about what the CMA are there to do, they’re there to protect customers. And in the end, their test is whether or not there was any harm done to customers, and we’re making a very strong case as to why we believe that not only will no harm be done, we’ll actually improve prices and our overall proposition for our customers through the generation of significant synergies that can only be delivered by bringing the two organizations together.
We’re now engaging in that process with the CMA. As you imagine, that involves a lot of detailed discussions, a lot of evidence, a lot of data. And of course, the CMA are an evidence-based organization and a world-renowned evidence-based organization, so they will look at the facts and produce the preliminary findings towards the back end of January.
But life has to go on. Coupe clearly wants the Asda deal to happen and as soon as possible, but he also pitches the line that there is a wider plan in place:
Our market is changing and changing very rapidly and the competitive forces aren’t abating. They’re driven by a couple of things: firstly, the rise of discounters; and secondly, the change in shopping habits, driven by online and digital.
So a digital focus across Sainsbury’s various business, including the Argos catalog home goods arm, is top of the agenda. There are plenty of examples of this paying off, argues Coupe:
We’ve introduced new service standards in our organization. We have a program called WOW service, which is front and center of our colleagues’ minds as we go into the run up to Christmas. And we’ve also introduced an app, which allows our customers to feedback in real time through what’s known as Lettuce Know. And so literally every store, on a day-to-day, week-to-week basis, understands their performance metrics in terms of their customer service and can act on that literally on a week-to-week and day-to-day basis, so a big step-up in our performance there.
The Argos factor
Digital transformation has a high profile in the Argos business, the catalog firm bought by Sainsbury’s in 2016. There are now Argos sections in 250 Sainsbury’s stores as well as with their own units on high streets. Coupe says:
It’s self-evident in the case that customers are becoming more digitally savvy. They increasingly use their mobile phones to order products from us. It is little short of remarkable. You can sit in [a] room, download the Argos app and order something and have it delivered within four hours at a convenient location for you, whether that’s a store, your office or, indeed, your home or, indeed, somewhere else. And you can see that in the shape of our business, with now 60% of our transactions enabled through some form of digital interaction with our business.
He adds:
The Argos mobile app is now being used by 1 million customers. And 60% of app users have switched to paperless statements so, again, making that business more efficient and, again, showing the changing nature of the way that our customers shop with us. Forty percent of all payments are now made by the app, again, a reflection of that change in consumer behavior.
There is one trick that’s not yet been pulled off – having an integrated Sainsbury’s groceries online strategy and an Argos digital strategy so that general merchandise from Argos can be loaded on to an online grocery truck to cut unit costs. Coupe can see this as a Holy Grail, but one that’s out of reach at present:
[We are] a number of years away from that kind of approach simply because the economics. Broadly speaking, there’s a cut-off point where the economics of the Argos business model work, price points in effect; and below that, the groceries online-type model works. So there’s always that trade-off to be made. But the idea of full-scale integration is many, many years away. The way I would think about it is how we start by integrating the front-end piece, so things like single sign-on, making sure that you only have to enter your credit card details, your name and address once across the entire ecosystem.
There have been baby steps made on this journey, he adds:
In the summer, for the first time, if you searched for a fan on groceries online and it wasn’t available within the grocery business, we took you to the Argos website, where you could buy a fan and then brought you back to the Sainsbury’s grocery online offer. That kind of search mechanism is, again, the kind of thing that you can see happening relatively quickly because it’s largely technology-based, not logistically-based. So these are the kind of things where we’re working on increasingly in the mobile and digital space.
So it’s a step-by-step journey, but probably the last thing on that journey would be to think about how you integrate the deliveries from stores to customers, although there are things that we are doing in terms of delivering two stores using our grocery network for Argos products as an example. So again, that’s a benefit that sits behind the scenes in the way that we’re running the business differently.
As for that looming Asda deal closure, Coupe remains publicly phlegmatic:
I think we made the case, but we can go no further than that. We’re in the detailed part of the investigations, and we’ll have to see what happens there in January when they produce the preliminary findings. As far as the market is concerned, I think we have to be sensible in terms of just recognizing the fact we’re almost in unprecedented times, consumer backdrop, political uncertainty etc etc.
My take
2019 is going to a big year for Sainsbury’s if everything goes to plan. The firm has done the digital spadework and is seeing rewards. The Argos takeover has given the overall business a healthy uptick. If it can execute on the promise of the Asda merger, the chain is well-positioned to hold its own as the online groceries sector becomes increasingly aggressive in 2019 and beyond.
Image credit - YouTubeRead more on: Analytics planning and data analysisCRM and customer experiencee-commerceRetail e-commerce and the omni-channel 