
Kirk Krappe, Apttus
It’s getting to be a habit. In the run-up to last year’s Dreamforce conference, quote-to-cash Salesforce partner Apttus revealed a $108 million round of venture funding and a billion-dollar unicorn valuation. This year, with just days to go before Dreamforce opens, Apttus has today announced a further $88 million in venture funding in an up-round that brings its valuation to an estimated $1.3 billion. Total funding to date now comes to $247 million and the company is looking towards an IPO in the first half of 2017.
Apttus says the latest round will fuel its “return to operational profitability,” which at first take sounds like someone getting mixed up about the difference between equity and revenue, but more likely means that a further investment in sales will help bring the rate of annual recurring revenues above its operating costs. This is widely seen as a prerequisite for any B2B cloud business in the run-up to a successful IPO. Apttus was profitable and self-funded until seeking its first venture funding to accelerate growth in 2013.
Going vertical, harnessing AI
Alongside the new funding announcement, Apttus has been busy releasing details of some of the fruits of last year’s funding in the form of new product enhancements.
One strand is the development of vertical industry solutions, with the launch of new features targeting healthcare and life sciences. Apttus has teamed up with Deloitte to offer a solution tailored to medical device manufacturers, as well as its own offerings for health insurance providers, biopharma manufacturers and healthcare providers. Existing Apttus customers in this field include Aesynt, IMS Health, GE Healthcare, and Olympus Medical.
The other strand is the launch of new product enhancements, most notably an intelligent agent named Max, which helps automate repetitive tasks in the revenue process. Max is a bot with a British female voice that understands natural language instructions via voice, text input or augmented reality, which it then applies to pre-orchestrated workflow processes. It can also heuristically learn habitual patterns which it incorporates into the automation. Speaking about the technology last week, Apttus CEO Kirk Krappe told diginomica:
What we’ve done is look at every use case in walking through a quote-to-cash scenario, and where there is something that’s repetitive, mundane, low value-adding, we’ve applied a Max use case.
These bots are very easy to set up, it’s not computer programming.
Krappe describes a scenario where a sales person is in their car after completing a sales appointment and verbally instructs Max to amend a template quote to match this new opportunity.
No logging into the computer, going into Salesforce, going into an opportunity, typing it in, picking products and configuring the CPQ, classic configuring and pricing. Max just dynamically creates this quote and then asks you, do you want to change any parameters — products, discount?
Max is doing this for you — whilst you’re in your car, or it can be mobile, or it can be texting — we can [also] use Slack or we have our own UI that’s similar to Slack. Max says, I’ve done a quote, do you need an approval? Do you want me to generate a contract? It basically walks you through the whole use case of quote-to-cash.
Although the technology sounds similar to Salesforce’s recently unveiled Einstein AI platform — which is set to be a major theme of Dreamforce — Apttus has developed its Max bot using the AI and bot capabilities within Microsoft Azure, as part of an alliance with Salesforce’s cloud rival that began two years ago. Apttus will also be showing off Microsoft’s HoloLens augmented reality technology interacting with Max as part of its product configurator at Dreamforce, says Krappe.
My take
Apttus has good cause to differentiate itself on the Dreamforce show floor after Salesforce’s acquisition last year of Salesforce-native quote-to-cash vendor, Steelbrick. The Steelbrick offering has now been incorporated into Salesforce and this month rebranded as Salesforce Quote-to-Cash (a category name that Apttus claims credit for inventing). While the Steelbrick product is generally seen as a midmarket offering while Apttus is targeting large enterprise customers, the two do go head-to-head in a number of deals and so Apttus needs to keep moving its feature set forward.
I was intrigued to hear Krappe’s take on Einstein — more on that in a forthcoming post. Having allied with Microsoft after originally being one of Salesforce’s earliest ISV partners, Apttus is an interesting position, especially now that the first flush of BFF bonding between Salesforce and Microsoft has started to wear a little thin.  How that plays out during this year’s Dreamforce — especially as Apttus brings Microsoft’s Azure and HoloLens technologies to the center of the show floor — will be interesting to watch.
Image credit - Feature image - Dollars flying into digital globe © fgnopporn - Fotolia.com; headshot by ApttusDisclosure - Salesforce is a diginomica premier partner at time of writing. Read more on: Cloud ERP financials and supply chainCRM and customer experienceMachine intelligence and AIUX and application design 