
According to Joe Duran, CEO of fast-growing financial adviser United Capital, the wealth management industry has “viewed human beings like walking wallets.” His company is among those who want to change that characterization. Rather than seeing people merely as prospects for specific financial products, its mission is to put the customer at the center of financial planning throughout their life.
As such, the company is a poster child for the kind of wealth management industry Salesforce aims to foster with its Financial Services Cloud, which goes on sale this week at a price of $150 per user per month, and which counts United Capital among its early adopters.
According to Simon Mulcahy, senior vice president and GM of Financial Services at Salesforce, the market is primed:
Financial Services Cloud is basically a formalization of what’s already taken place in the market. We’re just productizing that.
Underlining the demand for a more modern approach to wealth management, Salesforce has released the results of a research study which finds that the majority of financial advisers are behind the times in how they engage with investors. The survey of just over 7,900 adults across 8 countries from the US to Japan, and including 5,000 who have funds invested, found that:
Investors meet infrequently with their advisors, most often quarterly or annually, and through antiquated channels, such as phone, mail or in person.
Time-poor advisers struggle with the difficulties of manually collating many different data sources, while lacking timely information about their clients’ life events. At the same time, they recognize that they’re missing out on new opportunities to connect with digitally savvy customers. No wonder almost half of all wealth managers globally (47%) aren’t satisfied with the digital tools provided to them by their firms, according to separate research by Salesforce partner Capgemini.
The Salesforce study found that investors overwhelming want a more collaborative, technology-savvy approach, with almost two in three (63%) saying they’d prefer to manage investments collaboratively with their adviser, whereas less than a quarter (25%) said they currently enjoy this kind of relationship.
Digital micro-moments
Mulcahy believes technology can free advisers from the old model of infrequent, office-based meetings to one in which they digitally engage with their clients in more frequent and appropriate ‘micro-moments’.
The clients’ experience of wealth management [today] is on the advisers’ terms. By injecting technology, you flip the whole thing on its head. They can engage clients far more frequently.
Clients want to be advised. They don’t want to be treated in a dumb way.
Automated ‘robo-advisers’ as outlined in a recent report by another Salesforce partner, Deloitte, are part of the solution. But Mulcahy sees robotics as augmenting rather than replacing the human adviser.
Robo is a component of the answer. It’s about automated investing. That does not remove the need for advice. You still need the advice. There are so many other things you’ve got to consider when you’re looking at the holistic financial life picture. The role of the adviser in the world of financial wealth management is only going to grow.
This is a trust business. You earn trust by listening and proving you’re listening and caring. These advisers know the answers. It’s just difficult for an adviser to do what they can when they have so many administration burdens to overcome.
Removing the need to toggle between multiple information sources is an important part of the Salesforce solution, he explains.
An enormous part of our strategy is this pre-integration to create the paperless experience for the adviser.
An advisory firm that has had to knit all this together is going to see a significant burden relief, and the adviser is not going to have to pivot between all these different systems.
Adding mobile is important as well. In a world where you solve those basic problems, mobile is incredibly important for interacting when and where the client wants.
There’s pent-up demand for the right kind of advice he believes, and that point of view is backed up by Capgemini, which states in a white paper published with Salesforce this week that wealth held by high net worth individuals is at an all-time record high, having risen over 70% since 2008. Meanwhile older millennials are already in their 30s and are ready to take out life insurance and other savings and investment products, believes Mulcahy.
I’m expecting an explosion of wealth management. There’s a much broader market that’s underserved or unserved.
Image credit - Money dollar bills in sky with clouds © Rrraum - Fotolia.comDisclosure - At time of writing, Salesforce is a diginomica premier partner.Read more on: CRM and customer experienceFinancial services and fintech 