
We’ve been writing up the early stages of the Field Service Wars for a couple of years now. Alongside the growth of pure-play service management firms, such as ServiceMax and ServiceNow, the sector has seen the enterprise software establishment take an interest in this technology, with the likes of Oracle and Microsoft making tactical acquisitions to fold into their existing customer services offerings.
Such acquisitions are both a validation of the positioning of the pure-plays and also indicative of the potential that’s seen in this still relatively untapped market. Tomorrow at the German leg of its World Tour, Salesforce will once again talk about the Field Service Lightning offering it’s releasing. First flagged up last month at the firm’s ‘half time show’, this is a significant enhancement to the existing Service Cloud, now on general release and with some tech licensed from Click Software as part of the mix.
The importance Salesforce attaches to service management is perhaps reflected in the release today of its 2016 Connected Manufacturing Service Report, which sets out the argument for organisations to recognise a strategic role for service departments within their business.
A few background notes for context. The study was conducted by Harris Poll last month and is based on the views of 237 US senior executives. Just because it’s released on the eve of the German jamboree, it makes no claims to be a global view. Different results might found in different geographies.
Secondly, the report covers the manufacturing sector, which is one of the traditional highlands for the field service industry. Manufacturing here encompasses traditional manufacturing, consumer products/consumer goods, heavy equipment/construction and agricultural machinery, automotive, or oil and gas, as well as customer service, retail service/retail service operations or field service/field service operations.
That’s a pretty broad church and the inclusion of respondents with, for example, retail service responsibility as part of the congregation reflects changing perceptions of what constitutes field service management.
A message pitched by ServiceMax, a member of the Salesforce eco-system, is that it’s necessary to think beyond ‘the man in the white van coming to fix what’s broken’ characterisation of service management. That’s alluded to in the findings in the Salesforce report and I’d expect that ‘beyond manufacturing’ will be an increasingly strong message that will come out the cloud CRM provider in short order.
Stats
For now, there are some interesting conclusions coming out of the study, not the least of which being that 74% of executives polled, strongly or somewhat agree that services will be the primary revenue drivers for their companies within the next decade, while products will become loss-leaders. Some 92% of executives agree that their organizations need to adapt their service models to keep up with customer needs.
The bad news for organizations – and the sales opportunity for Salesforce and others – is that this vision is impaired by a dependency on IT infrastructure that is out of date, such as spreadsheets, paper-based systems and (horror of horrors!) on-premise CRM – helpfully spelt out in the study report as Oracle, Microsoft and SAP.
What this means in practical terms is that field service agents can’t always get at the necessary customer data when out on the road and end up having to make return visits to fix problems. More than 70% of executives say their field service agents need to make return visits “at least sometimes”, because they don’t have right part or tool (40%), can’t complete the transaction onsite (35%) or just don’t have the right customer information (35%).
In an era of mobile tech and the Internet of Things (IoT), that shouldn’t be happening. But while 78% of executives say they have kitted their field service agents out with mobile devices, only 46% of executives say those agents are able to make use of this technology if not connected to the internet.
Furthermore, only 41% of respondents say their people are able to capture data on site using technology, this despite 89% of respondents stating that real-time information collection and storage is seen as key to customer retention.
And in an age when paperless working remains an elusive aspiration, field service agents aren’t helping the cause, with 65% of respondents admitting that their teams will insist on printing out service tickets and taking them with them in their vehicles.
Of course, there is an IoT angle here. Again, this is something that ServiceMax and ServiceNow have been pitching for some time and it’s clear that IoT will be a major front in any Field Service Wars. The Salesforce study picks this up, noting that 68% of respondents see wearable devices as having an important future role in field service management, while just over half (51%) says their organization is already using IoT technology for predictive maintenance.
My take
There’s one last conclusion that’s worth noting. For all their claims to recognise the importance of service management as a growth contributor to the bottom line, nearly half of all respondents (48%) reckon that their company is “hesitant to incorporate new field service technology”.
Is that down to a ‘not the way we do things around here’ mindset among field service managers? Is it an innate conservatism that acknowledges the limitations of ‘the man in a white van’ in an IoT-enabled world, but fears change? Or is it as simple as executives buying-in to the idea with their philosophy but not their pocketbooks?
Whatever the explanation, there’s clearly evangelism that needs to be done here. Salesforce, of course, has form on this front. It’s interesting to remember that every big Salesforce keynote – such as the one in Hannover tomorrow – begins with a ‘back-to-basics’ reminder of the journey to cloud computing. Seventeen years on from Salesforce’s inception, CEO Marc Benioff still sees that as essential.
It’s something that all combatants in the Field Service Wars need to keep in mind. The idea of evolution in the field service industry needs to be pushed hard and to take hold.
To their credit, the pure-plays have done a good job nurturing and putting in the public domain powerful use cases to make their point that there’s a service economy beyond the white van. That message needs banging away at for a long time to come, both by the pure-play field service incumbents and the enterprise vendors scoping out the sector.
 
Image credit - Salesforce Research Disclosure - At time of writing, Oracle, Salesforce, SAP and ServiceMax are premier partners of diginomica. Read more on: CRM and customer experienceInternet of ThingsIT service management 