
Bromance back on?
Earlier today Bloomberg reported that Salesforce has hired un-named financial advisors to assist it on a potential takeover. Salesforce is tight lipped about any potential deal but given the likely size of any takeover and volatility in the markets, it will likely have to announce something in the next few days.
Which of the software behemoths is most likely to acquire Salesforce?
Synergies
Stuart (who will talk to this later) has had a long standing working theory that Oracle is the only company to which Marc Benioff, CEO Salesforce would likely sell.
This must be an out-of-left-field bid because of the fact advisors are involved and that Salesforce has notified the markets it is taking advice. But…Oracle’s market intelligence unit is among the best I know so if correct, then I am pretty sure they will have done plenty of homework. What follows is speculation but an attempt at arriving at the logic of such a deal.
Regardless of the on/off bromance between Benioff and Larry Ellison, CEO Oracle, such a combination solves problems for both companies. Here’s why.
Synergy No.1 – Salesforce has had a solid impact on the enterprise software landscape and especially so since Benioff hired Keith Block, ex-Oracle and a heavy hitter in the enterprise space. My sources tell me that Block has transformed the enterprise sales unit helped by a bunch of other exOracle hires and has introduced Oracle-esque processes into the business. That suggests similar processes and a smoother transition than is normally the case in a takeover.
Synergy No.2 – Salesforce and Oracle share a common database although Salesforce has bastardized its copy to such an extent that you wouldn’t recognize it as Oracle DB. Even so, and despite rumors that Salesforce was porting to another database, Benioff capitulated and committed to $1 billion in long term contracts for Oracle DB. A takeover eliminates that cost at a stroke, driving direct bottom line value to Salesforce equivalent to roughly $100 million a year. Oracle would barely notice that reduction on its side at its scale.
Synergy No.3  – For its part, Oracle has credible CRM offerings and the Siebel legacy still in play, but despite my optimism about the work being done on CX, it still has a lot of work to do. Salesforce solves many of those problems at a stroke in offering a coherent sales and marketing cloud while retaining Oracle’s ability to continue selling its own tuck-in solutions where they make the most sense.
Synergy No. 4 – Both Oracle and Salesforce make extensive use of stock option schemes with which to reward employees. Oracle’s scheme is extremely generous for its top performers while Salesforce’s is more broad based. Salesforce top employees would undoubtedly win over the long haul so winning over the people who REALLY matter would not be so difficult.
Synergy No.5 – Ellison is 70 years of age. He has nothing to prove and seems more interested in sailing than running the business….at least some of the time. Acquiring Salesforce would represent several things: a personal legacy that sees Benioff come back into the Oracle fold and a natural successor to his own position as recent CEO. More on that later.
Taken together, these top of mind synergies represent an attractive and appealing combination that are difficult to trump. There are of course many questions and I will leave Stuart to consider those and how they might play out.
However, it doesn’t go un-noticed that with net free cash of around $10 billion and a fresh debt round of $10 billion that stretches out to 2045 coming in, someone at Oracle is thinking VERY long term. At a market cap of $197 billion, Oracle has plenty of headroom with which to make a purchase on this scale and still generate solid free cash going forward. A fresh issue of shares can’t be out of the question if stakeholders want a good chunk of exit change. Salesforce has about $1 billion in free cash (PDF) to sweeten the pot. At time of writing, Salesforce share price was hovering around $50 billion.
There is one odd ball sticking point. Salesforce has committed to leasing what will be the tallest building in San Francisco. I’m not sure I see Benioff parking up at Redwood Shores, Oracle’s HQ, any time soon. The  extent to which the leasing arrangement comes under scrutiny may be a problem.
Other runners and riders
While I am convinced that Oracle is the only runner worth considering seriously, there are other contenders. Taking them in no particular order:
IBM – needs something to shore up its dwindling position in the market and Salesforce would represent a neutral play. But with Oracle DB at the center of Salesforce and a slew of ex-Oracle bag carriers working the enterprise beat, can anyone honestly see IBM making a fist of it? It would also mean unwinding Oracle-esque processes in favor of IBM-esque processes, an ugly thought at best. While IBM may have the resources, we can discount this one pretty quickly – unless we’re looking at a suicide bid.
Microsoft – is going through something of a renaissance under Satya Nadella’s leadership and certainly has the resources to scoop up a deal of this magnitude. But Nadella is on a different path with its Azure cloud and a focus on retrenching its position as favored developer resource. Its own CRM offering is also doing rather well so why cannibalize an existing business that’s proven successful? And of course let’s not forget the fiasco aka Project Green when Microsoft attempted and failed to harmonize its acquired enterprise software solutions Navision, Great Plains and Axapta. Can’t see this one either, despite the fact Nadella and Benioff are said to get on well.
SAP – has felt the chill wind of Salesforce and is now part of the emerging triumvirate of: SAP/Workday/Salesforce in replacement enterprise deals. Taking Salesforce off the table would be a huge shot in the arm but I can’t see it. Can you imagine the mess trying to unravel Oracle DB in favor of HANA when S/4 HANA is already under scrutiny? Would Hasso Plattner, co-founder SAP and de facto controller of the voting power that matters be prepared to dilute the heck out of himself for the sake of a technology that SAP quite frankly doesn’t understand that well? And what about all those Salesforce stock options? SAP doesn’t operate in the same way. It would be a smart purchase by SAP because it would stand as a bulwark against Workday and Oracle but somehow I can’t put this together financially or operationally.
Outside interest
In any horse race there are always interesting outsiders and it has been suggested that HP, Facebook, Google and Apple might be interested. I am sure someone somewhere can make the case but quite frankly I can’t see the logic from any of these. I have been proven wrong too many times to dismiss any of these out of hand but today? No.
Final irony
As I am writing this, a bunch of colleagues are holed up at an Oracle analyst event. I could not make it but right now I’d love nothing more than to be in THAT room 😉
Disclosure: Salesforce, SAP, Workday are all premier partners at time of writing.
UPDATE: Sources say Oracle has not made an offer per Buzzfeed. Well – I have a good idea where those who know might be and I’m not so sure that Buzzfeed has access to those people right now. But then a denial is totally plausible given the careful wording reported by Bloomberg.

Read more on: Best of archives 