
Salesforce Wave for Financial Services – client goals
The wave analogies will be flowing thick and fast today as Salesforce and its ISV partners announce a surge of new Wave analytics applications and tools. Salesforce itself is extending Wave beyond its already announced Sales and Service applications, bringing out new applications for IT and marketing, as well as a widely expected Wave upgrade for its industry-specific Financial Services Cloud. Meanwhile there are now twenty Wave apps live today in the Salesforce AppExchange from a range of ISV partners.
This latest iteration of Wave applications arrives with two new tools designed to make it easier for administrators to build and distribute Wave dashboards:

Wave Dashboard Designer — a dashboard management tool that allows admins to tailor the KPIs and other components of self-service analytics apps to specific roles and functions.
Wave Dataset Designer — a data integration tool aimed at business professionals, allowing them to combine data from multiple external sources, with “clicks not code.” For example, Salesforce says service managers can use this tool to bring sensor data from connected devices into Salesforce Service Cloud data “in order to better understand usage patterns and proactively address issues, all without relying on IT.”

The tools come at no extra charge, with Wave apps for Sales and Service remaining priced from $75 per user, and similar pricing likely for the newly announced Wave for B2B Marketing. The two other Wave newcomers, the IT-focused Wave for Event Monitoring and the vertical industry Wave for Financial Services, are both included free-of-charge in their respective applications.
Wave has now become a core part of the user experience in the financial services application, illustrating the direction Salesforce wants to take Wave across all applications. This is Wave’s mission per Stephanie Buscemi, COO of Analytics Cloud, set out in an interview earlier this year — to embed analytics into the user interface, bringing “engagement, collaboration and a system of intelligence, which is the analytic app” into transactional processes.
Wave-enhanced wealth management
In a pre-briefing yesterday, Rohit Mahna, GM financial services, told me the Wave-enhanced application is designed to help wealth management advisors get an aggregated view of client data, presented in a way that supports them in achieving better outcomes.
A fundamental change we’re seeing in the wealth management space is that advisors are really starting to take advantage of all this data they have on their clients and using it to get a complete view of their clients …
We’ve thought of this from multiple angles. Everyone’s moving from a product-centric model to a goal-based model.
There are various Wave dashboards built into the application, giving the advisor a choice of views, depending on whether they want to drill down into their client list, analyze their own productivity, or get insights into client goals. Filters are managed by user-friendly sliders and drop-downs, with instant updates of the data as the user drills down.
We’ve thought a lot about the screen layout. The advisors don’t have a lot of time to be trained up. We’ve spent a lot of time on building things that will be intuitive …
It’s all about providing as much data as possible to advisors and making advisors as productive as possible. To us it was all about empowering advisors to take advantage of the data.
Anyone can create a dashboard …
Of course that all depends on how reliable and comprehensive the data actually is. As Buscemi told me earlier this year, “Anyone can create a dashboard, but is it the right window into the data and information?” Salesforce is continuing to build out its roster of financial services specialist partners, such as Quovo and Addepar, which aggregate client portfolio and account information into the Salesforce platform. It can take a fair bit of work to get the data and dashboards ready for a specific implementation, but Mahna says Salesforce has done a lot to speed the process:
What we hear from firms is that it can be difficult based on the various systems in use — there’s really just a jungle of data and it’s difficult to find a path to connect the different data points together …
We built a standardized data model that allows firms to take that data model and extend it to their particular practice, and it makes it easier for partners to connect their data.
Of course the other factor is connecting into financial institution’s own back-office systems such as current accounts, mortgages and so on. Mahna says future iterations of the financial services application will reach beyond the wealth management sector into mainstream banking, insurance and capital markets:
Across the industry we’re seeing a blurring of lines. A bank is taking on more advisory services. They want to make sure they’re providing a wider solution to clients. What we’re doing is, we started more in the high-touch relationship wealth management area, but over this year and next year we’ll start extending this out. The reason is, that’s the way this industry is going.
Mahna also hinted that the product will pick up some of the machine learning capabilities that are expected to be a big part of announcements at next month’s Dreamforce conference:
As the company starts adding to the core capabilities, you’ll see those make their way to what we’re doing in Financial Services Cloud.
My take
This is traditionally the time of year for Salesforce to clear the decks with a series of announcements ahead of Dreamforce. Today’s product news gives Wave some visibility before attention switches to machine learning and other Einstein-flavored announcements at the main event.
One of the issues with Wave has been that it’s largely focused on presentation of data and so the introduction of a tool that is designed to make it easier to hook up new data sources is the most notable of today’s announcements. As Buscemi says, a dashboard is only as good as the data it’s generated from.
There’s still a long haul ahead before it starts to fulfil the excessive hype that accompanied its initial launch, but Wave is finally starting to mature.
Image credit - Wave for Financial Services Cloud screenshot by SalesforceDisclosure - Salesforce is a diginomica premier partner at time of writingRead more on: Analytics planning and data analysisCRM and customer experienceCustomer service managementFinancial services and fintech 