
With the European Union (EU) General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) coming into force in less than two weeks, it’s no surprise that discussions around how companies use their customer data are reaching fever pitch.
This has been amplified by the recent Facebook and Cambridge Analytica scandal, which has likely resulted in consumers and users thinking more carefully about what data they hand over and to which companies they trust.
As such, it was encouraging to hear a number of global brands speaking at the opening of Salesforce’s new Innovation Centre in London this week, claiming that GDPR should not be seen as the end goal – but rather the bare minimum. Hive, Salesforce and Aston Martin all shared their views on how customer-centric companies should be using customer data.
GDPR comes into force on 25th May and organisations will need to comply if they have any dealings with companies or consumers in EU member states (including the UK).
The ultimate aim of the regulation is to give individuals more rights over their data and restrict how companies process private information. GDPR has a number of requirements, which include:

a requirement for consent – businesses will need to ensure that all customers know that you have their data and that they consent to the business having that data
businesses will have three days to report data breaches to both the authorities and customers
the Right to be Forgotten – customers will have the right to ask businesses to delete all of their data, and to prove that they have
data portability – the aim being to create an environment where businesses can easily swap their data between different providers, whilst ensuring the data is erased from the old provider’s systems.
hefty fines for data breaches will be introduced – up to €20 million or 4% of global annual turnover for the preceding financial year, whichever is the greater.

It’s pretty simple
Speaking on a panel at the event this week, Terence Sorrell, global business design manager at smart home company Hive, which is part of the Centrica group, said that whenever anyone mentions GDPR, the room goes quiet – but he doesn’t understand why.
Sorrell explained that GDPR is designed to do two things: firstly to protect customers and secondly to stop companies doing nefarious things with customer data. He said that Hive “was never going to do the latter and was always going to do the former”.
And whilst Centrica is looking at GDPR across the board, Sorrell said that it won’t have a huge impact on Hive. He said:
We started our vision for the smart home as putting customers in control of their home. By proxy, they are in control of their data. We are not going to sell their data at the moment, we are fundamentally focused on developing the reward between the data and the consumer. We may well do in the future, but that’s a future state, it’s not now.
Sorrell said that consumers are now generally more aware of their data and are far more aware of how the data could be used, if a company was so inclined. As such, companies have a responsibility to be transparent and to educate, according to Sorrell. It’s also about explaining the value that a customer will receive by handing their value over. He said:
We need to be very, very clear about what value a customer gets out of the data that we have for them. That’s what we need to nurture, that’s the relationship we need to nurture. If that becomes profitable for us as a company in the future, then great. It’s about making sure that the customer gets the reward that they need from the acquisition of that data. I think companies will stray more towards being very transparent with customers.
Something else that’s really important – GDPR is the minimum expectation. It’s not the gold standard of how we treat customers and customer data. It is what is legally the minimum requirement. That’s why I’m not that fussed by GDPR, because we hold ourselves to a much higher standard.
You don’t have to do everything
Gerhard Fourie, director of marketing and brand strategy at Aston Martin, agreed with Sorrell’s comments and added that Aston Martin – although not driven by GDPR, but fits into its strategy around the regulation – has rethought what data it deems as important to collect. He argued that narrowing your focus and ensuring the customer understands the value is key.
Essentially, companies don’t have to collect all the data they can, even if it is technically possible. Fourie said:
A useful discussion for us internally is – why would we want this piece of data? What was happening at an early phase was that we got so excited about the idea that we could collate stuff. And then it becomes quite cumbersome to use it. So we have gone through a process now of saying, ‘actually we don’t need this’. Where would you use this?
Then it makes it very easy to understand why you’re collecting data – will it add value to the customer? There’s a difference between that and something being interesting, but frankly none of our business. Then it becomes very easy to explain to a customer why you’re collecting their data.
A new type of data economy
Another interesting perspective put across came from Peter Schwartz, Salesforce’s SVP of strategic planning. Schwartz argued that in the not too distant future, GDPR may fall behind the technology market, thanks to a new type of economy emerging – the personal data economy.
Schwartz said that people are ‘oil wells’ of data and that data is the new key resource – everybody wants it. However, he added that the problem at the moment is that whilst people are generating tonnes and tonnes of data, someone else is capturing the value of that data (for example, Facebook’s model). Schwartz said:
Essentially, everywhere you go, you leave little bits of digital dust. Being captured by people. That is being used in various ways, sometimes in your benefit and sometimes not. And what you don’t know is what is going on. You have no control over it. But that’s about to change.
What we are actually seeing is a shift towards a new structure of data collection. Of a whole new series of data brokers. The ability of other people to capture that data, make sense of that data, sell it on, and give you value.
Schwartz provided the example of companies such as moviepass and Cineworld, where for the monthly price of a just one cinema ticket, customers can go and see as many movies as they want (essentially a subscription model). These companies then hold the data on what films people went to see, how often they went to the cinema, what types of films are doing well etc. Cineworld and moviepass can then sell that data on to production studios, such as Sony or AMC, whilst protecting their customer’s identity – they become a middle layer, a broker. And return, customers reduce their costs and get a better experience (the value).
Schwartz explained:
That begins to be the new model. Where there are intermediaries, where the job is to capture the data, make sense of the data, put it into a usable form, sell it to people that want to use that data, and then give you back the benefits for the value of your data. We are going to see more and more applications of that sort, which are basically operating as an intermediary between you and others that want to use your data. And then give you value for that data.
We are about to see a whole new layer in the economy, with companies whose job it is to capture the data, organise it in a useful form, and then present that data to people who want to use it, and then give the source (the oil well) the value that they are now creating.
And so, this is how we will move into an economy that protects the rights of the individual, offers them a unique value, makes sense of data, and makes the big data economy actually work. Work for everybody, for people who want to use the data, and work for all of us oil wells generating the data.
Speaking directly to the impact of GDPR, Schwartz said that whilst this is currently happening in Europe, it is likely that it will become universal, with the US and other countries following suit. He said that people rightly want to have some degree of regulation over what companies can do with the data they hold on them.
However, this new personal data economy, where brokers protect the interests of users, could make GDPR less relevant, Schwartz said. He explained:
But, in some ways, part of what I’m trying to suggest is that this is almost already the past. That the technology we are talking about in the personal data economy is the future. By the time that really spreads, which will take 3 to 5 years to play out in the form of the new data brokers – this will make this a little irrelevant.
As it is with technology and regulation, technology tends to get out ahead of regulation. And I think the new generation of personal data economy will do just that.
Image credit - Via pixabayDisclosure - Salesforce is a diginomica premier partner. Read more on: Digital enterprise in the real worldGoverning identity privacy and securityRegulationUse cases 