
Education is a great thing, but it’s not enough in its current form to ensure success in the workplace of the Fourth Industrial Revolution. 
That’s one of the talking points at today’s Salesforce World Tour event in London with the company warning that while tech such as AI and machine learning may help address output and productivity issues for businesses, there could also be a personal price to pay for their employees. 
It’s not a particularly original observation in its own right – Armageddon peddlers from across the spectrum have issued similar dire warnings – but Salesforce’s message is based on a study of over 2,000 UK workers, students and job-seekers, carried out by YouGov. 
The top line conclusion emerging from this is that there needs to be a fundamental transformation of what is understood by education including accepting that it doesn’t stop at the graduation ceremony from high school or university. Andy Lawson, Executive Vice President and General Manager UK, Salesforce, says: 
Shifting to a model of continuous lifelong learning is essential when the pace of technological advancements is rapidly increasing. Employers can play their part by recognising other forms of learning and experience equally, alongside more traditional paths and support their staff to embrace ongoing training and education. This way, businesses can ensure that fair opportunities are provided to people across the UK, while building a diverse team that is best-placed to support the workplace of the future.
The problem here is that most people in or who aspire to be in the workforce believe that employers look most favourably on the traditional education path and as such focus on meeting those expectations.  That indicates a need for employers to recognise and support other forms of learning and experience equally, alongside more traditional paths. 
Some 82% of UK workers believe that lifelong learning is becoming more and more important, while 89% of full-time students expressed a similar view. UK adults believe that employers need to play a role in providing lifelong learning, but that employers often focus too heavily on traditional
Employers have their part to play here with 91% of UK adults saying that it’s incumbent on them to provide training in new tech that will be relevant to meeting further job needs. That’s the same percentage as believes that further and higher education institutions have the same responsibility. 
But over a quarter (27%) of UK workers do not believe that employers are doing enough to keep workers up to the mark on the technological skills needed to support them throughout their working lives. Some 43% of adults who are in work, full time education or seeking employment claim they would be more likely to pursue on-the job training in the future, than any other type of training or education (including formal education), in order to improve their tech skills. 
Hairdressing to tech
To make its point, Salesforce cites the example of Marcelle Braithwaite Customer Solutions Lead for Cloudshift Group, a partner firm. Braithwaite may work in the tech sector, but didn’t have a conventional route into her role:
Unlike a lot of my peers, I didn’t want to go to university as I was concerned about spending tens of thousands, when I was uncertain what career I wanted to follow. I ended up trying out a few things, including hairdressing for around three years. Looking for a new challenge, I took the plunge and decided to take a course to become Salesforce certified.
I had never worked in technology, but funnily enough many of my earlier careers like hairdressing had given me key workplace skills that can’t be taught on paper, including communicating with and relating to people – essential for a role in consultancy.
Not everyone gets the skills they need for the workplace directly from traditional education. My advice to anyone would be – learn essential tech skills, as this will set you up for any career and then keep investing in yourself with continuous learning to ensure you are prepared for the future.
A lingering concern remains the view that the skills needed to thrive in the Fourth Industrial Revolution are not being taught adequately in full-time education, including schools and universities. Some 31% of people that left full-time education less than a year ago and 48% of those who left full-time education between 1-5 years ago, say technology and digital skills were taught poorly the last time they were in full-time education.
Meanwhile  almost a third (32%) of middle managers say they were never taught technology or digital skills while in full-time education, while only 11% of respondents say they were proactively encouraged by academics to pursue a career in tech. 
The long-term knock-on effect of this is that more than one in three workers (37%) in the UK believe there is a risk they won’t be able to get a job in the future if they don’t acquire further skills to match future technology.
Those who have reached the highest level of education are the most likely to believe there is a risk they won’t be able to get a job in the future if they don’t acquire further skills to match future technology. 48% of UK adults with a masters or PHD university degree believe this to be true, followed by undergraduate university students at 43%.
Antony Walker, Deputy CEO of trade association techUK, understands these concerns and calls for change: 
As the UK economy becomes more digitised, the world of work is changing. Some jobs will be automated but lots more will be created, and almost every job will be changed in some way by digital technology. This report from Salesforce provides valuable insight into how the UK should prepare for change and ensure that we have a workforce equipped with the skills we need for the future. 
There is going to be huge demand for digital skills right across the economy. We need to think creatively about how we are going to help people acquire those skills whatever their age, geographical location and educational background. To do this, employers and educators will need to work in partnership to ensure all communities are ‘work ready’ for the future. 
My take
I did score an academic qualification in IT at university – and I’ve never used it ‘in anger’ since then, even though I ended up in a career analysing and reporting on the tech industry. The emphasis in this study on the need for ongoing on-the-job learning is greatly welcome and something that all employers need to get to grips with.  
 
Image credit - PinterestDisclosure - At time of writing, Salesforce is a premier partner of diginomica. Read more on: Cloud platforms - infrastructure and architectureCRM and customer experienceFuture of workIoT robotics and AIMachine intelligence and AI 