
Marc Benioff, Parker Harris at TrailheaDX
The company whose best known slogan is ‘No Software’ wants to see thousands more people writing software — so long as they do it on its own Salesforce platform.
Conscious that a shortage of Salesforce developer skills could slow its continuing growth, co-founders Marc Benioff and Parker Harris led the keynote today at the company’s first developer-only conference, TrailheaDX, unveiling significant new investments in the company’s developer ecosystem. Dylan Steele, senior manager of Salesforce App Cloud, who briefed us yesterday, explains:
It’s our stake in the ground to say we’re at a pivotal moment in time for developers on Salesforce.
Developers are vital to the success of our business, our partners’ business and our customers. Our mission is not just to evangelize the technology but to create a global community of experts who are comfortable building on Salesforce and sharing what that can mean for our customers.
There’s a widening skills gap to be filled, he adds.
There are 20 million software developers in the world today — probably we need 100 million developers to meet the market demand. There’s this huge demand gap.
Bridging the skills gap
Today sees Salesforce take three new steps to bolster its contribution to bridging that skills gap:

The two-day TrailheaDX event, with more than 2,500 attendees in San Francisco and countless more joining live from 130 ‘viewing parties’ in 24 different countries around the world.
The launch of a new $50 million investment fund at Salesforce’s corporate investment arm to invest in ventures that build new tools and components for developers using Salesforce Lightning.
A new Salesforce incubator due to open in the Bay Area by the end of the year to provide an environment for startups and consulting firms to test innovations in developing on the Salesforce platform.

Today’s event takes its name from the Trailhead online learning environment which was formally launched late last year after more than a year in beta. Trailhead offers recognition through badges as followers, known as Trailblazers, test their knowledge and build new skills as they attempt various challenges. More than 735,000 badges have been awarded in the past year and a half, creating what Steele says is “a developer army, a movement really.”
The program has been extended today with the addition of Trailhead Superbadges, awarded for solving what Salesforce describes as real-world business challenges, “such as scaling the infrastructure of a growing business, automating sales and customer service processes and engaging with customers using mobile apps.”
Nerds and citizens
Adding that cultural and learning component to supplement the technology is a crucial ingredient, says Steele.
If you build the technology alone you’ve failed, you’ve only done half your job.
Salesforce is also keen to emphasize that the program is not just for nerds — Trailhead is designed to meet the needs of ‘citizen developers’ too. Steele says:
We’re really focused on the spectrum of developers, from high code down to low code, using multiple different tools.
There was still a lot to satisfy nerds on offer at today’s event, with previews of features that will be announced at Dreamforce in the fall, along with a laundry list of new Lightning features coming in the company’s Summer ’16 product release, which marks a landmark 50th release in the company’s history.
Tools highlighted today included Lightning LockerService, a secure container around components; Lightning Inspector, for monitoring and debugging components in Google Chrome; and Lightning CLI, a heroku-based command-line interface. These and other tools help developers build applications more productively, says Steele.
You can’t just launch the framework and have at it. You need these enterprise grade tools. One by one we’re delivering the tools you need to build these Lightning applications.
Today’s event will likely be followed by others elsewhere as Salesforce continues to develop the Trailhead initiative, says Steele.
We’re kicking off the developer movement here in San Francisco but we have plans to run developer conferences around the globe. Global success is vital for our business.
My take
The growing Salesforce skills shortage was front-of-mind for many attendees at last year’s Dreamforce conference, as we reported at the time. It surfaced in the ‘town hall’ style Q&A with the co-founders that traditionally ends the event. CEO Benioff hinted then that Trailhead would be the focus for expanding Salesforce’s efforts:
I think we should enable the world on Trailhead. I think we should make it a global education programme and let people put whatever they want on it …
We are not doing everything we should be doing, we should be doing more in colleges, more hackathons, we should be doing more online.
Eric Berridge, CEO of Salesforce partner Bluewolf (recently acquired by IBM) highlighted skills shortage as a specific constraint on the ecosystem:
To grow it, all of us together, we have to actually go outside of this ecosystem and find people and train people and onboard them. That’s the way we can close this gap from a resource perspective, which is critical to our clients. The industry is resource-constrained right now.
So it has become critical for Salesforce to do something to ensure that the developer skills grow fast enough to keep pace with its own market growth. Interestingly, the Trailhead initiatives announced today follow the same playbook that has previously worked for the company’s core products.
First of all, the skills program is being delivered as an on-demand, self-serve resource that is accessible to relative novices as well as those with more experience. That’s smart, because it’s highly scalable. It’s also connected into platforms such as LinkedIn where those skills can be shown off where they’re in demand.
Secondly, the Trailhead ecosystem is getting pump-primed in exactly the same way that Salesforce first seeded its AppExchange ecosystem of third-party ISVs and integrators, leveraging partners to amplify its own efforts.
Whether this is enough and in time to slake the skills drought remains to be seen, but it appears to be a well-executed response to a pressing need.
Image credit - Screengrab from live video feedDisclosure - Salesforce is a diginomica premier partner at time of writingRead more on: CRM and customer experienceDigital skills and training 