
Marc Benioff
These days you know we’re nearing Salesforce’s quarterly results announcement when the scuttlebutt starts up again about the firm being acquired by Microsoft.
So it was yesterday with investment bank Stifel and Credit Suisse fanning the rumors with advisory notes to clients about “potential for acquisition” and so-called “industry contacts” who “refuse to dismiss the notion of CRM joining forces with another tech behemoth like Microsoft or Oracle”. I refuse to dismiss the notion of winning the lottery, but…
(For what it’s worth, it seems that, according to this version of reality, the asking price has dropped from $70 billion earlier this year to $65 billion – a Black Friday bargain if ever there was one!)
Inevitably it’s a case of “no comment” from the Salesforce camp, but CEO Marc Benioff had plenty else to talk about as the firm turned in a 24% year-on-year revenue jump to hit $1.71 billion. Net loss was $25.1 million, down from $38.9 million a year ago.
By cloud, the breakdown was:

Sales Cloud up 10% to $688.7 million.
Service Cloud up 38% to $469.5 million.
App Cloud and other up 40% to $269.1 million.
Marketing Cloud up 29% to $169.million.

The company now expects to top the $8 billion run rate by the end of the next fiscal year in January 2017, although for Benioff it’s the number beyond that that still occupies his attention:
You can see that we have something in sight, which we have been talking about now for several years, which is our $10 billion a year.
He added:
Salesforce is the only software company selling billions of dollars at CRM, and we are at the center of what every company is going through is digital transformation, it’s what every company wants to be in the 21 century.
In a subtle shift of emphasis, Benioff chose to highlight Salesforce’s interaction with CEOs, rather than CIOs or even the CMOs that have been so emphasized in recent years. It’s all about talking business, not tech, it seems:
During the quarter, I met with hundreds of CEOs around the world. When we’re meeting with CEOs, they are not that interested in talking about the cloud or about social or mobile. They want to talk about their customers and they want to talk about their top line, they want to talk about how they’re going to grow that top line, and this is the really, really exciting thing that’s going on, which is this customer revolution.
Salesforce President Keith Block picked up this idea and ran with it:
There is a constant theme that keeps coming through here, and that is that we are clearly in this age of the customer and the time of cutting your way to prosperity is over.
When you think about it, the agenda for every CEO in the world is growth. And the reason why CEOs are coming to us is because they’ve see Salesforce as that catalyst for growth, and we are also quite frankly a catalyst for customer success.
So whether it’s a company of all shapes and sizes, whether it’s a business model with B2B or B2C, large company or small company, regardless of the industry, these CEOs are really looking at us now to be their trusted advisor, and really help them define their new customer strategy, their digital strategy, their engagement model in really new ways to transform into a customer companies. That’s just become super, super important to them.
Tech spread
But when it comes to tech, Benioff delivers an insistence on the importance to Salesforce of not focusing on one area, such as cloud, taking polite exception to Workday founder Aneel Bhusri’s recent prediction that the next ten years will be all about data analytics.
Benioff’s version is somewhat different:
I think the next 10 years is the age of the customer. I don’t think it’s the age of data science or the age of machine intelligence or the age of cognitive or the age of mobility or the age of social or the age of cloud or whatever, okay, because all of those things are going to be important in the next 10 years.
I think that if we get too into any one particular technology, or if I was to all of a sudden wave the flag like I used to do 15 or 16 years ago for cloud, that would be a huge mistake for the company, because the number one thing, the most important thing to this company, is the customer.
He cited a recent conference discussion between IBM CEO Ginni Rometty and John Stumpf, CEO of Wells Fargo Bank. The former wants to be a cognitive company, the latter wants to be a customer company. Benioff knows which side he’s on:
I want to be a customer company like John Stumpf does. He is all about the customer, maintaining the integrity and the fidelity of the customer relationship.
I want to help him do that. Will cognitive help him to do that? Yes. Will cloud help him to do that? Yes, it’s doing it. Is mobile? Yes. Social?  Yes. IoT? Yes. All of these things.
But let’s keep our eye on the ball, which [is that] there is a transformational force that is wafting its way through all of these companies and every company is afraid that they’re going to be Uber-ized out of the world.
Technology is shaking every company at its roots. So that’s why the companies who will be the most successful are the ones who are most connected to the customers, because the customers are the ones who guide us into the future. They are the ones with the true vision of where we have to go. So I’m going with customer on this one.
My take
Numbers to make Wall Street happy certainly, but what interested me most was the emphasis placed on the idea of Salesforce as strategic business advisor to customers, rather than Salesforce qua CRM provider or technology supplier.
That’s something we heard taking root at Dreamforce earlier in the year and I’m guessing it’s a meme that we’re going to hear a lot of in 2016.
Note also the praise heaped on the big consultancies, most notably Accenture, and it becomes clear that Salesforce isn’t benchmarking itself against SAP or Oracle in its messaging, even if customers inevitably are.
The increasing number of large enterprise deals reported by the company, including what we’re told is the largest Marketing Cloud deal to date with an unnamed retailer, suggests that the sort of ‘Accenture-like’ board-level access, of the type that Block was in part brought on board to nurture, is coming through.
 
Disclosure – at time of writing, Oracle, Salesforce and SAP are premier partners of diginomica. 
Read more on: Analytics planning and data analysisCloud platforms - infrastructure and architectureCRM and customer experienceDigital and content marketinge-commerceInternet of ThingsMobile 