

$10 billion here we come?
We don’t comment on these rumors.
And that was it – the only reference during the quarterly analyst conference call to the Salesforce takeover scuttlebutt that’s dominated the cloud landscape for the past month.
Anyone hoping for more insight into what’s really going on (or not going on) woud have been sorely disappointed yesterday when Salesforce President Keith Block shut down any discussion with those six words.
Elsewhere it was pretty much business as usual.
The company reported net income of $4.1 million for the first quarter ended April 30 compared with a loss of $96.9 million a year earlier, while revenue jumped 23% to $1.51 billion. That’s the first profit in seven quarters.
Of equal import to CEO Marc Benioff was the passing of another totem:
We surpassed the $6 billion annual revenue run rate, and we did that faster than any enterprise software company in history, and we could not be more excited. Our current outlook puts us on track to reach a $7 billion revenue run rate later this year, on the way to being the fastest to reach $10 billion, which is our dream, and something that we are very focused on.
Of the various clouds in the Salesforce stack, Benioff picked out the Community Cloud for particular attention:
One of the really great things about our Community Cloud is that it’s so tightly integrated with our Sales and Service and Marketing Clouds, and that when our customers buy our solution, they’re not just buying a silo, but they’re buying part of an integrated solution.
When you look at some of our core deployments of our Community Cloud, companies like Home Depot, you can see that if you go to community.homedepot.com you see that we’re tightly integrated with their employees, we’re tightly integrated with their partners, and it’s been a huge boon for them to be able to increase their store traffic.
I don’t know a customer that’s not planning to deploy this product. This is something that’s extremely important for every company, whether they’re a B2C company or a B2B company in being able to aggregate their customers and unite them with their employees.
Analytics Cloud also got a big push:
I presented that product today to two executives, one of the world’s very largest insurance companies here in Chicago, and they’ve never seen anything like that. And I don’t think anything like it exists. They probably already own every product, you know? Those other products are really isolated and used by analysts, and they’re not analytics for everyone. They’re certainly not analytics for the rest of us. They don’t run well on iPhones and Android devices. They don’t run on the Apple Watch. You can’t spin it up instantly in our cloud environment.
As for the ‘bread and butter’ clouds of sales and service, Benioff added:
Sales Cloud continues to be the market share leader in SFA by far, and on its own one of the top pure play enterprise cloud companies by revenue in the world.
Service Cloud displaced SAP in the quarter and is now the market share leader in customer service and support. Sorry about that, SAP.
Not sorry at all
Sorry about that indeed.
While previous calls have included a fair share of Oracle-baiting, there was only one target for the jibes this time and that was SAP. Perhaps this was fuelled by SAP CEO Bill McDermott’s comments earlier in the day on the (un)likelihood of anyone acquiring Salesforce, but there was distinct rattling of sabres in the direction of Waldorf.
Keith Block – London calling
Benioff stated bluntly:
We’re going to squarely be very, very shortly the fourth largest software company in the world. Now, when that happens, we are really targeting one company to surpass, which is SAP.
Fortunately for us, their kind of lackluster growth, execution and lack of innovation in their core products as we saw in their conference this quarter, well, you know what? They’re an easy target, and that’s our next goal.
We’ve got our minds squarely on the prize which is the $10 billion revenue run rate, and that’s step one. Step two is go past SAP, and I think we can absolutely do that. I’m personally committed to making that happen. That’s my dream.
Given SAP’s current run-rate, that’s some big dream.
But in case anyone didn’t get the message about SAP being today’s ‘Big Bad’, Benioff added for good measure:
They’ve kind of forgotten how to be successful in the software business. The only innovation SAP has is in rhetoric. They should try writing some software.
It wasn’t just a Benioff foible that put SAP in the crosshairs as Block picked up the theme and ran with it:
If you were paying attention to SAP’s event a few weeks ago, the CIO of the world’s largest retailer, which is an SAP customer, she said she hopes to see an SAP implementation in her lifetime. And I think that spells it out. That is the difference between on-premise and the cloud. It doesn’t sound like customer success to me. And we are all about customer success.
So we’re seeing a growing trend of SAP and Oracle customers who are coming to us and talking with us and working with us to wrap around their legacy solutions. They want us to be the agility layer to these legacy technologies. They want us to be able to unlock more value from their investments. And ultimately it puts us on a path to a complete replacement in their front office.
My take
Given that one of Salesforce’s earliest tricks was to irritate Tom Siebel and get him commenting on them, I was surprised at the amount of time spent dissing SAP on this call. McDermott’s comments may have been annoying, but rising above them would be more appropriate. Whether true or not, the impression taken away is that McDermott got under the corporate skin.
And however fun the rough and tumble was, there’s no way that SAP is an easy target, certainly not for the kind of full scale replacement scenarios that were talked around. That big ticket back office isn’t coming out any time soon.
Away from all that, that’s the $6 billion mark confidently passed and onwards to $10 billion. There was much talk as well of European expansion plans and Block is in London today kicking off the UK leg of the Salesforce World Tour.
I’ll be sitting down with him later, so check back for more, including what promises to be an interesting customer demo from Barclays.
As for those takeover rumors – as you were, nothing more to see here.
Disclosure – at time of writing, Salesforce and SAP are premier partners of diginomica. 

Read more on: Analytics planning and data analysisCloud ERP financials and supply chainCloud platforms - infrastructure and architectureCRM and customer experienceDigital and content marketingHCM and the digital future of work 