
Listening to field service leaders from top companies Schneider Electric, BD, GE Healthcare and Accenture talk about their unique approaches to customer satisfaction during our Maximize 2016 conference this week, it struck me just how divergent the path to success can be. While each company had a similar recipe for the same outcome – happy customers and growing profits – they all used different ingredients in their field service processes to get there.
Shifting mindsets and ‘getting a new cookbook’
GE Healthcare’ s Dave Elario, vice president and general manager of service operations, explained that while you can change up the ingredients all you want, sometimes it ultimately comes down to “getting a new cookbook.”
Elario explained that in the global company’s quest for customer-service nirvana, it had to take a step back from looking at largely operational metrics and recalibrate so the team were looking at data showcasing what customers were actually feeling.
We had to change a cliche of our business. We have to serve customers like they want to be served – not like we want to serve them necessarily.
The global company’s previous service model had previously been based on a patchwork of archaic systems and it  didn’t have a centralized platform or system of record for service operations and maintenance activity. But Elario said with the help of the ServiceMax platform, GE Healthcare now has a tier-trained workforce focused on field connectivity and fixing equipment remotely to serve customers in the way they want to be served.
Since rolling out ServiceMax, the company’s defect rate on order work-order completion has dropped from 16% to 4% and the number of remote fixes now possible continues to grow. GE Healthcare now uses ServiceMax to prescriptively dispatch technicians and fix assets before they cause mission-critical problems. That’s the proactive service model we keep hearing about. Their technicians now access data coming directly from machines to service equipment before it ever breaks. Achieving 100% uptime builds customer trust and loyalty.
Schneider Electric’s focus on deriving value from connected service
For Schneider Electric’s senior vice president of marketing Tony Wells, it’s about differentiating his business on removing customer pain points – and using connected devices to get there. However, the technology is more of a means to an end, he said.
At the end of the day, if we’re not adding value for our customers, IoT is still just very theoretical.
IoT supports the three main elements of their business: safety, reliability and business continuity. Wells explained that Schneider can provide services more safely through monitoring connected products and constantly adapting metrics. The company can predict when equipment needs service prior to an outage, creating safer working environments. All of that leads to better outcomes for customers.
According to Schneider, 70% of decision-makers see the value (PDF) of IoT, but it requires balance to make sure a customer’s desire to pay for connected service matches the added value.
Additionally, Wells, a marketing pro, noted how important it is to achieve customer satisfaction and that his marketing and operations teams are tightly linked
You can do all the advertising you want but if you fail at the micro-moment when technicians are on site, then we’ve failed [overall] and our investment can go down the toilet. That connection to technicians and seeing the greater role they play – we’re not trying to drive survey question responses but rather outcomes. We don’t show customers the job our engineers completed just so you can check the list – we want to give customers a sense of completion.
And Wells is right – you don’t want your customer experience to feel like the prototypical used-car situation where the salesperson basically begs you to rate them highly, regardless of service quality.
BD’s model built around customer understanding and outcomes
I don’t buy sushi at Safeway; I wouldn’t go to [an ERP or CRM] to buy my service solution. We want something more specialized in that area.
That was BD executive director of worldwide service Don Davis explaining why field service is important and complex enough that it deserves its own platform. And rightfully so, since it can have such an impact on customers’ experience.
And according to Davis, while technology like IoT or augmented reality are great tools to craft field service strategies that delight customers, that’s not what customers ask for. They ask for outcomes and for equipment not to break. They want faster response times.
Sound familiar? This kind of servitization is one of the reasons we’re seeing so much growth in the service space.
Davis noted achieving customer satisfaction is all about accessing data – and getting really granular on things like the cost of service for each product line. During the panel, Davis pointed to customer expectations as a key driver of their service operations. He said that their customers anticipate that service calls will be responded to and the problem will be fixed within 24 to 48 hours.
Without the ability to see what customers are living through, the ability to differentiate our experience is really difficult as well.
Prior to rolling out ServiceMax, BD’s service practitioners couldn’t see the number of instruments that a customer had or accurately depict the maintenance history of a particular asset. ServiceMax, integrated with SAP, is now driving the standardization of the data for BD in more than 20 countries – mapping data to the 24-48 hours service benchmark. The company uses ServiceMax and connected devices to deliver maintenance data, asset diagnostics and service history to field technicians so they’re armed with the best tools and knowledge to respond within the 1-2 day timeframe.
My take
The vendor-customer experience is constantly changing and evolving – field service is right in the middle of it all. As service operations become more connected through mobile, cloud and IoT, technicians in the field will play an even more integral role in driving customer satisfaction. Meanwhile, companies like BD, GE Healthcare, Schneider and Accenture are increasingly incorporating connected service operations into KPIs at the corporate level.
Accenture managing director Gary Diorio, who was also on the panel and helped UTC with their SeviceMax implementation, pointedly noted yesterday that organizations need to understand that customers won’t tell you what they want – it’s up to you to figure that out.
According to a new survey we released this week, 86% of respondents believe field service will be a key revenue generator within the next two years. Companies are more and more realizing what a huge differentiating factor field service can be, so this number certainly doesn’t surprise someone like me who’s been working in the space for the past near decade.
In order to gain the most value from this new dynamic, companies will increasingly need to centralize administrative and service information to achieve competitive advantage over competitors – even as they take different approaches to achieve the same goal.
Image credit - ServiceMaxRead more on: Customer service managementInternet of ThingsPartner ZoneServiceMax 