
Leukert announces SAP HANA 2
As we near the SAP TechEd Barcelona halfway point, your election-weary scribe has uncovered some items of interest. Still a slate of meetings to go, but here’s the clarifications and surprises I’ve dug out so far, along with a quick keynote review podcast with SAP Mentor Graham Robinson. 
SAP HANA 2 and the pace of change
Arguably the biggest announcement of SAP TechEd Barcelona was SAP HANA 2, with new features around database management, developer tools and analytics improvements. What SAP’s press release doesn’t mention is the main reason for the change.
SAP HANA 2 is actually the continuation of SAP’s twice-yearly HANA platform updates, previously called SPS – just under a different name. As SAP’s Bernd Leukert alluded to in his keynote, SAP customers have made clear they want to manage the pace of HANA change.
SAP HANA 2 – highlighted features
With SAP HANA 2, those who are on the current SPS (SPS 12) or the prior two SPS releases can choose to stay in maintenance on those releases until May 2019 (At presstime, SAP’s Irfan Khan told me they do recommend customers move to SPS 12, due to two key features, “capture and replay” for testing, and workload management, but it’s not required).
Customers who choose to remain on SPS 10-12 don’t have to absorb features twice yearly from SAP. Those customers who want to push ahead with new innovations can move to HANA 2. In theory, this frees SAP up to be even more aggressive with adding features, such as the slick geo-spatial capabilities they showed off during the keynote:

Looking at wildfire data from @esa overplayed with @MunichRe exposure – Powered by @SAP #HANA2 #SAPTechEd pic.twitter.com/M21rFkR5MY
— Holger Mueller (@holgermu) November 8, 2016

Pulling ESA photographs into geo-spatial analysis of wildfires – one of the best SAP keynote demos, real relevance here #sapteched
— Jon Reed (@jonerp) November 8, 2016
Some at SAP have referred to this news as a way of fitting HANA into a “bi-modal” IT framework. Though the viability of Gartner’s bi-modal concept is hotly debated, HANA 2 should be evaluated as SAP’s attempt to give its customers options for HANA pacing. HANA 2 is NOT a different code line – it’s different options on absorbing new functionality.
SAP HANA Express – a developer engagement milestone?
The biggest announcement from SAP TechED Las Vegas was SAP HANA Express, the first fully-downloadable HANA individual developer edition. SAP Mentor Graham Robinson, a hard man to please when it comes to SAP’s developer editions, already wrote a surprisingly upbeat blog post on SAP HANA Express before SAP TechEd. He’s now doubled down with an on-site post, Thoughts on SAP HANA Express.
Prior to SAP TechEd, I asked Robinson if SAP HANA Express licensing would allow him to go beyond building an app in production to taking an app to market. That’s a key issue because that means all intellectual property issues have been resolved. Robinson responded with another relatively upbeat post.

The go-to-market aspects of individual developer licensing is an area where SAP has struggled, but it seems a corner has been turned with HANA. Before the show, Robinson told me a loose end might be how Hana Cloud Platform (HCP) licensing comes into play. However, after a meeting with Craig Cmehil and Thomas Grassl, VP of Developer Engagement at SAP, Robinson told me the free trial developer license of HCP had more capabilities than he thought.
This meeting happened after our podcast. Robinson gave me this clarification: he would now be open to building an app for his customers using HANA Express and HCP, but he’ll wait until after the next iteration of HCP on Cloud Foundry, now in beta, becomes generally available – that’s expected sometime in 2017. Without getting too technical, at that point Robinson could code a potential HCP app in Node.js, his language of choice.
Robinson has been telling me for years he’s unwilling to move beyond building commercial apps in SAP ABAP, due to the risk inherent in new platforms with new licensing agreements. For him to make this statement is, in my view, a big validation for SAP developer go-to-market. As Robinson said in our podcast:
It’s just getting this new technology into the hands of developers, in a format they can consume – the way they want to. With [SAP HANA Express], they can deploy it any way they want to, they can put it on their favorite infrastructure; they can put it on their laptop and learn about it.
But it’s not just learning – you can take an app to production:
The amazing thing about the HANA Express edition is the license lets you take it to production. You can build an app on HANA, and the only limitation is the size of the database. It’s limited to 32 gigs, but you can take that to production. If you have a data set inside your organization you think you could use, drop it into HANA and really build a valuable app on top of it.
Robinson sees the need for more work on the documentation side. He wants to see a “living, breathing, growing body of information.” Then I popped the question:
Jon: In your years of looking at SAP developer tools, is this a significant step forward from pretty much everything they’ve done?
Graham: I don’t recall anything I could take to production. All their free trials, all their cloud appliance libraries – I don’t remember any from SAP that I could take to production without having to worry about licensing issues.
HCP developer go-to-market – and new business units
I’m pretty sure Bernd Leukert’s getting sick of me asking about developer go-to-market at SAP. If so, he wouldn’t be alone. The problem: even if SAP has given developers like Robinson a means of building a productive app, getting that app sold to customers is another matter entirely. Some of this is not SAP’s fault – enterprise apps marketplaces are a work in progress, though SAP’s digital store under Jonathan Becher’s leadership is doing well (20,000 orders processed so far this year – all without any human sales facilitation).
I wanted to know: what is SAP going to do about the proliferation of SAP app stores, and how will SAP find a way to get developer apps included in field sales pitches? If a developer or small partner has to form their own relationship with SAP sales, only to be put in the position of seeking a difficult vendor approval rather than being sold on SAP paper, they won’t sell many apps.
During the press Q/A, Leukert responded. He’s confident strides will be made getting HCP apps in front of customers, now that SAP solutions are divided into business units. That means products and go-to-market are under one lead for each unit. In HCP’s case, that lucky man is Björn Goerke. Leukert:
We got feedback from you as well as from customers. What we did is that we built within SAP, responsible end-to-end businesses. In that segment, the HANA Cloud Platform specifically, as well as HANA analytics – it is not the traditional strength of our field organization.
But we said, “If we build dedicated end-to-end business units, and Bjorn is running that for the HANA Cloud Platform, and Carsten is driving customer engagement, we have all the assets in one unit.” This was active as of October 1st, so [give us some time to do it]. There is a clear path to take this momentum beyond what we are doing today, and I really believe there are massive opportunities.
Leukert probably mentioned Carsten Thoma of SAP Hybris because he’s been an important voice pursuing a consolidated apps marketplace approach inside of SAP, with the YaaS marketplace being one model SAP can potentially build on. Between Thoma and Goerke, there is a chance to sort out the apps marketplace and the field service aspect of HCP apps sales.
That would mean a developer like Robinson would not have to rely on their own personal contacts to generate leads. Though I remain skeptical SAP is ready to conquer the field sales component of selling HCP apps, I do believe the “simplify/consolidate our marketplaces” idea now has organizational resolve.
During the last two days, the blogger group has had the chance to meet with several of the business unit leads, Leukert referred to, including Thoma, Leukert, and Sam Yen (Fiori and UX design). I hope to share the full run down of all the new business units, but more fact-checking is in order.
There are plenty of loose ends for later, plus a terrific customer story, but that’s enough for this roundup.
Image credit - on-site photos by Jon Reed. Disclosure - SAP paid the bulk of my expenses to attend SAP TechEd Barcelona. SAP is a diginomica premier partner. Read more on: Cloud ERP financials and supply chainCloud platforms - infrastructure and architecture 