
Graham Robinson, SAP developer
One of my goals for SAP TechEd is to get a gut check on SAP developer engagement. After the keynotes, I pressed SAP executives on the problems I see. I was able to get a picture of what’s working and what’s not. I also got a better feel through the slew of videos we shot (see our full SAP TechEd playlist), many of which touch on developer issues.
Developer engagement matters because apps matter. This issue sharpens with TechEd keynotes emphasizing the HANA Cloud Platform (HCP). The HCP has gone from skunkworks to central to SAP’s S/4HANA vision. SAP is still an apps company on the one hand – very much so – but the platform is envisioned as the way customers will build new apps and extend the core.
That’s the digital future SAP is pitching – build apps on the HCP, extend the S/4HANA digital core in the cloud. In other words: customizing the living heck out of your on-premise code base isn’t the way forward; the impediments to upgrade and modernization become too steep. As of today, the most real world uses of HCP for extending core apps come by way of SuccessFactors HCM, a topic I covered in Extending SuccessFactors on the HANA Cloud Platform – a SuccessConnect gut check.
Where does the individual developer fit in?
My biggest disappointment remains the problem of the individual developer. Most SAP partners now have a viable end-to-end process for getting their own HCP apps to market. But individual developers, in my opinion, do not – there is still too much friction in the process, particularly when it comes to what’s needed to market and sell apps. That gets us to a debate on apps marketplaces versus direct sales.
So why do individual developers matter? You could argue that SAP is smarter to focus on bigger partners with more app-building resources. Au contraire – I say individual developers are the barometer:

Many creative/disruptive apps come from individuals who have the time and imagination to try risky new ideas.
Due to their (relative) lack of resources, individual developers expose the problems in developer go-to-market. Unlike bigger SAP partners, they can’t throw budget at the issues they encounter. Make go-to-market easy for individuals, and you’ve made it easy for everyone.
Many outstanding developers are highly influential in open source and online communities. Win them, win the crowd, populate your platform.

Skills and app building: SAP’s progress
Before I get into the problems, let’s assess the significant progress SAP has made. Den’s video with Craig Cmehil on the xJams is a persuasive view of how SAP has evolved from hacker night experiments in 2007 to a “really big thing” in 2015, with literally hundreds of Code Jams across the world, 25-40 folks at a pop exploring the tech and emerging with a result, often an app.
Hundreds of apps can be created in a matter of days – more than 1,000 apps were built at TechEd Vegas. The HCP Developer Center has a popular, perpetually free developer trial, and SAP has gone from dabbling in open source to a big commitment to a range of projects including Cloud Foundry. SAP has numerous MOOCs (online courses) on developer topics, including HCP education. I actually had a customer tell me this week that the HCP MOOC impacted their product evaluation. SAP also has a HANA developer edition on the Amazon cloud (developers pay only AWS fees). These advancements led me to tweet:

Refreshing to hear @_bgoerke talk SAP in terms of open source, devops, and how SAP tools (HCP) and service fit into open ecosystems #saptd
— Jon Reed (@jonerp) October 20, 2015

Re-inventing Demo Jam – can you build an app with SAP tech in a weekend?

This year’s Demo Jam was a vivid example of SAP’s progress. It began at the weekend Innojam, where fourteen teams were given randomly assigned projects with a health care theme. The finalists competed on stage, and once again, we had the winners on the video couch – and once again the winners were Keytree. But things were different this time. None of the teams had the ability to prepare their projects in advance, aside from bringing in a well-constructed team (that’s what Keytree did, with a rounded team that included designers and coders).
My concern was that attendees would be short-changed by half-assed weekend projects. Demo Jam, an American Idol of sorts for SAP developers, is meant to be top notch entertainment for attendees, with well-rehearsed, inventive solutions. Building viable demos in a weekend is no easy task (Keytree built a personal health monitor for office workers with a sensor powered by HANA, dubbed “Smile.”) But the Keytree guys said this was a viable format:
Sam: On the whole I think the presentations were very strong. Very few teams left before 2 or 3 am. It was all hands on deck.
Jon: So you think it’s a winning format then?
Will: I think it’s really good… having the experts in the room that can talk you through things and help you out with the pitfalls and make things easier is brilliant, because it gives people hands-on experience building an entire application in a very short time frame.
As the guys explained on our video, the Keytree team got such enthusiastic feedback on Smile they may build it into a full app. The ability to build a viable app in a weekend, not just for one talented team but for a bunch of them, is inarguable evidence that SAP has simplified its developer tooling and made next-gen apps possible.
SAP go-to-market – individual developers on the outside
It’s the go-to-market part that needs work. Graham Robinson, a respected developer and SAP Mentor who has built successful apps – though not on the HCP – vented frustrations during his shoot with Den:
I do think it’s one of the perennial problems is that SAP, when they talk about developers, they talk about the big software factories. They talk about organizations like themselves that have got hundreds of developers doing that. They don’t talk about me… SAP still thinks in terms of a big name partner who has all these developers who will build an app and put it on there. I don’t think they’re really connecting in the way they could with me.
I posed that question to Bernd Leukert, SAP Executive Board member, in his post-keynote press Q/A. Basically, I asked – where are the geeky individual developers on-stage showing off the apps they are (successfully) selling? Leukert responded that some of them were on display in Steve Lucas’ Monday night keynote. I didn’t get that impression, but then I left early because Lucas’ keynote ran way over time.
Lucas added to Leukert’s answer, explaining that they didn’t feature the new SAP app center because it’s in beta:
SAPappcenter.com is very much a beta site, we don’t have apps fully rated yet. But it’s there, and we do have a huge number of third party applications, where ISVs have signed up for the HANA Cloud Platform, built an app, and published it on SApappcenter.com. Customers are checking it out, and discovering them. We obviously need to improve the experience, which frankly is why it wasn’t front and center during the keynotes.
Lucas also addressed another part of the problem: awareness and promotion via direct sales channels:
To be clear, and the devious side of my brain is saying, it’s not just about having a great platform, which Bjorn and team have built – SAP wants to be able to offer ISVs with a virtual sales force… We aren’t announcing this today, but we’re thinking about it. We want the SAP sales force to be able to pick up and sell these third party applications.
When you’re a developer, and saying, “What do I build my apps on? What do I do?” [We want them to say] The cloud platform is a good platform, step one, step two, I have a place that I can publish it [the app center]. Step 3, here’s a giant sales force that can help promote it.
SAP is pursuing both fronts of apps sales: the marketplace and the direct sales channels. But both have problems. The apps marketplace is still in beta, and SAP is working to overcome a past fetish for building too many apps marketplaces (one partner I spoke to at SuccessConnect said they had their app in five different SAP marketplaces to cover their bases). Jonathan Becher’s digital team told me at TechEd they are working to consolidate the online apps marketplaces. Some have already been folded in. When the smoke clears, there will be the apps marketplace Lucas referred to, and also a store for apps that can be completely purchased online (as in a credit card transaction).
Selling direct versus apps marketplaces
As for the direct sales of apps by SAP’s sales force, this is where the bigger problem comes in. For the foreseeable future, hands-on sales will still play a role in the sale of most enterprise apps. The dilemma SAP faces is the balance between apps marketplaces and direct sales investment. At SuccessConnect, I learned that many salespeople are not aware of the HCP HCM apps, and how they can be used to differentiate (translation: win deals) during the sales process.
And for smaller shops, particularly individual developers, there are tough issues getting in front of customers on “SAP paper” – meaning SAP handles the transaction. If developers are required to sell directly to the customer as part of the deal – in other words, sell as a separate app with a separate contract – it adds complexities such as becoming an approved vendor, billing from an additional party, and so on. Anyone who has tried to become an improved vendor can empathize – it can be a tedious, soul-crushing project.
During a blogger session on HCP with Prakash Darji, SVP & GM, Platform as a Service at SAP, I posed the question of marketplaces versus direct sales. Darji:
I think that a storefront is almost a different business altogether than our core enterprise business. Enterprise procurement is going to go through its different normal enterprise procurement negotiation. I think the storefront is going to target more individuals and credit card purchases, and things under a $5,000 threshold.
Darji envisions a platform model where SAP takes the best/most popular HCP apps, and sells them directly to customers. About ten fit that description now:
We’ve got this library of 1,000 or so apps on HCP, and as I said, there’s 10 or 12 core ones. Those are the ones we’re rolling out to the field. We are actually doing marketing. We’re taking it to the field. We’ve even put in our field plans how our salespeople can get paid on the partner app as well.
Putting those select apps on SAP paper solves the go-to-market problem – for those apps. Darji acknowledged that SAP sales teams have varying degrees of awareness around these third party apps and how to sell them. But the tougher questions go to the apps that haven’t made the cut. They have a listing in the store, but where do they go from there? How do they get visibility? That’s where SAP’s legal team tends to raise its head: if a solution isn’t certified by SAP (a not-so-easy process for an individual developer to go through), then it’s not going on SAP paper.
SAP could refer customers to the store for purchase via credit card, but many want to go through traditional procurement channels. And that’s where some of the obstacles lie. Darji’s team wants to make it easier:
On the paperwork process, we haven’t built that model yet where it’s necessarily seamless. We are getting a lot of traction with reps, but we have to work it out a little in the field. The only way right now to put it on SAP paper is to go through certification, and that certification has some pretty big barriers [a company has to go through].
Darji plans to ease the process for those select apps, but he doesn’t envision putting 1,000+ apps on SAP paper. That leaves those apps, and the developers who built them, in somewhat of a lonely place, waiting for marketplace traction to pick up and/or to make inroads with SAP’s direct sales force. That takes gumption for a small shop, but it can be done.
Final thoughts – for now
On Twitter, SAP employees pointed me towards James Sinclair of Enterprise Jungle as an example of a small shop having success on HCP. I responded that James was a great example, but I’ve already interviewed and podcasted with him. SAP needs fifty more Sinclairs, if they can clone him. I talked with some talented developers at TechEd, but none who fit the description of a successful HCP app developer generating revenue.
How that model scales is something SAP needs to figure out. In the meantime, developers like Robinson remain sidelined – not from working with SAP technology, but from easily moving from app to HCP marketplace to customer sales. Robinson has other ways of taking his apps to SAP customers. He can even rewrite his app on Node.js without much of an issue if he chooses. But for developers like him, the go-to-market question lingers.
SAP is getting closer to solving these riddles. Most of the executives I spoke with acknowledged the problems and expressed determination to fix them. I thought Leukert was too optimistic in his answer to me, as if the problem had already been solved. But as I said to someone else, I don’t care if someone gives an optimistic response, as long as behind the scenes, awareness of the problems exist. Based on many talks this week, I believe that SAP is truly aware, but as always time will tell.
One thing I do know: the argument that “SAP sales teams don’t need to sell small apps when they have big software suites to sell” is the wrong one. I learned at SuccessConnect that smaller apps can be a big differentiator in the sales process. You can use industry-specialized cloud apps to show the value of easily extending your out-of-the-box SaaS. Not every competitor has that. With the rise of the HCP, SAP clearly gets it. But instead of hoping that the benefits trickle down to the individual developer, why not start with them? Make them happy and the platform will be cake – for everyone.
Update, 10/25/2015: Graham Robinson has posted a blog on SAP SCN, SAP makes strong commitment to Node.js, Via email Robinson told me, “IMO this will do more for developer engagement than pretty much any other initiative they have tried.”
 

Disclosure: SAP funded the bulk of my travel expenses to SAP TechEd Las Vegas. They also funded the costs of shipping video equipment, and some filming expenses. We produce this TechEd video series on our own time with editorial control. SAP is a diginomica premier partner.
Read more on: Cloud platforms - infrastructure and architectureDevOps NoSQL and the open source stack 