
Even in my darkest moments I’ve always said: never write off SAP and, once again, the company surprises with better than expected results for Q2 FY2016, helped largely by two factors: an unexpected bump in software sales – mostly from Europe – and the drop out of substantial restructuring charges. The net effect of these and a 30% rise in cloud subscriptions lifted total revenue to €5.2 billion from €5 billion last year and operating profit from €701 million to €1.3 billion.
As we’ve come to expect, SAP is focusing on cloud momentum. Check the following graphic:

Details were thin in the company’s rejigged press release (PDF) but this is how CEO Bill McDermott spun the story:




Our groundbreaking new architecture is accelerating momentum across all businesses – cloud, core, and business networks. As a result, SAP delivered a unique trifecta of double digit growth in software, cloud and operating income. Our S/4HANA pipeline has never been stronger and we confidently reiterate our full year guidance.
Guidance matters and in this context it looks like the company is maintaining a conservative outlook. That should not surprise given recent events in Europe and the uncertainty created by the UK Brexit vote.
This quarter’s scorecard also gave some insight into new cloud bookings which SAP pegged at €255 million compared to €199 million in the comparative quarter. That’s an upward bump of 28% using IFRS measures, and certainly represents a credible performance given the company’s scale. However, before getting too carried away, it is worth noting that in its last quarter, which was regarded by some as something of a fail, Workday revenue jumped 38%. For its part, Oracle recently announced impressive results as well.
One important point to note in these preliminary results: SAP reports that predictable revenue, which it regards as cloud subscriptions and software support now account for 63% of total revenue. CFO Luca Mucic has said on a number of occasions that this is a vital measure of the company’s ability to not only chart its course on any particular year but plan forward with a degree of certainty that is less reliant upon the blockbuster deals that characterized the on-premises past.
Turning to the European performance, SAP said:



The Company had a strong performance in the EMEA region, successfully navigating through the post UK referendum uncertainty, with an increase in cloud and software revenue of 7% (IFRS) and 11% (non-IFRS at constant currencies). Cloud subscriptions and support revenue grew 38% (IFRS) and 41% (non-IFRS at constant currencies). In EMEA, SAP had strong double-digit software licenses revenue growth in France, the Netherlands, Switzerland, across Southern Europe and again a solid performance in Germany. Russia and Germany had very strong double-digit growth in cloud subscriptions and support revenue.
It will be interesting to get more detail on this result but notably, the UK was not mentioned as a top performing country in this report. Bearing in mind, SAP does roughly £1 billion in business in the UK, we will want to test how the post referendum is impacting deal flow.
My take
A solid performance for sure but I want more detail on some of the numbers. That will come later in the analyst calls which I will pore over later in the day, updating this report as necessary.







Image credit - graphics via SAP, featured image of CEO McDermott via SAP annual reportDisclosure - SAP, Oracle and Workday are all premier partners at time of writingRead more on: Cloud ERP financials and supply chainCRM and customer experienceHR admin and payrollTalent management 