

It’s not often I get to say this but I will: SAP got something right and pretty much bang on the nose for me. The Cricket World Cup 2015 (CWC2015) mobile application is the dog’s gujons. For those unfamiliar with my particular form of praise – that means it is pretty darned cool. Not quite in amazeballs territory but not far off.
I have Thomas Otter, formerly of Gartner and now back at SAP on the SuccessFactors team, to thank for alerting me to this via Facebook. He said:
The sap cricket app is great. Not sure who in sap built it. Ux excellent on iPhone.
My immediate response was to ask whether CWC2015 stands up against Cricinfo, for me the gold standard for cricketing mobile apps. Otter said he believes so which in turn led me to download and tire kick on my Android device. And yes, it stands up as a worthy contender.
Navigation is great, the site works at lightning speed, even the movie clips stream effortlessly on my wifi. The only downside I can spot so far is that having inadvertently selected Afghanistan as my team, I can’t change it. Not that matters as England are going home early anyway.
The stats seem to support my general view. As at the time of writing there have been more than a million downloads and 43,386 ratings, the vast majority of which are favorable. Impressive when you think the ESPN’s Cricinfo has been in market for some years and so far has achieved 69.767 ratings whereas the SAP offering has only been around a few weeks. So on that score, SAP can go viral.
All of this may sound trite to those who could care less about cricket and even less about SAP but it’s a big deal. Here’s why:
SAP has long been a big sports supporter. Tennis immediately springs to mind as does sailing. In recent times though SAP went big on sports sponsorship announcing deals with the NHL, NBA and its high profile support of the 49ers. Like almost all non-Americans, I could care less about these deals, seeing them at the time as little more than playthings for the US crowd. Its claim to having helped Germany win the soccer world cup was disingenuous in my opinion, regardless of the PR spin.
I remember in private moments saying: ‘When they do cricket then I’ll sit up and listen – that’s a world sport – not some made up world sport.’ Of course my representation of cricket in that fashion is untrue. It’s an ex-colonial sport the US chose to eschew in favor of Major League Baseball. Some will consider that a matter of deep debate but heh ho.
Sports evoke passion and a sometimes irrational and emotional response – in my case it is cricket that floats my boat. Getting an application to support a sport well becomes critical for end users who are not slow to critique when things go bad. It is here that the focus on end user experience becomes central to what finally gets delivered.
On the flipside, the support of a specific sport opens up opportunities for the sponsoring organization to reach well beyond its customer portfolio boundaries. That will likely include folk inside the software buying decision chain. Like me. How that translates to cricketing fans in some of the more far flung places the sport reaches is something of a mystery. Nevertheless, having shown that it can offer a great user experience is an important perceptual proof point for SAP and its customers. The trick now is to carry this forward into the extensive applications portfolio with help from SAP’s extensive ecosystem of developers.
Images: via screen captures
Disclosure: SAP is a premier partner at time of writing.
Read more on: CRM and customer experience 