
Each year, the SAP blogger relations team puts us in front of as many SAP customers as they can find – or we can handle. This year’s TechEd was no different – or was it? What immediately stands out to me: these seven use cases are more diverse and advanced (see: full SAP TechEd video playlist). Yeah, there is still an ERP company in here somewhere, but after years of SAP marketing hyperbole, the present is finally starting to catch up to the future.
As a sidenote, when we film these videos, we talk to the customer immediately before taping to agree upon the scope of the interview. Usually, there is no SAP representative in the room. This helps to have a free discussion rather than a scripted video, which nobody needs. Here’s my breezy review of the shoots, with a lesson/takeaway for each.

HANA and Cloud for Analytics helps the State of Indiana with infant mortality
Who: David Ryan, Deputy IT Director of Business Intelligence
Problem: The State of Indiana needed to do more to help local agencies coordinate data and assess the reasons for infant mortality rates. They also needed to expose more data to agencies in general.
Solution: Ryan’s team determined early on that HANA was the right solution for their needs for speed and data science driven analysis for the Infant Mortality project.
SAP technology used: HANA and Cloud for Analytics



Key quote: “One of our goals in MPH is using multiple datasets to make better decisions, and to analyze that data and make some predictions on what’s going to happen and what’s going to work. Indiana State Police became one of our key groups that we started to work with, and we tested much of the Orca (Cloud for Analytics) product at that time. We had a lot of opportunities to see the product in action, using our data to see whether or not it was going to work for us. We’ve been really excited about Cloud for Analytics now.” – Ryan
MyPOV: Applied health care use cases are SAP HANA at its best. An interesting aspect of this video is the connect between SAP HANA, now a proven technology for the State of Indiana, and Cloud for Analytics, a new product. Ryan was clear that the State of Indiana isn’t “all in” on cloud. They don’t want all their data in the cloud. He sees HANA on-prem working together with select data sets and predictive capabilities on Cloud for Analytics as the right combo to drive change.

Genband swaps out Salesforce for SAP Cloud for Customer
Who: Craig Parker, GENBAND
Problem: GENBAND is a real-time communications firm and SAP services partner. They are also a customer. As Parker explains, their existing CRM system was not working for them. They were looking for a solution that had a “360-degree view of the customer” and a “global, friendly design.”
Solution: SAP Cloud for Customer, extended on the HANA Cloud Platform



Key quote: “What we’ve done with the HANA Cloud Platform has really set the foundation for our enterprise portal. Our IT strategy is to have an enterprise portal so whether you’re a customer, partner, employee, contractor – whoever you are – you’re going to get that same experience… We’ve also seen that our number of open tickets has been cut by 50%. ” – Parker
MyPOV: Cloud for customer is one of the biggest adopters of the HANA Cloud Platform of any SAP cloud product, trailing only SuccessFactors. It’s interesting to hear the customer view on how this can work.

GDT goes live with S/4HANA
Who: Jon, Jon, and John (our first-ever “three John” shoot)
Problem: GDT’s existing ERP solution was nearing end of life. 
Solution: GDT wanted an “innovative” ERP solution that could evolve at the pace of their business.
SAP technology used: SAP S/4 HANA



Quotage: “The first benefit is a single source of truth for our business and for the executives. The other is the speed at which we’re able to get that information. Before, it would take a long time to run reports and gather that data, and then we’ve got to tweak something. To get the executives the information that they needed, it was very difficult. Now we’re able to give them that information extremely fast. We’re able to develop applications now that are on their phone. It’s on an iPad. It doesn’t matter what it is; they’re able to start gathering that intel.” – GDT
MyPOV: GDT was not offering SAP services to their customers before implementing S/4HANA. They are now planning to add SAP services to their portfolio. When GDT first selected SAP, it was Business Suite on HANA. But then S/4HANA was announced. As the guys explain, GDT liked what they heard about “Simple Finance,” and shifted gears into an S/4HANA install. Sounds like they had their hands full being an early adopter, but that SAP helped them work through issues. In turn, that support experience gave them the confidence to offer SAP services to their own customers (support counts!).

ASUG Board Member Paul Roche talks Digital Transformation
Who: Paul Roche, ASUG Board Member
Problem: In addition to serving on the ASUG Board, Roche is also the Chief Operating Office for Network Services Company, an SAP HANA customer.
Solution: The second half of the video covers Network Services’ Business Suite on HANA implementation, which was implemented in a virtual “cloud” via SAP partner iTelligence.



Key quotage: “I think one of the greatest areas user groups can help, and why I joined ASUG when we converted to SAP, was user stories. How did you do it? Let me learn from you. Let me connect with people who have done it before. That’s one of ASUG’s greatest values: you get that connection, so you can learn from the people who’ve done it before… I think ASUG itself can have some leadership around road mapping. [That was] one of the biggest challenges when we went to Suite on HANA a year and a half ago.”
MyPOV: This video ran a bit long, but it’s one of the crucial shoots as Roche comments on SAP’s digital keynote themes, and ASUG member feedback before we get into his company’s use case. Bonus: if you listen to the full video, you’ll hear Roche take a good-natured swipe at “bloggers,” which I later reference.

Quick takes on the other three shoots

Business Suite on HANA with Fiori – Pacific Drilling – an early Suite on HANA adopter – shares why user experience has become a key issue in their IT operations, and why they rolled out Fiori. One argument for Fiori is a mobile workforce. Being able to access HTML5-based screens on mobile devices has given procurement managers a much easier way to handle off-hours approvals.
University of Mississippi serves students at scale with SAP HANA – The story of an SAP customer where serving students at scale – particularly on their mobile devices – drives the IT landscape decisions. For those like me who haven’t been in college for a couple of years (ok, decades, but who the hell is counting?), the mobilization of student life was a big theme from this shoot.
Intel’s Petabyte farm with HANA – This was a proof of concept project, but what a proof – running petabyte scale (yes, this is the scenario that was featured in Steve Lucas’ day one keynote). But actually, what was interesting about this project was not the data volume but how HANA’s new “dynamic tiering” capabilities allow for management of hot (HANA), warm, and cold data stores. Let’s face it, in-memory data comes at a premium price. As Tim Allen from Intel points out, this type of project – which other customers can now learn from and/or adapt – could lower the cost of “hot” HANA data to “cold” prices – and provide a clear role for Hadoop data as well.

The (quick) wrap
We’re still in the early stages of SAP’s “S/4HANA as digital core” vision. But it’s good to see that SAP customers can derive some genuine value before the full realization of that product line. Fortunately for us – and SAP – none of the discussions got bogged down in IT chores like Enhancement Pack upgrades and regression testing. That doesn’t mean those burdens are gone -far from it.
But these results-focused conversations should give SAP validation they are on the right track. The next part of this journey gets very interesting – how many customers will take it, and what results will emerge? But for now, these are interesting stories to ponder.
Disclosure: SAP funded the bulk of my travel expenses to SAP TechEd Las Vegas. They also funded the costs of shipping video equipment, and some filming expenses. We produce this TechEd video series on our own time with editorial control. SAP is a diginomica premier partner.
End note: present in all of the shoots is “Millie” the plant, which is referenced at the beginning of a couple of these videos. Plants play a big role in warming up a dark/stale meeting room, so for the last couple of shows, we’ve been naming our plants. The name Millie was inspired by an SAP employee, whose grandmother passed on after a life in the Hawaiian tropics, including a long stint at a pineapple canning plant. Millie the tropical plant was our tribute.
 
Read more on: Analytics planning and data analysisUse cases 