
High level S/4 engagements
As I expected, day 1 and CEO Bill McDermott’s Sapphire Now 2016 keynote, were all about the customer and most specifically about the S/4 customer. What was not clear in the run up to the event was the extent to which SAP is having to provide extensive help for customers.
For the first time, SAP brought walking talking customers to the main stage to speak to their experiences. We’ve seen some of these before and there was an inevitable sense of The Usual Suspects. That should be no surprise, given the modest progress made in S4/HANA go live numbers. What did we learn?
The keynote over-ran by a good 45 minutes from the planned 75 minutes. That’s unusual for SAP first day sessions, but here’s what I think happened, based upon a number of conversations both before and after the keynote.
Something changed in the programming at the last minute such that the keynote had to go much heavier on the central SAP messaging around support for customers. It made reprogramming of the keynote impossible to manage in time for the start of the event. Some colleagues were disgruntled. I was not because SAP kept to its story line rather than wandering all over the map. The media Q&A suffered as a result but that’s something we can all learn to live with.
McDermott dressed the messaging up in terms like ‘customer empathy’ and ‘customer assurance,’ much to the wry smiles of some colleagues. Those terms sound well and good on a stage but where is the substance and why now?
The press release covering the meat of this topic offers some clues, showing four levels of engagement, each of which has a price tag – naturally. For its part, SAP is cherry picking SIs who can do the accompanying transformation work necessary to deliver on what S/4 promises. I’ll return to this a bit later.
The real action is behind the scenes. In a conversation with Rob Enslin, executive board member SAP and the global sales lead for the company, it became apparent that SAP has recognized a problem that everyone else had been alluding to but about which the company was blinkered.
It turns out that despite fantastic sales in Q3 and Q4 2015, both Enslin and McDermott found that customers the company has known for many years were starting to call SAP to account. All those very large customers are willing to consider S/4HANA but it comes with a gotcha. SAP must provide the integrations those customers need in order to move beyond the core and into the digital technologies SAP is encouraging them to consume as part of the digital transformation they know is coming.
That means solutions like Fieldglass, SuccessFactors, hybris and Ariba must all work well with S/4. More to the point, customers do not have the appetite to figure out the integrations for themselves but demand SAP solves those problems for them. In addition, customers are demanding roadmaps that clearly set out how they move from here to there.
In some senses this is not new. As I have said before, study after study over the last year or so have asked SAP to provide some of these requirements. SAP was not exactly ignoring them but I don’t believe they fully appreciated the extent to which customers believe they are impacted until very recently.
SAP doesn’t get a pass on this but then I am not surprised given what I know about the maelstrom of development around HANA and S/4HANA the last few years, plus the ever so useful benefit of hindsight.
Note this is NOT about whether apps work in the cloud or otherwise but whether the functionality and speed S/4 promises flows through to the remainder of the SAP landscape such that the claimed and sometime nebulous benefits can be understood and articulated in an attractive manner.
A big part of how this problem is solved goes back many years and presents SAP with a unique set of challenges.
The SAP landscape in large companies is now so vast and pervasive that while the benefits of S/4 might be superficially apparent, the effort to get from here to there looks daunting to the customer. That dampens enthusiasm from the get go. It’s not the cost of the software, it ‘s the cost of managing a technical transformation which is turning out to be much more challenging than customers (and SAP) anticipated.
What’s more, the problem varies from industry to industry and even within industries. SAP’s largest customers have ambitious plans for building digital businesses yet they know they need help. For its part, SAP has largely lost the detailed industry expertise that allowed it to create solutions that over time have become the global standard for the industries they represent. In a perverse sense, SAP and its customers have become joint victims of their own success. In addition, some customers have made clear that they cannot abandon certain functionality that does not yet exist inside the S/4 suite. This also presents gnarly problems for the development teams.
Internally at SAP, there are precious few resources that fully understand the business problems inside many of these industries and so what you see, and will continue to see, is a multi-speed change and transformation across industries. For example, in the large roadmap Enslin showed me, and as it relates to business insights, customers can find topics like oil and gas traders’/scheduler’ workbench, performance of hydrocarbon and production forecasting and analytics optimized with HANA. Retail for merchandise management can also be found as can healthcare for patient accounting. These are some of today’s examples. There are many more.
In a later conversation with SAP co-founder Hasso Plattner, I posited that this was a problem we had previously discussed a couple of years ago and that SAP was always going to be challenged in that area. He did not disagree and acknowledged the extent to which SAP has work to do in order to both educate the whole ecosystem (partners and customers) in how the transformation should proceed.
I sense there is another problem. Plattner talked to me about a specific issue related to analytics load times for a customer that produces masses of data per second. It took a HANA expert from the Hasso Platter Institute to solve the problem. I am willing to bet there are many other examples waiting to be discovered among the 3,200 S/4 HANA customers. If I am correct, then SAP will need to implement a comprehensive skills transfer program for both its own people and the SI community.
My understanding is that there are programs under way and a certain group of SIs are considered capable of demonstrating the right level of skill to bring customers forward. In reality, the situation means that some industries will move faster than others but that’s OK provided the roadmaps make sense. That will be an ongoing discussion at both the individual customer and user groups level.
As a side note, I met with green field S/4 Finance customers who told me they got up and running inside seven months on HANA Enterprise Cloud. That has to be a record of some kind with an enterprise class solution for which SAP can justifiably take credit.
My take
I have no problem with any of this. Others may criticize SAP for failing to take this kind of thing into account early enough but I prefer to take the view that SAP is acknowledging the shortcomings and is putting a slew of resources into a comprehensive solution. The fact that most of the supporting materials point towards the support and maintenance section of SAP tells you all you need to know. SAP is protecting its future revenue stream in the most practical manner possible.
As an additional side note, memories in this industry are sometimes conveniently short. It is not so many years ago that Oracle customers faced an extremely painful forced technical upgrade. At the time, Oracle was given a hard time by analysts and media alike but it all worked out in the end. The same will likely be true here with one notable exception. S/4HANA may be SAP’s desired end state but it is not mandatory. A good number of SAP customers may elect to stay as they are for the time being.
The breadth of variety in the SAP customer base means that we will likely see more green field S/4 examples held up as success stories long before we see significant (note my choice of words) success in large customers. Even then, mileage and experience will vary.
SAP made a course correction by continuing to update a finance-only version of S/4HANA, originally called Simple Finance. This month, SAP will release S/4HANA Finance 1605, an update on the finance-only version.
Customers see the S/4 Finance option as a stepping stone, and SAP has responded. Looking ahead, SAP anticipates more customers moving directly to Enterprise Management, which includes finance. SAP has not decided whether to continue with S/4 Finance standalone after this update. They will listen to customer sentiment.
I also expect that SAP will take some level of short term margin hit in order to help make the customer transformation a reality and of course it will devote the resource to those high profile customers we all know because as Plattner rightly says, once you’ve got one of those past the winning post then the rest in that industry or segment will follow rapidly.
As we move into day 2, Jon Reed and I will be surfacing as many of those success stories as we can. To its credit, SAP has given us plenty of choice and from what we have so far seen, I am cautiously optimistic.
Image credit - Main story image - SAP promotional materials. Featured image via the authorDisclosure - SAP and Oracle are premier partners at time of writing. Read more on: Analytics planning and data analysisFinancials 