
SAPPHIRE Now 2015 show floor
SAPPHIRE Now is arguably the most important enterprise software show of the year. Other analysts will say SAP is not hip, cool and sexy. Quite frankly, that’s disingenuous bullshit. Try saying the same to the 20,000 customers who pitch up and see how far that gets you. SAPPHIRE Now 2015 is not the largest event. That honor goes to Dreamforce, but it is the most stylish and classy. After two VERY long days, this is what I am sensing from SAPPHIRE 2015.
A bit of disclosure. Following my show preview, Bill McDermott, CEO SAP emailed myself, Jon Reed and John Appleby looking for a content gut check prior to the event. That is a first and an honor. We didn’t hold back in offering our opinions about what customers want to hear. We don’t expect any CEO to suck  our brand of Kool-Aid but to McDermott’s credit, many of the items we wanted to see were included albeit not necessarily in the order we would have preferred.
The big makeover
SAPPHIRE Now 2015 saw the show get a big makeover. I always dread pounding the halls in what is the second largest convention center in the US. But on this occasion, SAP made intelligent use of the space to create an immersive experience that melded ASUG’s presence and the big SAP stands on one side of the hall with partners down the center and the large theaters down the other side. As we entered the space, it was relatively easy to orient. That alone is a big deal because in past years, the layout has been somewhat confusing, meaning much un-necessary hacking from one place to another.
The stands all oozed quality in both design and finish. I really felt they’d put considerable effort into making each area both expansive yet accommodating.
Early finishes
The keynotes on the first two days were odd in one important respect. Although scheduled for 90 minutes they both finished ahead of time. That was understandable in one sense on the first day since Sheryl Sandberg, COO Facebook was a no show due to the sudden death of her husband. But…this is McDermott’s one annual shot at selling his vision to the crowd. While competent and polished, I felt he missed an opportunity in closing out some 20 minutes early.
What was more puzzling was Berndt Leukert member of the Executive Board and the Global Managing Board of SAP with global responsibility for development and delivery of all products early finish. He was slated to deliver the product roadmap but finished a good 25 minutes ahead of time. Maybe next year they’ll schedule for an hour and cram more ‘stuff’ in.
Customers – yay!
For the first time in my memory, SAP brought live, walking talking customers on stage during keynotes. These were supplemented in the media and analyst sessions with more of the same and a good helping of detail.
We have been canvassing for this every year for at least the last eight years and the request was always met with a stony silence. I understand why.
Bringing customers on stage is always a risky business because rehearsals aside, customers have a habit of going off piste. Putting up a video is much easier because you can hand the customer a script and get them to parrot what you want. That was very much the case with the Facebook guy who exuded zero credibility.
For me, the star turn was Karenann Terrel, EVP and CIO Wal-Mart. Getting Wal-Mart onto any vendor stage is a coup in itself but when she went off piste, you could sense the discomfiture felt by Leukert who really had no choice but to giggle along nervously to her epithets. Here’s a couple. Referring to the relationship between Wal-Mart and SAP on a HANA project, she said:
We’ve had our moments
That’s politically correct speak for: ‘We’ve had occasion to yell at you numb nuts.’ But the real highlight was when she said:
I hope to see S4/HANA delivered in my lifetime. It’s on my bucket list.
SAP observers have said much the same, wondering if Business Suite 4 HANA is real or vaporware. On this I will have a separate and comprehensive story a little later but for now, McDermott has said it will be delivered by the end of the year. Regardless, those moments of authenticity were well worth hearing.
Priorities and confusion
SAP packed its keynotes with product and customer stories but that came with a significant problem. Many of us have been pestering SAP to deliver a cogent roadmap for S/4 HANA and especially the cloud element to the overall package. This is becoming urgent in light of continuing surveys that indicate less than stellar interest in the topic.
SAP didn’t give us that but I think I know why. I will expand on this in a later story because the reasoning takes a bit of unpicking. Nevertheless, seeing customers doing interesting ‘stuff’ with ‘internet of things’ in the context of HANA deployments was refreshing.
Others disagree, but to my mind, talking to the value of Concur for travel and expenses in McDermott’s keynote was very important. T&E is one of the most hated processes inside any business but Concur has a set of solid solutions including the much loved and 12 million customer strong TripIt Pro. Steve Singh who runs the whole cloud business and was the CEO Concur says we will see important enhancements later in the year. I look forward to that.
While I want to feel that customers can walk away with a spring in their step from being wowed by some amazing demos, the fact is that the specter of HANA adoption lies like a pall of lingering smog. SAP has to fix this and I think I know what they need to do. More on this later once we’ve concluded our final executive meetings.
Data sovereignty measures
In the meantime, I’d like to conclude with a very interesting aside which we heard from Mike Ettling Global Head of Cloud & On Premise HR. He believes that the actions of certain governments, including Russia, in insisting that data does not leave its geographical boundaries and with legislation slated to come into force in September as an enforcement measure, runs the risk of killing off the global cloud business.
I don’t think governments that are going this road have realized that there is a strong chance this will have a negative impact on country GDP. We are actively lobbying against those measures.
I look forward to hearing more from Ettling on the topic of data sovereignty.
My take
I’ve said plenty above and hinted at more analysis to come. Overall, SAP did a solid job of getting the diginomica team in front of executives. We always appreciate that, along with the opportunity to film a good selection of customers which we will showcase once production is out of the way.
As an aside, I ran into Rainer Zinow who has been tirelessly working on Business ByDesign. While that product hasn’t got a lot of love at this show, I was delighted to hear that it continues to sell well. As we mingled with the other media and analysts on the evening of the second day, he told me the company has closed out one of its larger deals for this solution at a contract value of €500,000. Nice.
This was not so much a ‘new’ SAP so much as a more nuanced SAP where the messaging was, at times, a tad messy, but which reflects the early stage of embedding a bunch of important acquisitions.
Disclosure: SAP is a premier partner at time of writing and covered most of my T&E for attending SAPPHIRE Now 2015.

Read more on: Cloud ERP financials and supply chain 