
SAP customers want to move to S/4 HANA at their own pace – and not at any price. That was the message that came out of the UK & Ireland User Group conference just a couple of weeks ago. My colleague Stuart Lauchlan wrote at the time:
[S/4} was dubbed at the time by CEO Bill McDermott as “our biggest launch in 23 years, if not in the entire history of the company”. In other words, it’s bet the farm time again.
If that’s the case, then the muted reaction of the SAP faithful, both in the conference hall this week and across the wider SAP community, doesn’t bode well, for now at least.
It seems that you can indeed lead a horse to water, but you can’t make it drink – or at least you can’t make it drink any faster than it wants to. And that’s all the less likely if you’ve managed to scare the horses in the first place…
Steve Lucas, SAP’s president of platforms, gave a presentation this week at a HANA forum in Frankfurt, with the aim of educating the horses, calming them down and getting them to drink the SAP water. He took the opportunity to explain why he believes SAP is a better option for enterprise buyers than Oracle, IBM, Microsoft and AWS. But does it make sense in today’s world?
SAP’s platforms pitch has been being formed over the past few years, both via internal development as seen in HANA, and through a number of cloud acquisitions. That latest of which comes in the form of SAP’s next generation business suite S/4.
SAP appears on the surface to be a very different company compared to what it was just a few short years ago. And it’s no surprise that customers/people are confused and resistant to change.
Lucas took to the stage in Frankfurt to explain clearly as to why customers should be taking this seriously and why SAP has got this right. Lucas said:
I kind of bristle a little bit when I hear SAP referred to as an ERP company. Because we have been very busy transforming ourselves as an organisation.
Modular vs. Singular technology
 Lucas’ vision for SAP centres around two different proposals. Firstly, that SAP’s technology offering is now completely modular (although there are exceptions to this). This means that customers no longer have to buy into a full ‘suite’, they can pick and choose elements of the SAP platform they wish to make use of – whether that’s the new SAP Cloud for Analytics, the HANA Cloud Platform, Vora or SuccessFactors.
This makes sense in world where buyers are less and less seeing the benefit of going ‘all in’ with one vendor to solve their problems. We see more and more companies picking and choosing cloud products, with lower entry points, that they then themselves attempt to tie together. This is something that Lucas was keen to highlight that SAP recognises. He said:
The pricing for [Cloud for Analytics] in US dollars, starts at $25 per user, per month. That’s incredibly accessible. If you think about the pricing for the HANA Cloud Platform, it starts at a couple hundred dollars per month, for a site. This is achievable, accessible technology.
This is a fully modular architecture, you can use any part of this. If all I want to use is Cloud for Analytics and nothing else from SAP, that’s perfectly fine. And it just works. If all I want to use is HANA, that’s fine.
However, he notes that this isn’t entirely true for S/4 (the big gambit). He said:
There’s technically one caveat, the one technology that does not work without HANA is S/4. This is the only mandatory interdependency in the architecture.
So in other words, to take advantage of S/4, you need to be running on the HANA platform already. Or to get to S/4, you need to roll out HANA. Or be going in all in with cloud.
But alongside Lucas’ modular pitch, he also took time to explain the importance of HANA underpinning everything and being a singular technology architecture. He explained that this is important to the future of SAP and its customers, because in the past it had wasted time trying to integrate. Lucas said:
Why HANA? Four or five years ago, the first thought that went through my head was, why does the world need another database? We had been building business applications for the past 35 years on other people’s technology stacks. It’s not a secret, we were using IBM’s, we were using Oracle’s, we were using Microsoft’s.
We came to one magnanimous conclusion: it was too hard, it was too complicated, almost to the point of absurdity, to build a simple business application to create an outcome. It was too hard. We were spending all of our time integrating these various components instead of innovating our customers.
We were confusing horizontal integration, with forward momentum. It’s not the same thing. Integration or tying components together is not the same thing as business innovation. This platform, the HANA platform, really dramatically simplifies that.
And this singular approach to designing technology (combined with the modular approach to buying in most of the stack) enables customers to run a simpler environment, according to Lucas. Way more so than the likes of IBM or Oracle, he said.
The HANA platform is a singular technology. Whether I’m using Oracle, IBM or Microsoft, I can think of four or five or six technologies that I would need to purchase from them to integrate in order to be able to do the same thing that HANA can do with one product and one copy of the data. That’s a nuance, but a huge difference in terms of your enterprise architecture.
Microsoft, IBM and Oracle, while great companies, with really smart technologies, have every incentive not simplify your architecture. Why would they? Why would Oracle simplify their $10 billion database business into a $2 billion database business? That would be stupid for them to do. But we started out the way you should, which is a singular platform providing a radically different approach to how you build business applications.
Better than the rest
So to make it clear, Lucas believes that SAP has the best solution for customers because it now has a
Steve Lucas and the SAP portfolio
single approach to designing software with HANA, which allows all of the modular components to be bought separately, but integrate easily.
However, Lucas was also keen to highlight the benefits that owning Ariba’s network has on application design for S/4 and the fact that SAP has built out its own data centre infrastructure. Lucas said that SAP had no interest in building on the likes of Amazon Web Services (which the likes of Infor have done) because it doesn’t believe that this will cater to people’s data protection requirements. Lucas said:
There is no enterprise software company that has a business network like Ariba. Oracle, IBM and Microsoft do not have a network where a trillion dollars worth of trade happens on an annual basis. Or a billion dollars worth of trade, frankly. Who has a network like Ariba? None of them. We’re integrating that with our logistics applications, our inventory applications. The nuances are that we have the broadest cloud portfolio offering.
We could have also said a long time ago that we were going to build this on AWS. It’s cheap. Why not? The reason why not is because of the healthcare laws and the data privacy laws, which are so different country by country. For us really we want to be able to deliver a consistent, safe and secure offering.
We built our own data centres for the HANA Cloud Platform, this is really important. The reason that we have not put the HANA Cloud Platform on something like AWS, is because AWS doesn’t adhere to all the global privacy laws where we operate. We actually own and operate our own data centres. That’s incredibly critical.
The HANA Cloud Platform is not meant to compete with AWS, we are not in a race to the bottom. It’s not our goal. Our goal is to provide a business oriented platform-as-a-service that integrates with the world of machines, with IoT interfaces.
Customer numbers
During a Q&A with Lucas, I also got the opportunity to ask him about how many customers were live on the SAP HANA platform – where I asked for specifics with regard to the individual modules. Here’s what I got told:
First of all I will give you the aggregate number. Across this entire picture, we have 291,000 customers [this includes everything from Ariba, to HCP, to SuccessFactors, to Cloud for Analytics – everything].
In terms of how many are live, we are in the thousands of live HANA customers. It’s an interesting question. We are in a world now where we are approaching 10,000 customers on HANA and thousands of them are live. I almost view the number of live customers for any of these things as irrelevant. Cloud for Analytics we just introduced eight weeks ago and we have 1,200 customers signed up for the trial – are they all live? No they aren’t all live, but this is the kind of demand signal that says to me that says it’s pretty good.
The HANA Cloud Platform we have around 2,000 live customers. We introduced the HANA Cloud Platform 18 months ago. I remember when we had 30 developers on the HANA Cloud Platform. We have over 1,000 developers focused on the HANA Cloud Platform. Our customers are doing a variety of things from medical scenarios, to customers that call us up and say they are an auto-manufacturer and they want to give their dealers a simple inventory website.
So my understanding from what Lucas said is that:
• Aggregate portfolio is 291,000
• HANA platform – 10,000 customers approximately, with “thousands” live
• HANA Cloud Platform – 2,000 live customers
• Cloud for Analytics 1,200 signed up for trial
Based on these numbers, by estimates we are then looking at around 4-6% of the current SAP customer base that are currently in a position to move to S/4 (have bought into the HANA platform already).
Lucas finished by saying:
Running simple is about doing more with less. I am yet to run into a company or CIO that says they have so much money that they don’t know what to do with it. Every CIO on the planet gets told do more – IoT, mobile, customer engagement – but to cut their budget 20%. Extra money doesn’t exist anymore. Doing more with less is exactly what this architecture is about. Enterprise architecture can be simple, that’s what this is about.
We have the newest cutting edge platform with HANA. We have the business oriented platform-as-a-service. We have the broadest cloud analytics offering in the market. And the newest business management and business process technologies with S/4. This is a platform that exists today that is built for the next two decades. What Microsoft, IBM and Oracle have is what they built over the last two decades, trying to make it work in a world it wasn’t built for.
My take
Lucas’ pitch was comprehensive and he explained himself well. It gave a clear picture of where SAP stands today and where it hopes its customers will get to. Putting up a HANA barrier in-between its customers and S/4 makes sense for SAP – it’s an enticing way for existing customers to take the plunge and make the investment in HANA.
But it is also relying on the hope that its customers will see a next-generation back-office system as a key competitive advantage in their respective markets. I spoke to one customer at the event that seemed to think it could be, but mostly this came down to introducing huge efficiencies across the business as a result of being able to run back-office processes in real time.
You can also see SAP trying to balance the need to get everyone on HANA with the realities of being in a market where enterprise buyers are no longer consolidating on one platform. They’ve got their fingers in relational databases, existing apps, NoSQL stuff, Hadoop, cloud apps from a variety of providers, etc. SAP wants to make it easy for customers to pick and choose, whilst honing in on the importance of a single technology like HANA. It’s not an easy message to balance.
We are also in a world now where new companies, because they’ve been built on web infrastructure, arguably don’t have the same human capital, physical infrastructure or traditional inventory that decade-old companies have in order to require something like HANA S/4. There’s still plenty of those sorts of companies around, but times are changing.
Basically, the way I see it, there’s nothing wrong with HANA or SAP’s pitch. It makes sense in isolation. But in the context of wider market changes, will buyers agree? I’m not entirely sure.
Image credit - via SAPDisclosure - At time of writing SAP, Oracle and Infor are all diginomica premier partners.Read more on: Analytics planning and data analysisCloud ERP financials and supply chainCloud platforms - infrastructure and architectureNoSQL 