
St Andrews Cross
Following on from my piece on the digital potential of a post-Brexit independent Scotland yesterday and Derek’s piece on the UK’s leadership stance on the European Sharing Economy, I was interested to see the two converge in a report from the Scottish Government that sets out its own stall on disruptive tech and business models.
In a new report that details the devolved government’s strategic assessment of markets in Scotland, it’s noted that disruptive technologies bring significant benefits to consumers, competition and the economy through lower prices, greater choice and better service and allow for a more efficient use of underused resources by allowing people to share their resources through online platforms: 

Disruptive technologies transform current business models. In Scotland, we must ensure that Scottish businesses are able to capitalise on these disruptions and have the necessary tools and ability to enter these markets should they wish to. It is also important to ensure that market structures and features are not unnecessarily restricting the entry of new disruptive business models.

But the Scottish Government warns that regulation is needed to strike a balance between incumbent services providers and market disruptors. It cautions: 

However, it said that regulation is necessary to maintain fair competition in markets between incumbents and new entrants. Government and regulators
Benefits [of disruptive technologies] must be balanced with the need for regulation and for these new businesses and traditional operators to be treated fairly with no unfair competitive advantage. 
A key element of debate surrounding disruptive technologies is the degree to which they should be regulated. Often, market structures and regulation can create barriers to new entrants. Where there are such barriers to entering a market, these regulations and structures should be reviewed to ensure that they encourage competition and, consequently, increase consumer choice.

The report makes it clear that the Scottish Government is prepared to get interventionist if it deems it necessary: 

New businesses are often competing with existing providers but are not necessarily bound by the same rules and regulations. The existence of a regulatory gap between new and incumbent operators can lead to an issue of market fairness. It is also likely that new technologies may disrupt a market and quickly become the dominant firm in this market. Key examples of this include Google and Facebook. Dominance in itself is not an issue, but firms must be monitored closely to ensure that there is no abuse of this dominant position.

Balance
The trick is how to get the balance right between regulation that controls potential abuse and that which would stifle innovation: 

It is important that consideration is also given to regulation which may have become obsolete or may discourage innovation in the market. Regulation must be proportionate, encourage innovation and provide a favourable business environment in which all companies can grow and flourish. On the other hand, new businesses are often competing with existing providers but are not necessarily bound by the same rules and regulations. The existence of a regulatory gap between new and incumbent operators can lead to an issue of market fairness.

It adds:

Further analysis is needed to understand where the balance is between encouraging competition and ensuring regulation is appropriate to ensure there is no competitive advantage nor unintended consequences. 

To that end, the independent Regulatory Review Group has begun a review of the regulatory environment within Scotland for key sectors affected by digital disruption to ensure that it: 

remains appropriate to encourage and support innovation while maintaining a level playing field.

With increased tax-raising powers following the Scotland Act, it remains to be seen what fiscal incentives – or disincentives – Holyrood might put in place around the Sharing Economy. Following the last UK budget, Chancellor George Osborne’s made it possible from next April to to earn £1000 from property rent, and £1000 from trading income, without paying tax, while people who make money from letting out spare rooms are already able to earn up to £7,500 tax-free under the “rent a room” allowance.
If Scotland were to seek independence post-Brexit and won a referendum to that effect, it would need to apply for membership of the European Union (EU). The attitude towards the Sharing Economy would likely be influenced by the European Commission’s policies in that event. 
EU states have not been consistent in their enthusiasm for market disruptors. Uber’s faced partial bans in countries including Belgium, the Netherlands, France and Germany. In Madrid, a court wants telcos to block access to Uber,  while in in Berlin, Airbnb hosts face fines of up to €100,000 if they rent out their entire apartments on the home-letting website.
Even to the regulators in Brussels that’s seen as difficult to justify, with Elzbieta Bienkowska, Commissioner for Industry and the Internal Market, comparing critics of Uber to the luddites of the industrial revolution. As a consensus position emerges across the EU, an independent Scotland would expect to toe the line. 
My take
I’m tempted to think of the ice cream van wars in Glasgow while I was at university as an example of how competition from new market entrants can cause trouble to flare up, but the analogy doesn’t quite fit. 
If an independent Scotland wants to have the economic benefits of attracting tech investment, then it will have to take a light-touch approach to regulation of the Sharing Economy. With a large dependence on tourism revenue, the temptation may well be on the side of the established hospitality trade against the Airbnbs of the world, but that would be an error. 
Image credit - FreeImages.com Read more on: Digital government and public services

