
What if you had a breakthrough idea at your day job?  Would you run it up the flagpole and cross your fingers?  If you’re Lee Odess, you pull a team together, make a proposal, and wind up with a startup – kinda. Odess’ team was working within Brivo, a 15 year old building security player based in Washington, D.C. that was using “Internet of Things” security approaches before the term had ever been flogged.
Three years ago, Odess and his cohorts proposed using the same API-driven single sign-on companies use in the virtual world, and apply it to building security. Brivo’s leadership greenlighted Brivo Labs – basically a startup within Brivo – and Odess and his team went to work.
Fast forward three years: Brivo Labs is using security as a baseline service to build new models based on improving the user relationship to our physical surroundings. (Their first mobile app, Brivo OnAir, is available on the iTunes store. They are also an ISV in the Salesforce ecosystem).
Recently I had a chance to speak with Odess about the evolution of Brivo Labs and how physical security is changing, as well as the obstacles his team must overcome. And yeah, I asked him about that nagging traveler’s headache: hotel key security.
Jon Reed: Give us the short version of how this got started.
Lee Odess: Brivo’s been around since 1999 – back in the early days of Internet commerce, we did some Internet of Things type delivery linked with Blackberry BBM. We can do small (smart) boxes; we can secure big boxes. Those cards and key fobs people use to get into buildings, that is what we’ve been doing. We do hosted video also.  Three years ago, we had this idea around a core API and single sign-on usual social identities.
Why couldn’t I do that to a building? Why couldn’t I walk up, either using a wearable, or an app, or an operating system, express my identity to the building, and get the appropriate level of access?  That’s what we have been doing for the past two and a half years. For us, the Internet of Things is about taking a core competency and leveraging cloud APIs and connected devices. Staying close to your business, but expanding.  It’s been a great experiment.
Reed: You hit your first nine month goal, which was to have something to exhibit at Dreamforce. How did you pull that off?
Odess: We took some unique approaches to development. We utilized crowdsourcing via Topcoder to create the first handful of products that we brought to market. That helped with the rapid deployment.  It also  challenged some status quo thinking around how development should be done. We had around five people at the time – with crowdsourcing, we were able to act like we had 50. The resources were sort of bottomless.
Operation Dreamforce: “Why do you have a lock?”
Reed: And how did that first Dreamforce go?
Odess: It was cool. Here we are at Dreamforce, talking about connected buildings and connected devices. People would walk up and ask us, “Why do you have a lock?” Everyone around us was marketing automation companies, and we had a bunch of locks. But a lot of good opportunities popped out of it.
Security is the beach head. The first experience you have going into a place is the access. If I can make that experience better, it could tie into marketing. It could tie into finance. It’s not like you have to add an extra system, because you are already putting in an access control system anyways. Now, if things can be connected, I can offer all kinds of add-on services.
Reed: When I travel, I’m used to carrying around a bunch of IDs and key cards. Are you trying to make my life easier, or the building manager’s life easier, or both?
Brivo OnAir screenshot
Odess: The cards you carry are pretty insecure. Situational awareness with wearables or your phone actually gives a much higher level of security. In New York City, go to any high-rise building. Walk into the front lobby. It’s absolute chaos. They don’t know who’s who, who should be there, who shouldn’t, what level of access should people get. It’s a chokepoint.
The security industry has historically inconvenienced 99% of people that come to your office, to protect against the one bad guy. We’re trying to flip it and say, let’s make it convenient for 99% of the people that come, and for that 1%, let’s make them jump through some hoops.
From the admin side, historically all of these systems are based off of computers that sat in the basement running Windows. They are not real time – everything is historical. You get a log report. Now we’re able to give you instant control on-demand as an administrator, from the phone in your hand.
When will hotels figure this out – and other use cases
Reed: Hotels can’t get this technology soon enough!
Odess: A year ago this week, we were at Google I/O with Google and HotelTonight, where we demo’ed a hoteling app where you could check in just by going on site. It sends you a key. You don’t even have to go to the front desk, and it can unlock your door via your phone.
Reed: Sounds good – so what’s the hold up?
Odess: The hotel industry is very press release driven, more than reality. They’re talking a lot about it, but there’s only been one that’s actually done it. Starwood did it, I think, at three hotels.  The current lock systems hotels have are not compatible with any of that, because they’re not actually very smart. But it will get there. It’s one of those inevitable things.
Reed: I assume you’re looking at other use cases also?
Odess:  Yes. When you go to a baseball game, that whole ticketing experience could be much better. If you have a box seat, right now, it might be digital on your phone just to get through the turnstile, but past there, it’s very analog. We’re trying to create better experiences, by making this digital. The key/access is really the waterfall event. From there, we can notify food and beverage services that you’ve arrived, and let the concierge know you’re there, and so on.
Property managers are thinking beyond security also. They want to know how people are using their buildings, so that they tailor services and charge on demand. Historically, managers have not had these kinds of data analytics. It’s like Moneyball for buildings.
Reed: Tell us about a current customer.
Odess: The majority of the 24-hour gyms in the U.S. are powered by our system. It’s all done through the gym membership software. They’ve been able to maximize the access to the buildings because of the API integrations they’ve done with our hardware and their software.
Another one is Cummins Engines.  They utilize our system on the big machinery that’s used to create jet engines. They linked us to their HR system around training, the idea being if you didn’t have the credentials, you couldn’t run the machine. It wouldn’t turn on if you didn’t have the property training. It’s a different type of access – what we call attribute-based permissioning. If you have this sort of credential capability, it’s not just about doors anymore, it’s about controlling access to all kinds of machinery and equipment.
Obstacles on Brivo’s IoT path: controlling access, and avoiding the creepy factor
Reed: When I think of obstacles for you to overcome, one might be the perception that your approach to security could give more access to an unauthorized person.
Odess: That question comes up. If I drop my card outside my building right now, somebody can use it to get in. The analog version isn’t necessarily any more secure. Depending on the level of the security that you need, we can give you multi-factor authentication, where maybe it’s your phone and your biometric and your pin code. Apple Pay uses some of the same methods. That’s a lot better than someone who uses your dropped credit card.
The other issue that comes up is creepiness. The way you address that is by adding value for those who opt-in, as well as privacy controls. Give people the ability to opt out – that’s fine. Let them use a paper ticket to get into the stadium if they want. But for those who are connected and comfortable with it, let them have the opportunity to use it. It’s like TSA pre. I had to get fingerprinted and everything else to get that, and gave up a little bit about who I am, for the luxury of now only having to show up 30 minutes before, and not having to take off my clothes and everything else to get through.
I’m okay with that. That added value to me. My dad, maybe not. We need to make this a little more natural. You can express identity and ask for permission, and then be granted based off of the information you’re comfortable giving.
Reed: As long as companies respect those permissions.
Odess: There’s a responsibility for the companies that are getting this data to treat it properly. I call it the Groupon effect. You don’t need a company like Groupon blasting you with spam. I don’t need to know about every nail salon in the Washington, DC area because I went to a baseball game.
Reed: I can think of situations where I’d share my info, and where I wouldn’t.
Odess:  To me, that’s where some value gets added with the Internet of Things. Right now, everyone wants to talk about connected toothbrushes. It’s fun stuff that doesn’t add value. When I go to Starbucks, I can pay with my phone. But if I want to go to the bathroom, they give you this creepy key on a boat anchor. Starbucks should know that I’m a guest. It should know that I’m a patron of the place. Eventually, this will become second nature.

Image credits: images provided by Brivo, and used with express permission.
Disclosure: diginomica has no financial ties to Brivo. I was approached by Brivo’s PR team, and agreed to do this story as I found the topic interesting.
Read more on: CRM and customer experienceFrictionless enterprise 