
Air travel and lost luggage: the two go together like peaches and cream, and the latter is often seen as being an inevitable risk of the former.
What follows is a simple – and personal – tale of this relationship in action, and would be of no greater importance to anyone else but me if it wasn’t for two things. One is that my luggage, by virtue of going to Miami rather than Barcelona, may well have had a better trip than I.
The other is far less flippant, for the way by which the luggage got to Miami may – and I stress the word may quite deliberately – have exposed a serious security flaw that would seem to have IT weaknesses at its heart.
I think it may be possible, with the assistance of a member of the check in staff, to smuggle a case onto a flight, and have it travel undetected.
The actual events
The actual facts as they happened are as follows.
On November 29th I flew to Barcelona. As I was staying a few days I decided to check in a slightly larger case than usual, being someone that has a growing dislike of those that insist on taking a small wardrobe on-board as hand-luggage.
I approached the bag drop counter and handed over both passport and boarding pass to the clerk. All the usual offices then followed, including printing out and attaching the destination tag for the case, and the sticking of the owner’s part of the tag onto my boarding pass. One mistake I made here – for the future reference of all – was not to check what was actually printed on that part.
I certainly did not do that, but then again I don’t think I know anyone who would. One assumes that the bag tag matches the on-screen check-in data and the printed boarding pass as a matter of course.
In due time I flew out on BA480 to Barcelona. My bag, however, went to Miami on BA209. What is more it was carrying the luggage tag of a genuine passenger.
Now, how this happened I know not, as I was subsequently told at the BA baggage desk at Heathrow that these tags are generated automatically from passenger data (name/flight/destination), so what appears to have happened – a wrong, but real, tag being produced by the system – simply shouldn’t have happened.
The one situation I can think of that might make it possible is if the check-in clerk thought a passenger had two bags to check-in, printed two tags, then finds there is only one bag to tag. That might leave a spare tag lying around that could be picked up and used inadvertently.
The fact that it carried a real passenger’s name got it past the issue of being a bag on a plane, unattached to a passenger. I have been on planes that have been even been called back from entering the runway because this issue was discovered in time – and while it can make one feel very grumpy, that is normally tempered by a fair share of gratitude that the system got all the data to line up in time.
My luggage remained `lost’ for some three days until Miami baggage handling realised it had been stood in a corner for a good while. As they told me, until they had discovered its true ownership, they assumed that real passenger was still  ‘in immigration’ (ie possibly being busted for a bit of moral turpitude or something). But eventually they read my own tag that was on it, and checked against the missing bags list.
The security hole
I guess it could be that someone else’s bag, for a different destination, turned up after I dropped mine and had their bag tagged as Banks/Barcelona/BA480, with the check-in clerk continuing to get successive tags one step out of phase.
But this series of errors (or at least guessed errors) points to a huge security hole which could allow someone to smuggle an unattached bag onto a plane. All it would need is for a check-in clerk at Heathrow bag drop to be part of a team/cell/whatever.
Remember, bag drops these days are for all flights, so all it would seem to need is for a passenger to turn up to check in for flight `A’ and the clerk `inadvertently’ prints 2 tags when one only is needed. From all the evidence at my disposal, that is what appears to have happened in my case.
Then another member of the team/cell/whatever turns up with a suitable device in a bag. The clerk knows this member and therefore knows what to do – put that second, spare tag onto this cell-member’s bag. The bag is then ‘official’ because that passenger exists, has checked in and is on the flight.
Then whatever is supposed to happen, happens……
It even has a side benefit as a plan. Security services will, for example, scour any crash site for evidence. If they find a remnant of a case with explosion damage, there may also be bits of tag on it that can lead to the identification of that real, but innocent, passenger. It could even lead to an evidential red herring as the police chase down totally innocent people associated with that passenger.
The only issue is that the explosive material in the bag is not detectable by whatever screening processes are used in Heathrow Airport. All that would need is information from someone who works in baggage handling as to the make/type/serial number etc of the scanning systems used. From that, relevant data could easily be located on the web, I suspect.
And a quick Google shows that a couple of years ago Al Quaeda reputedly came up with a non-detectable explosive. Though later press coverage suggested the means of discovering the new explosive had been developed, it has to be assumed that the development process will not have been halted as a consequence.
BA’s response
I had rather hoped that BA would respond to this story with something suggesting that it could nevr happen like this ‘because…………….’
Sadly, that hasn’t happened. A lifelong personal ‘rule’ was broken and British Airways Press Office was sent this story and was asked to respond. This is its statement:
We’re sorry to hear that our customer’s bag did not travel with him to Barcelona. Every day we take great pride in carrying tens of thousands of bags safely and speedily to their final destination where the vast majority arrive on time. When bags are delayed our teams do everything they can to reunite customers with their belongings.
The safety and security of our customers and crew is always our top priority and we never discuss specific security measures, however, there are multiple layers of security at airports, with security checks and screening carried out by airlines, third party operators, airports and the police.
OK, I can understand the unwillingness to talk about specific security measures, but it hardly gives any confidence. After all, what combination of IT failure allows the data from one passenger to be transferred to a different passenger or used about that different passenger without clanging some alarm bells?
And if it wasn’t an IT failure, but just a perverse accident or, far worse, a deliberate process, how did the IT system get to print the wrong tag anyway and not have some routine for checking tag data against passenger data or the number of bags tagged against the number of checked bags entered into the online check-in process?
I was certainly asked for that when checking-in and if I’d then turned up with two bags rather than the one I listed, I would expect the system to flag that to the check-in clerk so they could both be ID’d for `special checking’.
In the end, I just keep seeing a colander every time I think about this.
My take
I’m sure that BA is not half as blasé about this as it appears to be, but so far I am still left with a deep suspicion that a bloody great hole exists in the bag drop process and the associated tech running it.
Addendum
The email sent to [email protected] 8-12-15
Hi,
The attached is, as you will see if you read it, in two parts:
The first part is what happened to me and my luggage on December 29th  when I was en-route to Barcelona and my luggage ended up in Miami. As far as that goes it could just be a saga that I could then dine out on for a few months, except for the suspicion that then arose – that checked baggage could be given the wrong destination tag (so it appears to belong to a real passenger going to that destination) creating a security flaw of significant proportions. 
The second part of the piece therefore outlines what I consider to be a reasonable scenario of how it can then be exploited with some ease by terrorists or other criminal elements.
I plan to put this up on the Diginomica website by the end of this week, so I would love to include some comment from BA as to the company’s view of the possibility that my scenario is right or wrong, and if wrong, why and how. It does seem that there is a flaw in the company’s IT systems to allow either extra luggage destination tags to be printed out – even in error – or for the wrong tag to be generated by accident/software bug. But the inability to trap the error means that it will a) happen again and much worse b) permit the error to be generated deliberately and then exploited.  
I do hope you can find time to do a bit of digging and come back with a response to this. 
Regards
Martin Banks
diginomica – Contributing Editor
www.diginomica.com
Read more on: CRM and customer experienceSecurity 