
Supporting much of the fascinating work that is happening in the field of molecular biology – that is, the study of DNA, RNA, proteins, and the interactions between them – is a company called QIAGEN. Scientists can use molecular information to diagnose diseases more quickly, and effective treatments can be developed more quickly, but advanced technologies are needed.
The critical information and data taken from biological samples – using ‘sample to insight technologies’ – are often provided by QIAGEN, which has more than 500,000 customers around the world.
This process of going from sample to insight requires a huge amount of processing power, data and technology. And as one can imagine, as the technologies for molecular inspection advance, the amount of data is increasing at a rapid rate and companies like QIAGEN are having to rethink their digital strategies.
To support this growth, in reaction to the increasing amounts of data available, QIAGEN decided to outsource its core IT functions to an (unnamed) cloud and managed service provider. However, at the same time, it wanted to rethink its existing business processes to become more efficient and service-orientated.
As a result, QIAGEN opted to keep its service management functions in-house and replace its existing ticketing system with a modern, cloud platform that could optimise and automate many of its existing functions.
It decided to implement the ServiceNow platform to both save on costs and improve the efficiency and quality of how the organisation runs. Although the system was initially being used for IT Service Management, it is now being considered for multiple functions across the business.
I got the chance to speak to Sotirios Siozos, Senior Manager IT International Services, QIAGEN, about the implementation, where he explained that he and his team have been sitting with the business, analysing the existing processes and then rethinking and transforming them to become more efficient within the ServiceNow platform.
QIAGEN implemented ServiceNow’s incident, problem and change management to create a new ticketing system and then moved all assets and business services into a ServiceNow Configuration Management Database – a single record for IT. It is also using ServiceNow Orchestration to automate processes and requests.
An example of how the platform has improved the service experience at QIAGEN can be seen with time reduced in on-boarding new users. Siozos said:
The average time for this previously was three weeks. After orchestration and optimising the processes behind it, we are now in the middle average of three days.
And with regards to the expansion of the ServiceNow platform, Siozos said:
The implementation for us is never ending, because although you could say that ServiceNow is in place and is running well, there are ongoing enhancements. It’s a live system that you are modifying in all directions. This is something that’s really dynamic and I would say that we are continuously working on this.
After finishing with our IT processes, I would say that it’s’ becoming a business partner now. For example, it’s now a facility management tool. We are moving to bring more and more business areas onto the platform – accounting is working with it, and we are now also working with the legal department.
Benefits and advice
Sotirios Siozos, QIAGEN
With ServiceNow, QIAGEN has reduced the number of tickets per year by approximately 10,000 – because of the automation and self service – ultimately saving it money with its outsourcing provider. QIAGEN is now also completely transparent, as all of the process data is held within the ServiceNow platform, meaning that the company is more compliant for audits.
However, for Siozos, the biggest benefit has been the data that the platform provides and the ability for his team to work with departments to improve their existing processes. He said:
We are sitting together to get the requirements together. We are sitting together to try and understand the business problem. After that we are checking the environment and trying to understand what possibilities there are to help them do their job better. We are sitting together, setting out a timeline and delivering the parts of the business that are needed.
Reporting, this is the most important thing. You can generate and create an easy report dedicated for your business area for better analysis. Based on that we can make improvements and optimise how the department operates. I think the reporting is one of the biggest advantages for ServiceNow.
But Siozos also had some words of advice for those carrying out similar projects, particularly ones that touch so many different aspects of the business. The key? Keep discussions open with all the teams and make sure that you’re managing expectations. Siozos said:
This is a marketing discussion. What is the advantage? Why do you need to start to use ServiceNow? How are you documenting your work? Is it an IT problem or a business problem? It’s a big marketing topic where you need to explain to the business what are the advantages. You need to communicate properly.
I would say that from the very beginning that you need to set up the right expectations. What is possible with the tool and what do you have to do to get the tool working in the right way? Expectations, expectations, expectations.
If you promise that you will do something and you don’t deliver, you will lose your reputation. It’s about continuous communication. The technical part isn’t that complicated but you need to get all the people around the table and explain to them the benefit, and also why some things aren’t possible.
Image credit - Images free for commercial use Disclosure - At the time of writing ServiceNow is a diginomica premier partner. Read more on: IT service managementUse cases 