
John Donahoe
ServiceNow turned in some strong numbers yesterday and topped off the day with the purchase of start-up VendorHawk to bolster its Software Asset Management (SAM) capabilities.
In a blog post, Farrell Hough, General Manager of ITSM at ServiceNow explained the rationale behind the acquisition as being to provide extended reach in the SaaS applications space:
SaaS subscriptions can sprawl rapidly at companies, often bypassing IT.  As a result, companies are often unable to identify which apps exist and how much is being spent on them.  Without full visibility into SaaS usage across the company, many are deploying redundant apps some of which are automatically renewed annually, but underutilized…Customers need a SAM solution with a strong SaaS subscription management capability to discover all apps in use to manage and optimize redundancy, access and spend.
She added:
Today, VendorHawk recognizes 36,000+ SaaS apps to discover spend and map redundant apps. To give you an idea of the scope of the challenge our customers face, at one site VendorHawk identified 248 SaaS apps that the customer was not aware of.
VendorHawk also analyzes utilization and optimizes SaaS subscriptions for contract renewal for many popular apps such as Salesforce, Box, and Google G-Suite to name a few. To date, ServiceNow SAM supports SaaS capabilities for Microsoft Office 365 in our Kingston release with others planned for this year. ServiceNow intends to replatform VendorHawk capabilities into a SAM release in 2019.
Changing roles
So that’s all to come. For the moment, ServiceNow CEO John Donahoe is pointing to a 40% year-on-year increase in subscription revenues with total sales up 37% to $589.2 million. That’s well ahead of Wall Street expectations and sends ServiceNow over the $2 billion a year run rate.
Of note is the customer demographic with 21 transactions of more than $1 million in the first three months of this year. Some 52 customers are now worth more than $5 million a year, up 52% year-on-year, while there are 536 customers now doing more than $1 million in business, up 43% year-on-year.
Donahoe estimates that he’s up to 700 customer meetings since joining ServiceNow and that he hasn’t found one yet that isn’t engaged in some form of digital transformation. That’s having an impact on the nature of the IT function role:
It reminds me of the role of finance over the last 20 years ago. Twenty years ago, the Chief Finance Officer (CFO) was sort of a green eyeshade person; Finance was kind of an internal function that didn’t have maybe all the respect in the world. They kind of kept track of costs. Over the last 20 years, finance and the CFO are increasingly playing a cross-organization role focused on business value, not just costs, and are far more strategic.
The more I engage with Chief Information Officers (CIO) and see these digital transformations, where CEOs need their most technically literate leader to help lead the digital transformation. I think the CIO and IT are right on the cusp of being the same place that the CFO and finance were 20 years ago, where they’re being asked to drive cross-functional change.
As part of that, the CIO has to partner with the other C-suite executive. So, if you’re going drive end-to-end employee experience, that’s not just an HR issue any more than it’s just an IT issue, any more that it’s just a legal or facilities issue. Employees just want a great experience, and they want all the functions inside the company to work effectively together. So, we’re seeing more and more examples of CIOs partnering effectively with Chief Human Resources Officers (CHRO), with Chief Marketing Officers, with Chief Information Security Officers (CISOs).
There’s another aspect that chimes with Donahoe’s previous experience, this time from his tenure at eBay – shaping the platform to follow the customer. He explains:
When Pierre Omidyar created eBay, he created it for initially collectibles, Beanie Babies and collectibles, in an auction format. He never envisioned there’d be 3 million cars sold on the eBay platform, or hundreds of billions of consumer electronics in a fixed-price format. Customers just started using the platform for multiple buying and selling. And so, the expansion happened following the customers.
That’s very much consistent with what we see here, where customers are using our platform, and they start using it in these use cases. It’s not us saying, ‘Oh, well, we’re going to create an HR service delivery use case’. It was actually they started saying, ‘You know this thing we’re doing with IT help desk? We can do it with HR help desk’. And so they started building their own solutions on our platform around HR help desk. And they said, ‘Hey, could you build that out of the box?’. And we say, ‘Yes, we can’…literally, one of our biggest challenges right now is the number of requests where our customers want us to build out-of-the-box applications for workflows that they’ve currently had built for their own use cases on our platform.
CSM focus
A clear target sector for ServiceNow customer service management space, although Donahoe’s explanation of his ambitions here is less bombastic perhaps than yesterday’s bold declaration from SAP CEO Bill McDermott that his firm wants to take the customer management market and rebrand it:
If I were to describe where our target segment is in customer service, it tends to be industries or companies that have a high number of inbound contacts, where the goal is to get to the root cause and address the root cause so that you reduce contacts in the future. That’s contrasted with the goal being spending a lot of time on the phone with them. If you want to spend a lot of time in the phone with them, you probably want more of a CRM-based customer support or customer service technology.
Increasingly [for]technology companies, financial services companies, services businesses, their goal is to actually use the inbound customer contact channel not just to resolve a customer’s problem, but actually to get to the root cause. So you need a cross-functional workflow, a cross-functional platform – and that’s where we shine.
He cites the example of Australian telco Telstra as a case in point:
They wanted to reduce the [length] of time of their calls. Using the ServiceNow platform they’ve gone from 15 minutes to 6. They were sending technicians out on many cases where a technician was not needed. So, they’ve been able to reduce unnecessary technician visits by 55%. And they have a real focus on how do they use the data. This is in a world of machine learning and data. All the data they get from one of the calls, the inbound contacts, what are they calling about and how do we get to the root cause so that we can fix it within our network so that those calls don’t happen in the future and we have more satisfied customers.
And while McDermott talks of disrupting the disrupters in the CRM market, Donahoe takes a more under-stated tone:
There’s no one competitor that we’re placing. To be honest, I think increasingly customer service is such a large market that the leading-edge customer service decision makers are realizing that different platforms optimize for different things. Our goal is to frankly be spending more time in the circumstances and situations where our capability fits what they need and less time in bake offs where we aren’t the best solution.
My take
Onwards and upwards for ServiceNow – strong revenue growth and a focused strategy for expansion of the functional footprint. A good start to 2018.
Image credit - ServiceNowDisclosure - At time of writing, SAP and ServiceNow are premier partners of diginomica. Read more on: Cloud platforms - infrastructure and architectureCustomer service managementIT service management 