
Frank Slootman on a previous visit to London
As ServiceNow’s European roadshow touched down in London today, the firm released healthy third quarter numbers that included some notable ‘biggest ever’ deals across the past three months. 
The firm turned in a net loss of $36.3 million on revenues of $357.7 million, up 37% year-on-year. Subscription billings hit $363 million, a 47% year-on-year increase. CEO Frank Slootman highlighted the size of new deals, noting:


We closed 16 new deals with net new ACV [Annual Contract Value] greater than $1 million. Second, we posted a 99% renewal rate. Third, 301 customers now pay us more than $1 million in ACV, an increase of 31 in the quarter. And then lastly, 18 customers now pay us more than $5 million in ACV, an increase of six in the quarter.
We also continue to see great uptick in Global 2000 accounts, adding 23 new logos in the quarter including Prada, Hilton, and Constellation brands. Our average ACV per Global 2000 is now approximately $1 million, a 6% sequential increase and a 20% year-over-year increase. 

He cited some prime examples of flagship deals in practice, including an upsell to a US Global 100 financial institution, the firm’s largest contract value to date with more than $5 million in net new ACV:


The CIO was tasked with driving significant cost savings, increasing employee productivity and improvement of velocity of service delivery. We successfully demonstrated a comprehensive service management solution and the ability to unify processes in a single system of engagement. The deal was led by ITSM to consolidate 66 disparate tools and augmented by ITOM to deliver lights-out automation. This initiative will result in more than a $115 million in savings over five years.

Beyond IT, ServiceNow has also clocked up its largest HR deal ever, a $2 million upsell to a European Global 100 financial institution:

As part of their global transformation, this customer is replacing a legacy solution that supported 19 disparate document management tools. We won this RFP against 10 other vendors with a comprehensive platform approach including case management, orchestration to integrate key systems and in-platform analytics. ServiceNow will improve employee engagement for more than 250,000 employees and deliver productivity for more than one million cases per year.

Finally, the firm also saw its biggest Federal Government deal, a $2 million up-sell to an agency within the US Department of Health and Human Services, with the government sector now representing 11% of net new ACV, up from 9% a year ago: 

This customer contracted ITSM to consolidate 10 legacy systems, performance analytics to gain insight into key trends and discovery to effectively manage assets. Additionally, our FedRAMP certification, led to us becoming the first enterprise-wide cloud platform.

Focus
Going into 2017, expect to see increased vertical sales focus from ServiceNow, building on the current product specialization that’s been in place, said Slootman:


We are going to layer in another vector specialization that’s going to be by solution and by industry verticals. So this is going to be an evolution of our selling motion that’s going to be more refined by industry and by type of solution. So it’s really a normal evolution. We’re becoming just more sophisticated in our ability to sell more broadly and more deeply into our large enterprises and institutions. 

Expect to see more partnerships coming to the fore as well. Slootman alluded to hoping to work more with IBM, building on successes with the likes of CSC and Accenture. He also talked about alliances in the HR market:


We’ve had longstanding relationships with Workday and the reason is we’re both cloud companies, there’s often similar customers that will adopt both Workday and ServiceNow at the same time. There is really good value added integration between our respective platforms. We’re starting to see more opportunities now with SAP as well. I think we’re more on their radar, and I see certainly a go-to-market relationship developing there as well. In general, we’re starting to spike the radar on the HR site much more than we historically have, and we really expect that to continue.

Overall, there is a cross-sector pattern in play, he added:


[It] is just massive modernization, okay? [Organizations] are replacing dozens and dozens of legacy systems, and have a complete overhaul, complete redesign, complete refresh and really putting brand new systems, brand new infrastructure in place. That is just typical of our business in these large enterprise accounts where they’re turning off a lot of old stuff and a lot of fragmentation and sprawl, big clean up and going in with a single platform approach. That’s typical for what we do.

But there are missteps to watch out for, he cautioned: 

One of the key challenges that we have when we work with our ecosystem of integrators and their own professional or services organizations [is] to really drive people very hard towards outcomes. Because if we don’t, a lot of organizations will implement ServiceNow, and they’re very happy. But in reality what they’ve done is, they’ve modernized, they have put their own old system in a new jacket and it looks different and it feels different, but fundamentally, they have not transformed. Everybody is still having the same jobs, and they sort of preserve the status quo and their existing systems. That’s missed opportunity.
So, it’s very much incumbent upon us to really inspire, to drive our customers to higher outcomes. We really started that in 2016 to be much more aggressive, much more proactive to get customers to implement with much higher expectations than they historically might have.

He concluded: 

I mean IT is a conservative profession. People have a tendency to be very incremental in their approaches, and we as a provider really try to break people out of that and embolden them in their objectives and their expectation. The software can do it, the question is whether the organization can?

My take
More from ServiceNow’s London event from Derek du Preez later. For now, a decent set of numbers from the firm that kept Wall Street happy and an increasing list of large value use cases as proof points on view. No-one on the post-results announcement conference call asked about ServiceNow being on Salesforce’s leaked ‘takeover target’ line-up that aired last week. Nothing seen in the past quarter is likely to knock it off that list – which is a compliment, by the way. 
Image credit - ServiceNowDisclosure - At time of writing, Salesforce is a premier partner of diginomica. Read more on: Digital government and public servicesHCM and the digital future of workIT service managementSecurity

