
To say that there is a lot of political tension in the UK at the moment would be an understatement. The Prime Minister’s decision to call a snap election in order to secure a presumed landslide, with the aim of getting a larger majority to make Brexit negotiations easier, was a complete disaster.
To almost everyone’s surprise, the opposition party secured more votes than expected and the country is now faced with a hung parliament. Whilst the Queen’s Speech is due today, which is written by the government and outlines its priorities for the parliamentary period, at the time of writing this, the Prime Minister had still not secured a deal with Ireland’s DUP to support her minority government.
Add into the mix that Brexit negotiations officially began on Monday, with the UK essentially succumbing to the EU’s preferred timetable, it’s fair to say that there is an incredible amount of uncertainty at the moment.
However, and I say this very lightly, one sliver of hope is that Chancellor Phillip Hammond hinted in a speech yesterday that the government may have shifted gears in its ‘no deal is better than a bad deal’ rhetoric, and it seems that Britain may now be heading for a softer Brexit than expected.
Much of the technology industry has been calling for this, particularly given that so much of it relies on European talent for skills (although what will happen to migration rules and borders is still unclear).
But even more promising is that Hammond placed services as a priority for Brexit negotiations over goods – something that hasn’t been mentioned previously, but has been highlighted by lobby groups for tech and digital, as well as trade committees, as being critical. And is a good starting point for those worried about the UK’s digital success.
Obviously we are a far way off any sort of guarantee that this will go to plan – the EU is likely to have its own ideas – but the fact that the importance of services is on the government’s agenda is good news for the industry.
Yesterday, the Chancellor said:
Britain has benefited from globalisation. But we must not turn a blind eye to the growing tide of hostility to it in parts of the developed world. To counter that, we must push for a new phase of globalisation, to ensure that it delivers clear benefits for ordinary working people in developed economies.
To date, much of the thrust of globalisation has focused on the removal of barriers to trade in goods. “Globalisation 1.0” if you like – expanding the opportunities for major goods exporters like China and Germany to sell their products to a larger market.
He added that the UK’s priority, given the comparative size of our goods and services market, must be services. Hammond said:
But our economy is 80% services. And many of our areas of greatest competitiveness are in services – for example, finance and insurance, ICT and communications.
So for the UK to be able to share fairly in the benefits of globalisation, we need to lead a global crusade for liberalisation of services. And we must employ that logic in our Brexit negotiations, to agree a bold and ambitious free-trade agreement with our EU counterparts that covers both goods and services.
Why is this important?
You have to put this within the context of the UK’s economy versus the EU’s, as well as consider how the EU is pushing for greater liberalisation and harmonisation of services activity across member states (which the UK would be excluded from if it were to leave).
Firstly, judging by the Chancellor’s speech, he wants a free trade agreement (FTA) that will cover both goods AND services, as digital trade falls under the latter.
However, we sell more in services to the EU than we do in goods, but the EU sells more in goods to us than they do services. FTA’s usually are limited in their scope when it comes to services. So there’s a good chance the EU will want to focus on goods, and services will be sidelined.
Whilst the UK has a deficit on trade in goods with the EU27 (£89 billion in 2015), it has a surplus on trade in services (£28 billion in 2015).
So basically, our priority is services, which is good for digital, but the EU’s priority will be goods – which is usually the topic of discussion under most FTAs.
Typically services are covered by WTO rules, which are light on tariffs, so that’s not a problem. However, those rules don’t take into consideration the regulations that will impact the trade in services across the EU, so Britain needs to build that into any FTA it signs.
For example, regulations to consider include:
• right of establishment (meaning that individuals or companies from one member state must be legally free to deliver services in another member state either temporarily or permanently, while continuing to be regulated by the authorities of their home country); and
• mutual recognition of professional qualifications (the licensing of professionals by regulatory bodies is subject to the principle of mutual recognition throughout the Single Market).
Greater integration
The importance of a services focused FTA for the UK becomes even more critical when we take into consideration that the EU is pushing for greater harmonisation and liberalisation of services trade across member states.
For instance, the European Commission wants to create an e-card for services, which would allow any member state to liaise with whichever other member state that they wanted to provide services in, via an online portal, and in their own language, to get issued an e-card for the indefinite provision of services in that host country.
For example, a company in Germany could apply for an e-card for service provision in Spain and would apply for the e-card online, submit all its documentation in German, which would be translated into Spanish for approval. Providing the company in German fulfils all the requirements of a service provider in Spain, an e-card for indefinite service provision would be provided to the German company in a matter of weeks.
The idea is that this would reduce red tap and make it easier for companies to trade in services across member states – something that hasn’t worked as effectively as the trade in goods across the EU.
As such, if the UK is outside of this type of close integration of member states in the future, it will suffer even further in the provision and trade of services with the EU, its current closest trading partner.
There is a risk that even if the government manages to convince the EU that services needs to be a top priority within the FTA signed, any deal agreed could soon become outdated as the European Commission does what it can to pull member states closer together – potentially making the UK a less attractive destination for companies wanting to use it as a springboard into the rest of Europe.
My take
It’s good that this is on the government’s agenda, but there is a long way to go. And as I mention above, even if the government does secure a services-strong FTA, as the EU focuses more on services integration across member states, there is still a risk that we could be left behind in future.
Image credit - Images free for commercial use Read more on: CentralDigital government and public services

