

Last evening I was digging into recent data around our stories and discovered that in the last month, 40% of our top 20 stories as measured by engagement are all related to customer success in rolling out a variety of technology.
From this perch that data validates my long held belief that despite all the analysis our team can provide, it is customers speaking to their experience that matters the most. Even more striking, customer stories only account for around 12-15% of our content at any one time. You could argue that if that’s the case then why are we expending so much energy on stories which, while well shared are likely of less interest to buyers. I’ll get back to that a little later.
Of equal interest to me is the distribution among social channels when readers engage with content. In the past, we discovered that despite its many limitations, LinkedIn usually provides by far the most important means of engagement. That fits with the business-to-business narrative we mostly cover in our content because LinkedIn has established itself as THE go to place for the business person.
However, that’s not always the case. Check out the graph at the top of this post. It shows the aggregate shares of the top 30 customer stories over the last month. Most stories were written in that time frame but some keep chugging along in the long tail adding the odd additional engagement. It is immediately noticeable that the most shared story prospered on Facebook. That was a surprise so I went over all of the top 100 stories and discovered this is an outlier. What makes it more interesting is that it is a technical kind of story involving MongoDB.
Knowing what we know about behavior among the networks, it would have made a better ‘fit’ on Twitter. But we have noticed there has been a migration of traffic by a good number of the cognoscenti from Twitter to Facebook. On that basis, we can expect to see more of this kind of activity. Will it encourage us to expend more effort sharing on Faceboook? I don’t think so. Facebook’s algorithms are remarkably crude and geared towards the consumer type of media and brand. That may of course change but for now, Facebook as plenty of runway ahead of it, optimizing the experience for its existing desk side and mobile users.
As a side note and despite protestations to the contrary, I believe it is insights like this that make LinkedIn valuable to Microsoft and a source of contention for Salesforce. To better show that, here is the same data but with the social graphs split apart from the aggregate:

You can easily see that apart from the top outlier, LinkedIn shares consistently outperform the other major networks, regardless of how often a story is engaged with. The is particularly true for the top 10 stories.
Are there any other obvious patterns? No. These stories run the gamut of self-service, omni-channel, HCM, ERP and pretty much everything in between and beyond and across all major industries. There are occasions when a well known brand has been in the headlines for some other reason and that does influence the extent to which people are interested. But we don’t view that as anything more than a halo effect from which we benefit marginally.
Now all we need to do is get better at digging into the LinkedIn data and working to ensure we keep up those engagements.
Now – when you are considering your social strategy, to what extent are you driven by real results rather than the media obsession with Facebook?
Oh yes – that other 60%. One thing that a bunch of us do is provide insights to our partners about what matters and what doesn’t. That is reflected across both technologies and what we see in the field. In turn, that helps partners not only shape the kinds of message they want to get into the market but also augments their customer intelligence data. In short, it performs a valuable function that tangentially helps the buyer. That 60% reflects that in terms of reports on performance, product changes, macro market topics and comparative analysis.
Image credit - via the author Read more on: Analytics planning and data analysis 