
There’s a certain irony that just as Microsoft became the first big tech company to say it was happy with the so-called Privacy Shield transatlantic data pact, data protection authorities across Europe are set to declare it unfit for purpose.
Microsoft – along with basically the whole of the US tech industry – is the kind of company that the more zealous Eurocrats in Brussels have been targeting with increasingly shrill data privacy demands for years. That campaign came to a head last year with the striking down of the existing Safe Harbor agreement by the European Court of Justice (ECJ).
The replacement solution was a last-minute declaration of something called Privacy Shield. John Frank, Microsoft’s Vice President of EU Government Affairs, this week pledged:
I’m pleased to announce today that Microsoft pledges to sign up for the Privacy Shield, and we will put in place new commitments to advance privacy as this instrument is implemented. We believe wholeheartedly that it represents an effective framework and should be approved. It is an important step in enhancing trust in the global digital economy, and we hope that it will be approved as negotiated.
The European Commission welcomed Microsoft’s announcement, in a statement:
We welcome the fact that companies already commit to using the Privacy Shield and complying with its obligations.
But both parties seem to have jumped the gun rather. When Privacy Shield was announced, we noted at the time it was more about PR and calming nerves than a fleshed out agreement. The Emperor’s New Clothes, we suggested.
It seems that the Article 29 Working Party, a committee made up of representatives from data protection authorities from across the EU, agrees with us – and without the endorsement of the Working Party, Privacy Shield is unlikely be raised.
Today, representatives of data protection authorities from all 28 European Union countries sit down in Brussels for a two day conflab and the betting is that Privacy Shield – in its present form – won’t last the distance.
Germany’s data authorities are the most determined to send the Shield back to the drawing board, according to a leaked document posted on the website of the State Commissioner for Data Protection of Baden-Württemberg last week, arguing that it’s not tough enough and is:
not yet in a position to confirm that the current draft adequacy decision does, indeed, ensure a level of protection [in the US] that is essentially equivalent to that in the EU.
One major concern is understood to be that there are six exceptions under which the US authorities can still collect European data in bulk, including counterterrorism, cybersecurity, and detecting and addressing certain activities of foreign powers. All of these are reasons why Safe Harbor was struck down in the first place.
Meanwhile the Irish government is said to be concerned about the impact on jobs if Privacy Shield toughens up the country’s liberal interpretation of existing data protection legislation.
The EU national data protection authorities and the EU’s Data Protection Supervisor Giovanni Buttarelli will issue a joint opinion later today.
The Commission wanted the replacement privacy shield framework to be operational by June, always a ridiculously optimistic target, but now essentially impossble.
Assuming Privacy Shield needs to be modified, that means getting back around the negotiating table with the US government, which has already made it clear that it hasn’t much wiggle room left on this issue.
It’s possible, if unlikely, that the Commission will choose to ignore the Working Party’s concerns and press ahead anyway. If it does, a judicial challenge in the European Court of Justice would certainly result, probably originating with the German data authorities.
If the Court backed such a challenge – and its track record on data matters suggests that’s entirely possible – then Europe would have struck down two data transfer frameworks, with a probable knock-on effect on transatlantic data sharing.
And as for those tech firms who’ve been leaning on insertion of model clauses to address data transfer concerns, there’s bad news there too, with scuttlebutt that the validity of these will be questioned as well by the Working Party.
My take
Should’ve have done it properly in the first place, instead of rushing out a cobbled up ‘solution’ with a ludicrously pompous name after the deadline had passed.
The Commission and the US had over two years to come up with a solution to an emerging data transfer problem and failed utterly to address this. Faults are undoubtedly on both sides, although the obduracy of some of the more vociferous Eurocrats stands out.
What’s left now is a transatlantic mess.
Read more on: Data privacyRegulation 