
In a lot of organizations, we see human capital relegated to HR. That won’t work in this world. IT leaders, finance leaders business leaders, the CEO – they need to be involved, because this is not just the future of the workforce, it’s the future of work. That message could sound motherhood and apple pie, but I think it is a real big shift.
So says, Erica Volini, US Human Capital Leader at Deloitte Consulting. As change goes, it doesn’t come much bigger than a shift in the future of work. But AI, robotics, cognitive computing and digital platforms are changing the workplace for good – and for better – believes Volini and HR has a key role to play.
This is a far deeper change than simply a new wave of technology sweeping through offices. The likes of AI have the potential to change the way we work, says Volini:
We often talk about digital in the context of technology. In our work, digital means mind-set shift as much as it means technology. It’s about looking at data in different ways, being more comfortable with failure to support the move towards innovation, driving collaboration in a way it hasn’t been done before and walking past the traditional hierarchies we see in companies to create what we call a more network of teams.
That mind-set shift ends up, we believe, the differentiator between organizations that are able to truly be digital, versus those organizations that are just adopting digital technology. Companies have always been working towards new technologies and mind-sets; the different now is: one, you have to do it really quickly and two, it never ends.
It’s not that jobs will be lost and workers on the scrap heap, replaced by robot. Instead, says Volini:
Our view is that it’s not going to be the job that’s going to be automated, but the tasks in the job.”
There are always going to be elements of work that cannot be automated and need the human touch. But jobs will change and although some jobs will disappear, more will spring up in their place.
Volini uses the example of a major hotel chain. On the face of it, replacing concierges with technology makes sense: you could see what restaurants are available or make reservations. But instead of replace concierges with automation, the hotel chain changed the role:
What they’ve done is replace the concierges with what they are calling experience managers. The idea is that what we can’t replace with a robot is someone who understands, who lives in the environment in that city, who can answer questions like: in four hours what can I do in this city if I’m interested in X, Y and Z?
I think that’s a great example of what’s happening, because companies are using automation to deal with tasks that are routine and easily automate, but they are not stopping there, they are thinking about what new types of work can be brought in in order to enhance the overall experience.
Skill shift
This area of customer service and experience is going to be key – but that means a shift in skills. The real difficulty, she notes, is not introducing the technology, but upskilling, reskilling and hiring talent to operate at a higher level of customer service and provide that enhanced customer experience:
Where do they find those individuals? Is it simply about providing new skills to their existing workforce? Do they have to supplement their workforce and when they do, do they do it through full-time employees or can they take advantage of the gig workforce or contingent workers who might be out there? Now, because there are so many alternate talent models out there, that’s actually the harder challenge than technology.
Volini believes that there is going to be massive investment in finding and retraining these people in corporations. But there will also be an increasing emphasis on forging partnerships between corporations, universities and communities to widen the talent pool, she says:
It’s also about the communities. We have a lot of governors and majors thinking about ‘how do I make my city the place where I can attract companies?; how do I create my own skilled workforces so that companies want to come here’.
This shift in mind-set and the different talent needed to work in this different work landscape falls firmly in the remit of HR, according to Volini:
HR’s always been in the business of finding new talent. Today’s HR organization needs to take a step back and actually create a partnership with the business and with IT to be able say: how are the work processes changing, how do we imagine that work is changing moving forward and what’s the pace of that change?
Where does automation fit in, how can we use alternative talent models, how does the actual proximity of work change: do you need people on-site or can you have more virtual? HR needs to facilitate that conversation, bring in the right stakeholders and then determine what the workforce of the future look like and that’s the starting point.
It’s quite a starting point and it involves scrutinizing every aspect of HR and the talent program from the very big: looking at organizational structure, to the HR specific, such as how to measure and award performance. She says:
Every single aspect of HR is in the spotlight right now. It also needs to be looked at through the new lens of the workforce and the work itself is radically changing. So to me, that’s a massive call to action for the organization.
The speed at which companies can get to grips with these many questions will determine how quickly they can truly take advantage of the possibilities of this new way of working. Those industries impacted by technology in a major way – high-tech companies, banks and retail – are having to respond to this quicker.
My take
This all sounds great. Robots and people working in harmony, playing to their strengths. So why haven’t we seen a huge uptick in productivity? Technology is not the issue, maintains Volini. Neither is people’s ability to wield that technology. The problem lies with organizations’ abilities to harness the power of individuals and technology.
Beyond that, explains Volini, the problem is that public policy is not moving fast enough to allow organizations to take advantage of the digital world – for example, providing portability of benefits for gig workers:
There’s no doubt that the technology is out there and no doubt that individuals adopt it very rapidly… but in the work world, it’s not only about embedding the technology but getting people to understand it’s OK to think outside the box: to be innovative, to do something that might have a high chance of failure because there may be a high chance of success – that shift in culture is massive and until we make that shift we are not going to see the productivity gains we would expect to see from the technology.

Image credit - Romolo Tavani - Fotolia.comRead more on: Future of workHCM and the digital future of work 