
Shooting for the moon
Earlier this week, the European Commission issued some saber-rattling anti-trust allegations about “abuse of trust” relating to its exploitation of the Android operating system. 
The European Competition Commissioner Margrethe Vestager has decided that Google is in breach of European Union law and given the firm 12 weeks to respond to her or face fines of $74.5 billion and a checklist of demands to mend its ways. 
It says something either about the Commission’s over-inflated sense of its influence over the US tech industry or the myopic worldview of the Wall Street analyst, that these blood-curdling threats didn’t even merit a mention in yesterday’s post-quarterly numbers analyst call with CEO Sundar Pichai. There were other more important concerns to be dealt with.
Google parent Alphabet reported revenue of $20.26 billion (£14.14 billion) for the three months to the end of March, a 17% rise year-on-year. Profits were up 20% to $4.2 billion. With both numbers falling short of Wall Street expectations, the firm’s share price fell 6% after hours. 
What may well have spooked investors were the losses in what Alphabet calls its ‘Other Bets’ business, which focuses on its experimental ‘moon-shot’ initiatives, such as self-driving cars, Google Fiber and AI. That arm lost $802 million during the quarter, up from $602 million in the comparable quarter last year. This is the first time that Alphabet has made ‘Other Bets’ numbers public and that may have scared the horses. 
In stark contrast, Google ad sales brought in $18 billion in revenue, up 16% on $15.5 billion a year ago. In the advertising space, the shift to mobile platforms is top of mind for Pichai. Mobile ad spend is growing four times as fast as total ad revenue, according to consultancy e-Marketer. 
Facebook wasn’t mentioned during the conference call, but its presence was felt like the proverbial elephant in the room as Pichai outlined what he sees as Google’s competitive differentiators in the mobile advertising and marketing space: 

As people turn to their mobile phones in moments of high intent, which we call micro moments, Google has a compelling value proposition. We offer marketers four things: the best ways to target commercial intent at the right moment; the best mobile ad formats; the best reach and range of quality inventory; and the leading measurement solutions.
First, thanks to our unique interim signals, we are able to connect marketers with the right customer precisely the right time. A new example of this is Customer Match, which helps brands reach their most valued customers on Google Search, YouTube and Gmail, with highly relevant and targeted ads. After using Customer Match to reactivate their loyal customers, specialty retailer Williams-Sonoma reported a 50% lift in revenue compared to previous campaigns that didn’t use Customer Match.
Second, we continue to invest in the best new mobile ad formats, tailored to help users find exactly what they need at the right moment. For example, we rolled out Model Automotive Ads, which helps automakers recreate the showroom experience by featuring images of cars alongside helpful information right in the Mobile Search results. On average, participating brands see a more than 30% increase in engagement rate with these new automotive ads compared to standard text ads.
Third, we provide advertisers with the best reach in inventory across many of the web’s most coveted platforms. Marketers like HBO Now are seeing great results from our popular app promotion offerings, like Universal App Campaigns, which helps advertisers easily run campaigns in Google Play, YouTube, Search and across our Display network. In fact, in January, we saw a 200% year-over-year increase in ad-driven installs on Android alone.
And in our burgeoning Programmatic business, we recently rolled out Programmatic Guaranteed, a new way to conduct better deals between advertisers and publishers on high quality inventory.
And fourth, we give marketers powerful measurement tools, so they know exactly how effective their ads are. Just this week, we announced the availability of sales lift studies to help consumer packaged brands better understand how their online videos are driving offline sales. This adds to our significant efforts in this area.

Getting that message across is important right now as e-Marketer predicts that Google’s ad revenue growth is set to drop to single digits (9%). That will still leave it with 30.9% of net digital ad revenues, well ahead of Facebook on 12.0%, and with a third of total mobile ad revenues worldwide, but it’s a downward growth trend that will continue into 2017 and beyond.
To make Google ads  ‘sticky’ for users, a lot more attention needs to be given to the user experience and how ads are displayed. Pichai said the firm has experts working on this full-time:

These are people who have been working on this for many, many years and they are squarely focused on optimizing for positive metrics across users and advertisers. So our utmost focus is making sure, for users, these changes have a positive impact. Mobile is an entirely different paradigm and so a lot of things are counter-intuitive. For example, users are very comfortable swiping on mobile. So we deeply think about these things, and I’m very comfortable about how we are planning this for the very long-term.

YouTube
Pichai also pointed to YouTube as another growth area for advertising. Again using e-Marketer numbers, net YouTube ad revenues were up 40.6% last year and set to grow 21.1% this year. Pichai said: 

As YouTube continues to grow, with great content and engaged users, marketers can’t get enough. For example, Microsoft Xbox hosted a six hour live streamed event on YouTube for their Halo 5 opening week promoted with TrueView ads where 8 million people tuned in, helping it break sales records.

This is, he added, a good example of what, ten years ago, would have been a ‘moon-shot’ initiative in the Other Bets category, but which with investment has turned into a viable business.  YouTube on mobile alone now reaches more 18 to 34 and 18 to 49 year olds in the US than any TV network, broadcast or cable, he said. 
With that base established, the firm is now moving into YouTube Originals, original content available on the premium YouTube Red service. Pichai explained: 

We have released six so far, which are available to YouTube Red members. Early indications are that this is something that’s going to resonate well with users. We are working on a lot more original content throughout the year and we’ll see how it goes…This year, we are on track to release 15 to 20 original series or films coming up. I think that’s an exciting direction we will pursue.

In the enterprise cloud space, the firm has now pulled all its interests under one executive, Diane Greene. 

Enterprises are starting to see the power of combining Google Cloud Platform with our suite of business applications, all of which are infused with our machine learning services. As companies accelerate their move to the cloud, we can help them automate their IT operations, better understand their data, and become more cost effective and secure, while also offering them transformative office productivity.

There are a number of key inflection points that have led to the decision to push harder into cloud services provision, said Pichai: 

We’ve always been doing cloud. It’s just that we were consuming it all internally at Google. But as we have grown, really matured in terms of how we handle our data center investments and how we can do this at scale, we have definitely crossed over to the other side where we can thoughtfully serve external customers. So that’s the first point of inflection.
The second point of inflection for us is as we’ve been investing in machine learning and AI for years, but I think we are at an exceptionally interesting tipping point where these technologies are really taking off. That is very, very applicable to businesses as well, and so thoughtfully doing that externally, we view as a big differentiator we have over others.

A point that Pichai emphasised, presumably with an eye to those “Other Bets” losses, is that he is firmly keeping an eye on the ball of the main business: 

Obviously, we are doing many things, but I tend to spend my time on the core of, you know, our core product. I think we have a unique opportunity to evolve search to be very assistive in how we serve our users and be an intelligent assistant that helps users throughout their needs in context, especially in the context of mobile. That’s an area definitely I spend a lot of time on. 
Related to that, we do think we can do a lot of that by based on our core advancements in machine learning and AI. So that’s an area we invest a lot. And I’m thoughtfully involved with that as well. And third, definitely from a computing standpoint, computing is foundational to everything we do. So thinking through about how computing evolves, be it emerging technologies like VR or how mobile advances over the next few years, so these are all areas where I do spend time on.

All of this enables Google to play a role as an agenda setter, he argued:

Overall, I do think in the long run, I think we will evolve in computing from a mobile first to an AI first world. I do think we are at the forefront of development. So we don’t view it as adapting to it as much as pushing hard and getting there. And so that’s the core of what we do, and we’ll continue to do that.

My take
You have to speculate to accumulate. It’s a bold move by Alphabet to open the kimono on how its ‘Other Bets’ arm is losing money and one that should be applauded. There’s a price tag on innovation and the last thing a firm like Alphabet can afford to do is not innovate. Play the long game – it’s a message Facebook has been pounding out and one that Wall Street needs to get its collective head around. 
As for the European Commission’s latest hissy-fit of Silicon Envy, it’s beyond a joke. The US and Canadian anti-trust regulators have both already rejected the sort of claims that the Commission is now making. There’s nothing wrong with having a checks-and-balances system to protect competition, but to my mind this latest action is more about gesture politics on the part of a relatively new Commissioner out to make her mark. As such it should deservedly end in failure. 
Image credit - Le Voyage Dans La Lune Read more on: Digital and content marketingMachine intelligence and AIMobileUX and application design 