
In spring of 2015, the last Littlewoods home shopping catalog dropped on doormats across the UK. Customers waiting for the usual 1,200-page July issue received a letter instead to tell them the brand was going entirely online. It was the end of an 83-year era for an institution that had been as resonant a brand in Britain as Sears in the US.
But the switch merely turns a new page in the bigger story of how parent company Shop Direct has left physical channels behind to become Britain’s second biggest digital pureplay retailer (online giant Amazon takes the top slot, and several bricks-and-mortar retailers have big online revenues too). Now the group is moving its internal systems to the cloud to continue a multi-year journey of digital transformation. Its CEO for financial services Neil Chandler explains:
Shop Direct has a paper-based heritage. We’ve moved that totally online and we’re looking to be world class as a digital business.
Formed in 2005 from the merger of once bitter rivals Littlewoods and Great Universal Stores, Shop Direct today has grown to £1.8 billion ($2.6bn) annual sales through its online-only department store brands Very.co.uk, Littlewoods.com and VeryExclusive.co.uk. Emphasizing the shift to new channels, its four million customers complete more than 59% of their online purchases on mobile.
Shift to cloud
Behind the public shift to online retail, an even more dramatic shift to cloud computing is playing out. This week, Shop Direct announced a new agreement with IBM to redesign its financial services platform as part of a £50 million ($71m) investment in personalization technologies. This extends a 10-year digital transformation partnership with Big Blue under which the retailer has moved to a hybrid cloud model that will see it embrace new cloud-native architectures, says Chandler.
It would be foolhardy to just sit there and do a lift and shift. These things are never pain free. It would be foolhardy to not take the opportunity to fundamentally rearchitect as well.
We’re moving towards a fully service oriented architecture. Retail is no different to other industries, we all have legacy infrastructure that was architected to be fit for purpose at that point in time, when it was all about what went on within your own four walls.
In moving this out it affords you the opportunity to abstract all your architectural layers, make those far more flexible so you can bolt and unbolt more rapidly.
That’s especially important given the diversification in the number of channels that consumers are using today — retailers need to be able to react quickly as new channels emerge, such as Apple Watch, he explains.
Cloud computing is not nirvana, but it makes it easier to respond quicker to changing consumer behaviour.
More flexibility
Cloud also gives the retailer more flexibility to scale up and down for seasonal variations in demand. That’s a lesson Shop Direct learned the hard way at the end of 2012, when uptime on its in-house servers fell to 57 percent during the busy December shopping season. The retailer moved those servers to Amazon Web Services as a result, before switching to IBM under its 2015 deal. The company says it maintained 100% uptime during the December 2015 season. Chandler says:
Consumer demand doesn’t run smoothly. One of the biggest benefits cloud gives us is we don’t have to physically build that infrastructure and have enough tin to meet that demand.
The thing we have to worry about as a digital retailer is keeping the shop open. This allows us to make something with far more scale far more rapidly than classic on-prem infrastructure does.
Getting its computer systems fit for the digital age will enable Shop Direct to make better use of its other assets, such as its logistics operation and the financial services that Chandler heads up. With the right computing in place, the distribution capability is more than a match for Amazon, he tells me.
We’ve always been a remote retailer. Irrespective of the physical reality, the back side is pretty similar either way.
We believe we’ve got a very optimized supply chain. We believe that’s one of our differentiators.
Consumers look for a greater level of flexibility and secondly — this is even more important — a need for greater certainty. When you’re at home you want to know when the parcel is going to come.
All of those things come about from having a truly digital supply chain with visibility all the way through. This is less about cloud than having a digital infrastructure that allows you to have that product view all the way through.
Acting on data
The ability to extend credit so that consumers can afford what they want when they want it has always been a big part of the Shop Direct proposition.
Our purpose is good things, easily accessible, to more people.
More people is a case of, we like to think of ourselves as almost democratizing retail. Take the iPad Pro, for example. Not having £800 in the bank shouldn’t be a reason you can’t access those products. We provide you with the means to make it affordable at this point for you, Mrs very normal person.
The financial services aspect adds to the mass of data the business holds on its customers. Moving to cloud is crucial to having the compute resources to be able to properly analyze and act on that data, adds Chandler.
We have a huge amount of data. It’s incumbent on us to be able to take that data, turn it into meaningful insight for that customer and make it actionable for that customer.
As you think of the size of the data, that becomes easier to manage through technology like cloud, open source, unstructured data storage, etcetera. Especially when you overlay that consumers are sharing vast amounts of data through digital channels such as social media.
You have the need to have increasingly powerful analytics capabilities, deployed through cloud, or software as a service. You need it where you can execute on it, you want to get it into your shop front.
From my perspective as a retailer, data analysis is great, but what end is it there for? It’s so that the customer’s experience is more pertinent, more relevant for her from your shop than anyone else’s shop. I want her to buy our stuff, come back and buy more, and be happy.
My take
The conversion of the UK’s traditional catalog home shopping brands into an online powerhouse is a truly breathtaking story of digital transformation. Littlewoods even had a high-street presence of more than 200 stores as recently as 2005. All of that physical stuff has gone now, but the business has built itself a new future in the cloud.
Image credit – Littlewoods Myleene Klass summer collection © Shop Direct. 
Read more on: Cloud platforms - infrastructure and architectureCRM and customer experiencee-commerceRetail e-commerce and the omni-channelUse cases 