
Well now, here’s an interesting nugget to come from the latest quarterly Shopping Index to come from Demandware, now part of Saleforce’s Commerce Cloud.
While previous studies have reiterated a common thread of traffic, traffic, traffic as powering digital growth, for the first time shopper spend has outpaced traffic as the main driver for a 12% growth in digital commerce.
The findings are based on analysis of 725 digital commerce sites with 500 million shoppers across 37 countries.
The latest findings are significant, argues Rick Kenney, Head of Consumer Insights at Salesforce Commerce Cloud, who says:
The growth game just changed. Since the inaugural Shopping Index in 2015, we’ve segmented digital growth into two major sources: traffic growth and spend growth. Traffic has been the dominant driver of revenue growth — providing over 80% of digital’s growth at times. But the last two quarters have seen a significant shift –  shopper spend accounted for less than half of the growth in Q4 2016, and this quarter, spend drove just a hair more than half of digital growth.
The shift to shopper spend as a growth driver has two main implications for digital commerce, he adds:
First, the spotlight will shine even more brightly on the site experience, as making visits more productive will be monitored more closely than ever. Retailers will personalize more of the shopper’s journey, creating more impactful areas of the site than just the product detail page; site search results and category pages provide a bigger audience and earlier opportunity to surface relevant products to the shopper. And yes, expect to see a rise in conversion rate optimization practices within digital teams, as test and learn becomes the mantra of high performing teams.
Second, finding net new traffic is going to get harder and more expensive (hello, supply and demand!). The old means of filling the top of the funnel with new visitors isn’t sustainable. Instead, retail marketing teams will continue to refine ad buys and optimize paid channels. In addition, more focus will be put on relevant marketing — we’re looking at you, email. The days of “batch and blast” sends have long been numbered, but relevance will be a key requirement in this next phase of digital marketing.
Use case proof
Commerce Cloud is one of Salesforce’s primary focus areas at present, with an Einstein AI makeover for the offering announced recently. The firm has been chalking up some good use case references, such as luxury fashion brand Diane von Furtstenberg (DVF), which has adopted Commerce Cloud Einstein and Commerce Cloud Store.
Headquartered in New York City, DVF has been a Salesforce customer since 2011. It plans to use Commerce Cloud capabilities to unify commerce across online and offline channels. Commerce Cloud Store will be used to deliver mobile-first point-of-sale (POS) that will enable store associates to engage with their customers in a more immediate and meaningful way.
Meanwhile Commerce Cloud Einstein will assist associates in making predictive product recommendations, based on their customers’ online and in-store shopping histories and interests.Tom Britt, chief operating officer at DVF, says:
DVF is a customer-first brand and we are laser-focused on delivering the shopping experience our customers want, wherever they are.
A more recent win for Salesforce was Ralph Lauren, whose CFO Jane Neilsen says:
We are moving to a more flexible platform for our directly operated ecommerce business through a new collaboration with Salesforce Commerce Cloud. This new solution will deliver a more brand enhancing and consistent experience for our consumers with a lower total operating cost than the platform we were internally developing.
In concert with our actions in our directly operated e-commerce business, we continue to evolve our digital strategy to move with the consumer and drive growth through our online partners. Last year, global sales of our product across both our pure play and department store customers’ websites were approximately $500 million at retail, comparable to the sales volume of our directly operated e-commerce business.
Having strong logos as use cases is a powerful proof point for the business case for digital commerce in retail. There’s certainly still great potential for growth in the retail e-commerce sector. Seldom a week passes without some retail digital transformation use case featuring on diginomica. It’s a basic reality of the retail sector in 2017, a need summed up George Feldenkreis, Executive Chairman at Perry Ellis when he says:
We continue to focus shopper in the digital world…e-commerce was a major disruptor. Everybody knew that e-commerce was going to grow, but some retailers did not see that way and came in with very late. Amazon successfully operated a non-profitable organization which allowed to build an amazing tech company and now it controlled 43% of searches and keep growing worldwide. The next disruptor in the years ahead and a very well be Artificial Intelligence,which will continue to disrupt the all retail models.
That’s the kind of wider mind set thinking that will undoubtedly be music to the ears of Salesforce CEO Marc Benioff, who sees growing awareness around the potential of digital tech in the retail sector:
I was down in Las Vegas with the entire Salesforce Commerce Cloud team. And I’ll tell you, we had over 1,500 people attending our Commerce Cloud conference, and it was amazing to see what’s happening right now in this incredible retail industry and how so many retailers are focused on achieving a new level of customer success by going online or creating hybrid solutions between online and stores.
My take
The Demandware Shopping Index is one of the more valuable trackers of developments and evolutionary trends in the digital commerce space, due in large part to the scope of its poll base but also to the ongoing quarterly nature of its findings. It’s worth the time of any retail CEO panicking about his or her omni-channel thinking to take a look.
Image credit - DVF/Ralph LaurenDisclosure - At time of writing, Salesforce is a premier partner of diginomica. Read more on: Best of Retail e-commerce and the omni-channelMachine intelligence and AIRetail e-commerce and the omni-channel 