
We often hear about, and talk about, the changing face of the market in the race towards digital transformation, with laggards rapidly losing marketshare and newbies quickly rising to the top.
Which is why when I saw the news regarding the London Stock Exchange’s latest FTSE 100 reshuffle, I was unsurprised to hear that retailer Morrisons and security services/outsourcing provider G4S are facing demotion to the FTSE 250.
Although Morrisons and G4S operate in two completely different segments, one being consumer focused, the other being enterprise driven, both companies have been hit by changes in the technology market in recent years as buyers shift their spending habits.
To make the point event more pertinent, one of the likely candidates to be promoted is payments platform Worldpay, which although currently isn’t even in the FTSE 250, has seen a huge increase in its share price since its IPO just a month and a half ago.
These trends serve as a stern reminder to others considering the impact of digital on their business models.
Morrisons
 Supermarket chain Morrisons has had a very difficult few years. Not just because of the pressure it has faced from cheaper European alternatives, such as Aldi and Lidl, in the midst of the economic downturn – but because it was slow to recognise the importance of digital, multi-channel and data in a retail environment.
Morrisons has spent a number of years playing catch up.
The Bradford-based company has been in the FTSE 100 for more than 14 years, but in the past 12 months has seen its share price fall by 17%. New chief executive David Potts has been investing in turning around the supermarket chain’s fortunes, but in March the company reported a 52% drop in annual profits to £345 million.
To give you an idea about how slow Morrisons has moved towards digital, when compared to its competitors, its third quarter results highlighted that online only contributed to 1% of all sales.
Despite simplifying its Match and More loyalty scheme, which customers found overly complicated to begin with, and continuing to work with Ocado for its online deliveries (currently serving around 52% of the UK), retail consultancy Retail Vision bluntly said last month:
Potts is doing as well as anyone probably could but he has arguably received one of the biggest hospital passes in UK retail history. It’s hard to see Morrisons ever making a full recovery, and it’s potentially ripe for takeover.
Only question is, who will buy it?
Morrisons is entering the critical Christmas period in near critical condition.
Being slow to recognise the importance of a multi-channel and digital journey to consumers in their shopping experience could cause Morrisons some serious long-term pain.
G4S
Meanwhile, on the enterprise side of the market, G4S has too seen its earnings more than halve this year, following a restructure that was brought about as a result of a very public scandal relating to UK government contracts.
G4S – along with fellow outsourcer Serco – found itself in deep trouble when it emerged in 2013 that it had been overcharging the British government and taxpayers for an criminal electronic tagging contract.
The firm was found to have overcharged the government by “millions” of pounds and was not only banned from doing business with the public sector for a while, but was also put under investigation by the Serious Fraud Office.
This all resulted in G4S writing off £45 million in “provisions for legacy UK government contracts” and set about a restructure.
From a purely observational perspective, it’s also apparent in the market that buyers are becoming less interested in ‘big bang’ outsourcing, as it arguably doesn’t allow for the necessary innovation to be introduced on a regular basis, over a number of years. This is particularly true in the UK public sector market, where government departments are attempting to wind down huge outsourcing contracts in a bid to become more digitally focused.
G4S
As mentioned earlier, changing habits hitting the group hard.
Worldpay
However, one of the companies that may be set to benefit from the likes of G4S and Morrisons dropping down the scale is Worldpay, which despite not even being in the FTSE 250 yet, could enter the FTSE 100 following an incredibly successful IPO in October.
The payments processor was sold by RBS back in 2010 to private equity firms for £2 billion. However, when the company floated it was the largest IPO in London this year and the company was valued at a whopping £5 billion.
On the day Worldpay had an initial offering of 240p per share, which has since risen to near 300p per share today.
The company has benefited from the changing habits of consumers shopping online and via mobile, underpinning many of the digital payments that take place today.
My take
Although Worldpay is not competing directly with the likes of G4S or Morrisons, it’s clear that those that are digitally focused are fairing better in today’s market. That doesn’t mean you have to be born digital either, there are companies out there that are undertaking a digital transformation and are coming out the other side better off. Take a look at easyJet, or Ryanair, or Marks & Spencer, or even Lloyds Banking Group.
It’s worth taking note, because these are trends that if ignored too long, leave problems that become increasingly hard to reverse.
Read more on: Financial services and fintechRetail e-commerce and the omni-channel 