
When you are selling products and solutions for the semiconductor market, there is a lot of information you need to sift through to find the right product. With so much research performed before contacting a salesperson, you want to be sure you have that information available in an easy to find and digest format.
Silicon Labs recently rebuilt their web experience to ensure it is serving the right information to its market. It’s a story about focusing on key business objectives and the technology that helps it do that. We think a great web experience is all about personalization, but there’s so much more than can and should be done before you even worry about that.
Improving the flexibility and agility of marketing
Silicon Labs is a semiconductor company with a huge focus on the Internet of Things (IoT) market. Think smart lights, cameras, door locks, TV tuners, data center timing products and much much more. When they first started out they were solving complex technical problems for a range of vertical markets. In the last 7-10 years their investment in IoT led them to take a strong focus on the IoT vertical market, resulting in a much wider market (from thousands of customers to tens of thousands.
With a wider market to focus on, Silicon Labs had to transform their operations and digital experiences to scale and serve more customers. One place they examined for improvements was their web properties.
According to Kamran Shah, Director of Corporate Marketing for Silicon Labs, IT had played a heavy role in the website. The development team built a lot of custom functionality with a .NET CMS but found that it couldn’t scale and they couldn’t make changes as easily as they needed to be on top of changes in their products and market needs. It could take up two weeks to get a new product on the website or make changes to existing ones. What they wanted was flexibility and the ability for the marketing team and business units to work on experiences without the need for IT.
Consider the specifications for a product listed on the website. Each product has 50-80 technical specs that matter to customers. But what’s important and what’s different changes over time so marketing needs to update the specs regularly. In the past, IT would have to help do this, but Shah said they wanted a way to allow marketers to be responsive and update the site faster.
A business, not technology, decision
The decision was made to look for a new digital experience solution and a 6-9 month evaluation process took place. What’s interesting is that this wasn’t a technical evaluation like you might think. Shah said they tried to be cognizant of making a business decision and they asked themselves if the technology mattered.
If you think about what is involved in changing technology direction, you might think it would be an important part of the decision. But Shah said the IT team was open and interested in a change, and they wanted the decision to focus on the business requirements. So, for example, even though the development team was a .NET shop, there wasn’t a requirement to for the new CMS to be a .NET platform. What they understood in taking this approach was that they would have to account for a transition period to let their team ramp up.
Some of the core capabilities they were looking for (they had 120 factors) included:

Performance
Global availability
Cloud-hosted/managed services
Design flexibility
Extensible environment

Silicon Labs finalized on Adobe Experience Manager. It fit the bill with much of their requirements plus a couple of other key capabilities:

Experience Manager provides built-in digital asset management
They needed to deliver video content to places like China and AEM was structured to enable them to do this easily

Changes made to support the new website
Silicon Labs doesn’t maintain a product information management system to store product information. Instead, they use tags. Every page and asset is assigned a set of tags that represent what the information is and what product it relates to. Shah said that tags are the language and understanding of the website. Over five thousand technical documents including data sheets, product guides, reference manuals, videos, and images are stored in AEM as assets. Each asset is tagged by product and type of content, and it’s these tags that inform the website where to present the information. Shah said they hired a taxonomist to help with the data structure and data model.
Workflow changes were a major improvement. The marketing team spends a lot of time defining the buyer’s journey to understand what is required on the website. Corporate marketing works with business units to get all the information in place and then leverages AEM to try different approaches and then finalized on the final structure.
This process happens for each product launch and update; they would build a custom experience each time. Prior to AEM, much of this work was done using complex Excel spreadsheets going through many iterations to get to the final update. Now it’s configured within AEM, eliminating three steps and optimizing the page promotion process.
Silicon Labs has a small marketing team, about thirty people edit the website, so they didn’t see a need to create a lot of templates. What they did instead was leverage AEM’s component model (what AEM calls Fragments), creating reusable components and only a few templates.
Shah said this new approach resulted in many more requests from the business units due to the increased responsive of the marketing team. What use to take two weeks could now be done in twenty minutes. One of the things they found they had to adjust was intake management and prioritization of requests, ensuring they were thinking through all change requests carefully.
As for the developers, much of the day to day updates were taken off their plate, allowing them to focus on core requirements and add more custom value such as dealing with complex requirements, different types of accounts, and working on next-generation projects.
Gaining insight to improve the experience
Silicon Labs also leverages Adobe’s analytics capabilities. Again leveraging the tagging hierarchy, they know what content is popular, what customers are looking at them, including if they are named accounts. They can track every asset to the buyer’s journey and can see any friction, giving them the insights required to improve the web experience.
Shah also talked about their use of Adobe Target to distinguish between known versus anonymous visitors, allowing them to treat segments differently. One feature Shah found by accident was segment analysis against a specific asset. He saw this one day and ran it against the kit that is typically available to a customer after they purchase the product. What he found that was many people actually view the kit before they make the purchase and that, in fact, there was a high correlation between people who viewed the kit and then made a purchase. This insight led them to change how they offered the kit on the website.
The integration of AEM tags with their Marketo marketing automation system resulted in 100% tracking of activities on the website. They were able to improve product interest accuracy by 150% moving the right customers through the conversion flow as quickly as possible. With the ability to understand what customers are doing on the website, Silicon Labs was able to improve its engagement accuracy by 35%, engaging at exactly the right time.
Shah also told me that another indicator of business performance for Silicon Labs is page load times. Adobe’s performance and caching architecture made a big impact on their website’s performance.
My take
A couple of things I liked about this story. First, is that Silicon Labs didn’t go into their selection process with technology front and center. Yes, they probably had a ton of technical requirements that the right solution needed to meet, but there were no pre-determined limitations on the type of platform. This opens the door to much more possibilities for a best-fit solution. The fact that they also recognized up front that if they decided to go with a different development platform, they would need to plan for training and ramp up, was really nice to see.
The other thing I liked was the recognition that just because it was now easier to get changes done to the website didn’t mean they shouldn’t step back and think through change requests carefully. It takes time to consider the impact of changes on the customer and their decision-making process. Sometimes a change is just a change; it doesn’t result in any meaningful improvement.
Silicon Labs indicated they have additional plans for leveraging much of the capabilities within Adobe Experience Manager, particularly around the analytics capabilities, but also other features. The realty is, digital experience is never complete, there’s always room to improve.
Image credit - His super abilities. Mixed media © Sergey Nivens - Fotolia.comDisclosure - Diginomica has no financial ties to Adobe.Read more on: CRM and customer experienceDigital and content marketing 