
In a global market where costs keep rising and supply chains have become increasingly complex, manufacturers are facing enormous pressures to remain profitable.
Exacerbating these challenges are savvy consumers who not only expect orders to be more tailored, but also demand faster delivery and greater accuracy, with more choice over when and where to find or receive their purchases.
In this omni-channel environment, companies face an urgent need to address how their supply chain logistics can be enhanced to streamline efficiencies.
But this is no easy task — and focusing on individual aspects or systems simply won’t cut it. To achieve genuine transformation, it’s essential that logistics components be viewed and treated as a unified and inter-connected whole that allows real-time collaboration across the board.
Reflecting this need is a recent study by the Aberdeen Group, which found that up to 92% of companies are actively looking for more collaborative optimization solutions!
This is where advanced Supply Chain Execution (SCE) can play a vital role.
Unlike most legacy systems that offer limited functionality — and even less integration — modern SCE solutions combine Warehouse Management, Labor Management, Transportation Management and 3PL Billing into a single application.
By consolidating these key areas you increase the accuracy of your executions and align intelligence across your entire organization. More specifically, here are six ways an advanced SCE solution will help you.
1. Make decisions based on accurate data
By taking a consolidated approach, advanced SCE provides visibility into all relevant operations. And because it incorporates ‘live’ contextual data from real time news feeds, social channels and comprehensive reporting, your decisions are based on information that’s both correct and current.
For example, a social media stream such as Infor Ming.le offers users the ability to receive shipment order related alerts on their news feed as well as posts with opinions and comments from other users. Additionally, users can use links to drill back to the relevant online information.
2. Take your productivity to a new level
With automation technology that supports Radio Frequency (RF) picking and voice-activated commands, advanced Supply Chain Execution can reduce time-consuming manual processes.
Productivity is further enhanced by functionality that’s tailored to the needs of specific industries such as retail, manufacturing, CPG and distribution,
A dashboard that’s personalized for each user, and an intuitive interface, help all team members learn faster and complete tasks more quickly.
3. Leverage assets and control costs
Advanced Supply Chain Execution consolidates assets and lowers costs across every aspect of your logistics. With powerful tools designed to analyze and streamline operations, you drive and monitor labor efficiencies, decrease disruptions due to demand variability, leverage equipment and space, and increase output.
Sophisticated transportation management also limits travel time and running costs while inventory management tools reduce excess stock.
4. Optimize inventory across your network
While conventional execution systems are typically limited to locating inventory, modern solutions can manage the whole process and provide superior visibility and traceability.
This allows you to track SKUs with precision, execute omni-channel transactions seamlessly and reduce stock levels.
5. Increase the accuracy of your orders
The Warehouse Education and Research Council (WERC) defines the perfect order as one that is ”Delivered complete, on time, damage-free, and with the correct documentation and invoicing.”
By integrating warehousing, transportation and billing, advanced Supply Chain Execution will dramatically improve your order accuracy, reduce costs of correcting errors, and strengthen customer relationships.
6. Consolidate your billing through central control
If you use third-party suppliers as part of your logistics operations, advanced SCE can simplify management of your billing and invoicing by centralizing the process across multiple facilities.
Not only will this improve your collections and help to reduce days outstanding, you’ll also bill customers more accurately through enriched reporting and improved costing models.
Is it time to get connected?
For manufacturers who are serious about operational excellence, it’s time to consider the game-changing capabilities of advanced Supply Chain Execution to consolidate across key areas. With inbuilt functionality to reduce complexity, improve customer relationships, cut costs and boost profitability — it certainly will deliver.
Image credit - Global logistics network concept © Golden Sikorka - Fotolia.comRead more on: Cloud ERP financials and supply chainInforPartner Zone 