
High-flying startups such as Xero, Zenefits and ZenPayroll have raised huge amounts of equity funding to fuel their growth serving the high-volume small business market. But that’s not the only route to winning 13 million users and several hundred thousand small business customers, as the story of Zoho shows.
Apart from sharing the same initial consonant, Zoho has little in common with these other players in its approach to the same market, avoiding what its CEO describes as an investment bubble. Instead, it has taken a bootstrap approach, growing organically and largely by word-of-mouth rather than spending aggressively on sales and marketing.
In this, the second part of my interview with CEO Sridhar Vembu, I explore five key ingredients that underpin Zoho’s business model.
1. Marketing through engineering
As we discussed in part one, Zoho prioritizes spending on product development over marketing and sales. Vembu told me:
We would much rather take the money we would have invested in marketing, put that in engineering and give away a really good product. That’s how we do it …
Our cost of customer acquisition is probably one of the lowest in the industry.
This approach is summed up in the maxim ‘marketing through engineering’, which really means focus on designing a product that is easy to get started and which will earn the customer’s loyalty. Zoho follows a freemium model so people can get started with no initial cost and they begin paying as they add extra users or products. They may start with CRM, email or the newly launched Zoho Expense, then later on they’ll add bookkeeping, project management and other applications in the Zoho portfolio.
It’s much harder to spend a lot of money on engineering, so it requires more discipline, said Vembu:
R&D is hard. You cannot hire engineers fast enough, anywhere in the world. It takes a certain amount of time for an engineer to really get in the groove and start making a real contribution, and to have time to figure out technologies.
Sales and marketing spend — Google’s happy to take our money, Facebook is happy to take our money. If we had a hundred million budget, it’s easy to blow it all.
2. Disruptive economics of cloud
That engineering talent should be put to work to leverage the disruptive economics of the cloud model and really cut operating costs, said Vembu.
The fundamental thing that’s powering the cloud, if I had to summarize it in one sentence, is massively reduced systems management costs.
All of Zoho’s infrastructure is managed by 30-50 people worldwide, full-time, 24×7 round the clock. For the size of the customer base we manage and the number of customers who use the number of solutions in breadth and depth, it’s just an incredibly efficient number.
No enterprise of that scale — if you take Zoho’s infrastructure, what it is actually doing, ported to a corporate enterprise IT context — they would have maybe 50 times as many people to manage it. The cost savings are here. That’s where the cloud really shines.
There also no need to buy any of the high-margin hardware and software of the old enterprise computing world, he added:
Cloud vendors are not just competing with each other. Cloud is competing with EMC, NetApp, Cisco, all these players. They’ve sold these huge amounts of enterprise IT infrastructure but they’re not selling corresponding amounts to the cloud vendors. We don’t use EMC, we don’t use NetApp, we don’t use Cisco, we don’t use Oracle. They are really the losers in the cloud race.
The whole margin is being compressed. We are taking that low margin through and transferring it to savings for the end customers.
3. A solid freemium offering
Sridhar Vembu, Zoho
All that engineering helps make it economic for Zoho to allow free sign-up for its products for a limited number of users — both because the operating cost of providing a free account is low and because the products can then ‘sell themselves’ as those new accounts expand their usage. This ‘freemium’ approach of offering a free product initially and charging a premium when free users upgrade their usage has become less commonplace in the SaaS market but Zoho remains committed to it, said Vembu.
A lot of the cloud companies are moving away from the freemium model. We still believe in it strongly because for us, the economics is, we want to get as many users as possible first.
Get them to use our product strongly — we actually track usage very heavily — and then since we have a portfolio, they will discover more and more of the Zoho suite, and then they end up buying something.
Unlike other vendors, Zoho doesn’t put ads or other revenue-generating back-end services on its freemium products, he said.
When we give something free, it’s really free. No clicks, no ads. We don’t sell data online. Free is part of our branding outreach marketing strategy.
It’s also important for the free version to be a proper product that provides real value. Sometimes this means taking a short-term hit on revenue, he added, for example when Zoho in January increased the number of free users in its CRM product.
It’s not just a token freemium, we actually give really solid product that’s highly useful to a business.
Take our recent CRM example. We expanded our free offering from three users to ten users. Even though it resulted in a slight revenue impact in the short term, we believe in this because we are investing in reducing the cost of customer acquisition. So again it’s this strategy of marketing through engineering.
4. Help where it’s needed
One of the most important elements of any freemium strategy is to make sure the right level of assistance is available without causing a disproportionate drain on resources. Vembu told me:
Given that we sell to a large number of small customers and the price ticket per order deal is smaller for us, it has to be really important for us to improve the user experience so that it doesn’t require an engagement for them to figure it out.
We also need to hold on to them, otherwise we don’t get paid, or we have too much churn. All of this forces us to evolve more rapidly our user experience and that has been the main goal for us.
Zoho also offers live support via Internet chat and a toll-free support number. At the same time, there is a team that provides more proactive support to business users who are perhaps trying to do more with the products.
We have an extensive on-boarding team whose job is to track, okay this person signed up this date, why aren’t they using it 20 days later or 40 days later? We track all these milestones, how much usage is going on, then they will intervene, to ask them, maybe they need help from us, why aren’t you using it?
Zoho is very popular among students and is happy to encourage this demographic because, as Vembu told me, they are “the workforce of the future.” Younger users are increasingly cloud-savvy, he added.
If you look at the new generation of people entering the workforce, they’re really in a sense cloud savvy. They’re on Facebook all the time, they’re mobile savvy. That helps because that relieves us of the load of teaching we have to do to explain our product.
So it’s a kind of a generational change that’s happening. It gets better over time. I believe in 2020 no one will be asking, how does this whole thing work, they will just know. We just have to say why we are better, not why they should move to this model.
5. Integration to other products
Compatibility with existing products is always a key part of any newcomers’ strategy for entering a technology market. Zoho has an engineering team of around two dozen focused solely on integration to third-party products and the vendor releases on average one new integration per week. Often, it will invest in integrations to third-party products first, Vembu told me, even if Zoho has a competing product of its own.
For example, Zoho Campaign, we integrated first with SurveyMonkey before integrating with Zoho Survey. Zoho Survey integrated with Mailchimp first, before integrating with Zoho Campaigns.
We don’t like to force ourselves on customers. If they use one Zoho product, they aren’t forced to use other Zoho products.
While we offer a good product suite with integrations in between, we also recognize that, particularly in the larger enterprise accounts, people will go with best-of-breed, or whatever their existing choices are. So we want to work with all of the existing choices.
6. Don’t force the pace
Funding growth organically rather than pumping in external finance requires the patience to take a longer view. Zoho has adopted a “laddering” strategy, Vembu told me. First it established itself in the individual professional and small business market. Now it is maturing its product set and developing a partner ecosystem to extend its presence among midmarket businesses of a few hundred up to one thousand employees.
Our strategy is to go one step at a time. We don’t believe in forcing the pace. We don’t want to parachute into a high-end enterprise, that’s not our strategy. In part because that strategy kills you in sales and marketing expenses.
Our strategy is, we pay our way. The growth is happening on our own dime. That’s what we like about it.
We have a really strong consumer and small business audience. A lot of the really strong growth is coming from this mid-sized adoption. A few hundred employees is the sweet spot. Maybe one thousand.
In the larger companies, it would be a division or a department. They adopted one serious Zoho Project, or Zoho Creator in an IT department of a larger company.
We rarely play at the enterprise level today, but we are scaling up to that.
My take
It’s worth pointing out that Zoho grew out of an earlier business that has since become a subsidiary, but which provided resources to develop the product in the early days. So there was some initial funding through that route — the venture didn’t start totally from scratch. But Zoho could have chosen to take further funding later on to accelerate its growth. Vembu prefers to stick to this more organic growth path.
It’s less fashionable to build a business this way than the high-octane, VC-fueled rocket trajectory preferred by Silicon Valley’s shooting stars. But it may yet prove a wise choice — time will tell.
Image credits: Businessman spraying dollar sign cloud © TSUNG-LIN WU – Fotolia.com; headshot by Zoho.

Read more on: Cloud platforms - infrastructure and architecture 