

John Chen
In all, but one area, we were in line with or ahead of our key business metrics.
If we’re being charitable, you can’t fault BlackBerry CEO John Chen for maintaining a resolutely ‘glass half full’ mindset. Or at least, you can’t so long as you don’t have shares in the firm.
The problem with Chen’s upbeat tone is that that one area in which the firm missed its targets is the hardware arm, where revenues plunged more than $30 million sequentially in the latest quarter. But the CEO remains adamant that one of his three top priorities remains:
We are going to get towards a profitable device business.
Actually, while that attempted rallying cry is presumably intended to raise stockholder morale, the reality is rather more conditional than that. Chen has given himself – and the firm – 6 months to turnaround the hardware business or it’s time to get out. He says:
My number one focus is to stay in the hardware business beyond September, but I’m also a realist – I’m not going to stay in the business and continue losing money.
So what will it take to make it possible to stay in the devices game? Chen’s lowered his bar here. Previously he’s been of the view that five million devices a year need to be sold to get to breakeven. That’s now estimated to be three million.
For the past quarter, 600,000 units were revenue-recognized, down 100,000 on a sequential quarter basis. So even the three million annual run rate is out of reach at present, although less so than the completely unattainable five million figure would be.
The big launch of the Priv handset last fall doesn’t appear to have made an impact, although it’s hard to tell exactly what the situation is here as the firm declines to comment on unit numbers sold. Chen does say:
Priv is now available in 34 countries, up from four last quarter. Unfortunately, contract negotiations took longer than planned with certain major carriers, including Verizon. It pushes the Verizon launch out of the quarter. However, Priv continues to receive very positive reviews and net promoter scores.
Our value proposition, that is to offer the most secured Android smartphone for the enterprise, is actually quite strong. We believe [in] this market opportunity, whilst maybe small today, we continue to develop and open up, and we are leveraging this through increased channel coverages.
But he adds:
People do like our Priv, but there is a much more limited audience in that particular market that segment seems to be quite saturated at this point.
Other directions
At the same, the firm’s strategy to drill down on the mobile software market appears to be delivering in spades. Software and licensing revenue for the most recent quarter was $527 million, ahead of the stated targets. That’s allowing BlackBerry to predict annual growth in this area of 30%. Chen says:
We have more than doubled our software business growing faster than the mobility software market.
Another area of potential growth for BlackBerry could come from partnering with major Systems Integrators (SI) to provide security professional services know-how. The firm recently beefed up its skills in that area with the acquisition of UK-based Encription. There’s opportunity here, says Chen, but not without partnerships in place:
You [might] think that somehow I’m going to build a huge professional services organization and be profitable. I’ve been in that business for a while It’s a really, really tough business to be in, to have good margin, because of capacity planning and where all the resources are. So we’re going to be very, very specialized…for government agencies, intrusions and large corporations, intrusion detections and threat analysis and so forth and as well as for the IoT cloud certification services.
In the meantime, I’ve been reaching out to various SI of the world, which [would] love to have a partner like us, that would create and provide know-how. They would like to take it out and we could do some kind of a revenue sharing process going forward. A number of them have resonated with me. None of them where I could announce today, because we’re still working on kind of how they work together. I’m going to try more leverage on partners with some very specialized verticals on ours.
It sounds like a promising avenue to explore, but one that needs attention, again another reason perhaps to offload distractions? But still the hardware business gets a stay-of-execution, which to the outside observer looks like a digging-in-of-heels by Chen himself:
I truly believe that we’re very, very close in being able to break even or start making money in device. I said many times, despite of all the efforts that we put in, if we cannot make money on the device business and it becomes a burden due to consolidation, then I will have to get out of that particular business. That’s not a big secret.
But he has to admit that the continued commitment to hardware is hurting the firm, including among customers:
I say it and that hurts me in front of the customers. A lot of time I go to [present] to a customer, they keep wanting me to explain that, but I think I explained it as a reasonably good business person and that people get it.
But I still believe that we have a shot at it. Hopefully I’m not naive but we do have a pretty good plan with multiple engine firing at the same time. That’s where we are.
My take
I’m all for conviction at CEO level, but Chen’s focus on a clearly sinking-fast hardware division is a bit too close to Yahoo! CEO Marissa Mayer’s ongoing belief that she just needs (another) three years to complete her never-ending turnaround of that company.
At least Chen has drawn a line in the sand with his September deadline. I suspect that he will find it impossible to back-away from that now. Come September, BlackBerry will either lose its hardware business or it will lose its CEO, followed shortly afterwards by its hardware business.
Read more on: e-commerceMobile 