
Unified communications (UC) is one of those tech industry goals that has been promised for so long that most of us have given up hope it will ever arrive. In the meantime, the habit of communicating across a variety of piecemeal channels has become so pervasive that even if there were a single platform that could do it all, we’d find it difficult to change our ways.
Which is why we’re all still slaves to our email inboxes even as we’re phoning each other on our smartphones, hosting online meetings in WebEx, messaging in everything from Yammer to WhatsApp, and collaborating in Slack.
Perhaps that explains why no one seems to have noticed that unified communications is now becoming a realistic proposition, unless they happen to stumble upon it from the likes of Google or Microsoft. After acquiring Skype and then merging it with its existing Lync communications platform as Skype for Business, Microsoft now has a cloud-based offering that plugs voice and video calls directly into the collaboration framework of Office 365. That combination is bringing customers to the platform, says Andrew Sinclair, general manager of Microsoft’s Skype for Business unit, who I met in London last week.
Where people sort of trip over the line, and come to Microsoft is, they end up with half-a-dozen different solutions, and there are half-a-dozen different channels that they’re communicating with people. They’re not getting the benefit of integration across any of them.
Moving to the cloud
Although the Skype name and user experience is instantly familiar, I wondered whether perceptions of unreliable call quality is an obstacle when selling the platform into the business market. Sinclair says Microsoft is addressing call quality by moving the entire Skype infrastructure to the cloud, so that it no longer relies on the peer-to-peer client connections that were the backbone of the original Skype architecture.
Skype was built for a desktop world, so as we’ve evolved through mobile, we’ve obviously had to adapt. We’ve actually moved from peer-to-peer to cloud-based. We’re in the process of rolling that right now.
Business users get the added advantage of connecting into the cloud over private managed network links rather than the more variable connections that consumers use. The key to making that work well, says Sinclair, is persuading organizations to move off their kludgy internal networks in favor of services like Azure ExpressRoute, which bypasses the Internet and connects directly into Office 365 and Skype running in the Microsoft cloud. Sinclair explains:
As we move people from on-premises, to the cloud, they’re getting an even better experience. A lot of the challenges of getting into the enterprise, it’s just misconfigured networks. There’s a lot of mergers and acquisitions, there’s a lot of cobbled-together networks in the enterprise. Surprising, but it’s the truth.
We have services such as ExpressRoute, which is our MPLS connection that we’ll sell you via Azure, which will get you a high quality link to the cloud, where you can guarantee that we’ve configured the network correctly. That gives you a great service.
Having moved away from Lync’s on-premise legacy, the Skype for Business proposition can now provision anything from a standard phone line to a full cloud-based PBX on demand. This is a massive turnaround from the old on-premise world, where setting up phones and email for an office meant taking the time to physically install servers and phone lines and then employing staff to keep them running.
The reality is, companies don’t want to deal with that anymore. They want to move up the stack.
These days, I can go and sign up for a 365 subscription. Everybody has all the apps, all I have to do is download from the app store. And I’ve got a full conferencing solution, I’ve got group video, I’ve got a phone number, I’ve got everything. I can do that in an afternoon, for my entire business.
You can do that because we run all the infrastructure. All you really need is the user address. That’s a revolution.
You don’t get our ops guys phoning up and saying, ‘Sorry, the servers are down, we’ll call you when it’s back up.’ No, these are redundant data centers. If we get a hiccup in Skype for Business, you won’t notice it. We’ll flip over to another data center.
New ways of working in teams
The impetus to move to a more agile, integrated communications infrastructure is driven by the new ways of working that are emerging in a digitally connected world. Teams are becoming more dynamic and fluid and therefore have to change the way they communicate, says Sinclair.
Dynamic, agile, networked teams come together and you get the best people together to do the task. They get the task done, and then they disperse.
That requires an awful lot more fluidity, and above all, it requires the ability to find the right people, and communicate with anybody. Strict hierarchies are all but dead, silos of productivity are all but dead.
It’s the integration of Skype with the Office 365 application suite and tools such as Delve’s intelligent search that brings this fluidity to life, Sinclair explains.
A big part of the way teams are evolving is being able to find the right people. And if that person is in another building, in another country, it’s not serendipity that’s going to find them, it’s the infrastructure that’s going to find them for you.
So if you’re looking for people with the right expertise, you want to find the guy who wrote this document. If you’re in Office 365, somebody mails you a document, you open the document, and you want to talk to them, what do you do? You click the Skype button on the right-hand side, and it calls them.
You don’t close the app, open some other app, find their name, find out if it’s that Andrew Sinclair, work out who it is, contact them in that app, discover they’re not actually using that, they’re using some other product.
So it’s just simplification. It’s simplification without losing functionality, it’s simplification that then adds functionality, which is this ability to traverse across the different apps, and have communication as part of every app.
Sinclair promises more innovation along those lines.
There’s an extreme version of this vision that says collaboration is just the future of everything, rather than a separate app.
We started off as a separate app, but you can see the extreme version where if I’m in Word, and I want to talk to you, and you’re the author, I just click on the author’s name, and I talk to you. If I’m in Outlook, and I’m halfway through typing a mail and I think, well it’ll be so much easier if I just get him on a video call, and I screenshare and I show him the thing that we’re arguing over.
It’s that in-context collaboration. I think this is where we are going to innovate tremendously. We’ve already rolled out a bunch of it on the online apps, we’re rolling it out in the downloadable apps, the executable apps. You’ll see more and more of this.
That integration is also extending into third-party applications, he added, such as the integration with Salesforce that was announced at last year’s Dreamforce.
At last month’s Build conference, Microsoft CEO Satya Nadella spoke about future use of Skype as an interface to the Cortana digital assistant and other software robotics. Sinclair feels the business case still needs to be established for enterprise customers, but pointed to Skype’s ability to use its 300 million-strong consumer user base to try out new functionality and refine the underlying machine learning before passing the results over into the business market.
We launched translation on Skype to consumer over a year ago and we’re rolling out more and more languages. The reality is that’s more of a business service than it is a consumer service. We rolled it out on consumer because we need the volume. We need to be able to train the model, so we need to be able to learn the languages. You can do that when you have hundreds of millions of users.
Sinclair emphasized too how much value Skype still brings to that global consumer base.
The idea that, for free, using a smartphone — which for a good portion of the world is standard equipment — you can talk to multiple people, in high-definition video, with wideband audio.
This is science fiction, and magic to most people.
My take
It’s evident that Skype has gone through a significant transformation since its acquisition by Microsoft — and Lync even more so. There’s still some work to do to fully realize the vision of unified communications that operate in the context of everyday tasks and processes — and it’s still very costly to purchase those dedicated links from enterprise networks into the Microsoft cloud.
So this solution is not for everyone. But it’s certainly much closer to delivering a seamless user experience than earlier iterations and adds another important and distinctive strand to Microsoft’s collaboration portfolio.
Image credit - Via UC ExpoDisclosure - At time of writing, Salesforce is a diginomica premier partner. Read more on: Cloud platforms - infrastructure and architectureCollaboration sharing and digital productivityIoT robotics and AI 