
It wouldn’t be a start-up conference without a panel discussion on how innovation leads regulation and how governments can do more to keep up with the pace of change. And Slush 2016 was no different.
Heading up a panel on the second day, Uber’s public policy senior analyst Guy Levin spoke about how he wants the ride-sharing platform to be regulated, but within the context of how it can help improve cities for governments and the people.
Joining Levin on the stage was Winslow Sergeant, managing director at S&T, LLC, previously chief counsel for advocacy for the US Small Business Administration, and Prince Constantijn of the Netherlands.
The panel also had comments about the recent US general election and the result of the EU referendum in the UK – where all agreed that more needs to be done to ensure that rapid technological innovation is inclusive across society. And that more needs to be done to not isolate huge swathes of the general public.
Uber’s Levin kicked off the discussion by highlighting that it feels like start-ups have growing influence in the world, what with two royal princes on stage at Slush 2016 and Barack Obama editing Wired magazine. Levin said “start-ups are now in the halls of power”. He then asked – does this mean when it comes to policy questions, start-ups can relax? Can lobbyists sit back?
Sergeant said that the reason he went into government was to ensure that he could share the lessons he had learnt in the private sector – but governments need to work more closely with the entrepreneurial community. He said:
I understood what some of the challenges and barriers were. I wanted to be able to work within the system to help make some changes, so that the next bunch of entrepreneurs coming up wouldn’t have to face the same challenges that I went through. I strongly believe in the public-private partnership, I believe that there is a role for government. What we need to ensure is that the entrepreneur works with the government to let them know what they should do and should not do, so that the system works well for both.
But we know that innovation leads regulation, so therefore those that are out on the cutting edge there are going to be those that are out in spaces where rules aren’t properly defined. That’s where there is conflict. There is a need to bring those on the cutting edge into government, to help those that are crafting rules to make sure the rules are flexible enough to accommodate the future.
Prince Constantijn highlighted the efforts made by the Obama administration to improve both technology procurement and to introduce new skills and digital systems into government. For example, the federal government in the US has created digital agencies, introduced open source code sharing and has insourced a lot of tech talent from the private sector. Prince Constantijn said:
I would only trust governments when they actually start purchasing from start-ups. When they start to adjust their public procurement rules to be more innovative, then you can really say the government has got the real picture. Otherwise it’s maybe more window dressing.
The Obama administration has shown a remarkable ability to bring talent into the government from enterprise, from Silicon Valley. That’s really an indication that he meant well. By bringing people in, it also tried to change the culture of the agencies and entrepreneurial. There I think you had an administration did it’s best.
Uber’s experience
Levin also had an opportunity to share some insights into his experience at Uber and how its success has varied from region to region. For example, we at diginomica have followed some of the upsets that Uber has faced in Europe over claims that it is operating outside of the current regulations for transport – with incumbents claiming that this has resulted in an unfair advantage for the platform.
Whether or not this is true, it has meant that Uber has faced a backlash in certain regions and has even been banned in certain cities. Places like London have done what they can to support the platform (whilst facing huge pressure from the black cab industry), whilst cities such as Barcelona and Frankfurt have introduced bans to protect the incumbents. Levin said:
Coming from Uber we definitely see the need for regulatory reform and the challenges that that poses sometimes. The incumbents and vested interests, they’re the ones that will have the longstanding relationships with governments, they’re the ones that will have the longstanding relationships with regulators, they work well in the system as the status quo. How can governments have enough of an eye to the future and balance this disruptive new entrants?
Uber is now in over 70 countries all over the world, over 400 cities. Different governments have approached it very differently. In the US now there is laws embracing ride sharing, in most states in over 100 jurisdictions. But in much of Europe we have had more challenging times.
We actually want it to be regulated, we just want regulation that’s proportionate and smart. So if you look at Estonia and Lithuania, they’re passing new laws to embrace ride sharing. We’ve learnt a lot of lessons and grown up as a company and we are really trying to tell our story about how ride sharing and shared mobility works with public transport and can help solve problems for cities.
Commenting on Levin’s points, Sergeant reiterated his view that it’s important to have the start-ups and entrepreneurs involved in the discussions with regulators so that the regulations allow for new innovation to enter the market. He said:
When you craft rules and regulations, make sure you have the players at the table. The stakeholders at the table. It doesn’t make sense for government to craft rules that will impact start-ups, and those that are going to be impacted are not at the table to explain why those rules will work or not work.
When I was in government, I made sure that when agencies were putting forward rules and regulation, that they had some of the industries or stakeholders, especially the SMEs and entrepreneurs, that they were at the table. In the Obama administration what I often found was that the people writing the rules were out of date in terms of having to deal with the industry.
Political disruption
It won’t be news to anyone that the technology industry has been somewhat shaken by the political upsets in the UK and the US this year. Both the result of the EU referendum and the US general election have left technology companies wondering how this is going to not only impact their trading, but also how they’re going to protect their diverse employee base.
Both Sergeant and Prince Constantijn said that there is a feeling amongst huge proportions of the population that they’re being left behind in the modern world, and the results of the two votes were a backlash against those that have figured out how to work the current system. Sergeant said:
I think what we’ve seen is that those who are in the educated community who feel that they can have the system work for them. They understand technology and they have a role to play and the system can work for them. Then there is a huge pool of people and they don’t know how technology will work for them and they don’t know if they will have a job. So we are seeing a backlash. We are seeing people fearing the future. They are fearing AI. They are fearing the unknown.
Whilst the entrepreneur embrace the changes, but there are those that fear the future and they want to go back to the past. That’s where I think entrepreneurs have to do a better job of selling it, and explaining that there is a role for them to play and it’s not just an exclusive club for a few people.
Prince Constantijn agreed, and he added that the technology community needs to do more to give back to society so it’s not just the elite that are benefitting. He said:
I think there is obviously the rhetoric around technology replacing jobs. And people that are deep into technology think that’s not a problem. But if you see what came out of the electoral processes in some countries, people do think it’s a problem. They’re disconnected with global developments and all of this tech moving. It’s something we need to be aware of.
I also think that anyone involved in building ecosystems and entrepreneurial policy, that the career option of an entrepreneur is open to everyone. It’s not a highly educated tech environment only. You’ve got very good entrepreneurs, business people, sales people, that don’t have to be from Ivy League universities. It has to be accessible.
But entrepreneurship should also be deployed for the good. So it’s not entrepreneurship as an exclusive little club with a lot of highly educated people with a lot of capital flowing in and deploying a lot of technology at a global scale, that’s not the only story. It’s also a story about how we can do good and how we improve our societies and how we can make it more inclusive.
Image credit - UK flag Brexit stormclouds from EU balloons below © meatbull - Fotolia.comRead more on: Digital government and public servicesRegulationThe new professional and IT as a service

