
What does a good day at the office look like in 2017? What will it look like in a few years’ time? And how can technology deliver the workplace experiences that employers and their workforces respond to best?
These are questions that Mike Gedye, executive director at real estate advisory firm CBRE, says he’s mulling over every day. Gedye works in the part of the business that serves occupiers (tenants) of corporate real estate, rather than owners, and which manages around 5 billion square feet of tenant-occupied space worldwide.
CBRE frequently surveys its user base about what it needs from workspaces, he says, and cost, productivity and efficiency unsurprisingly remain the top concerns across the board, but keeping on top of technology is becoming a bigger and more important challenge even for more old-school businesses, as well as pioneers.
This is interesting, because while the general vibe offered by a WeWork, Workspace or Second Home set-up – with its ping-pong tables, free beer and yoga sessions – may not work for more conservative, buttoned-up corporate cultures, the technologies that these co-working environments are so adept at implementing certainly can.
In particular, co-working companies are extremely good at using technology to manage space efficiently, so that it can be divvied up among tenants in ways that maximize profits. That idea could have a lot of appeal for companies with office buildings where seats, rooms or even whole floors sometimes go unoccupied, but still cost money to rent, light and heat. Says Gedye:
Space efficiency is a big concern for many companies, given modern workforce trends. Today, full-time employees might make up 80% or 90% of your workforce, but in ten years’ time, it could be more like 50%, with the other half made up of consultants and temps, and a bunch of AI and robotics thrown in for good measure. So what type of space will you need then, how much of it will you need, and when will you need it?
Smart thinking
Smarter buildings, relying on Internet of Things (IoT) technologies and sophisticated analysis of the data these generate hold the key to managing space in a world where ‘one seat per person’ is no longer the general rule, he says. Instead, the emphasis will increasingly be on matching supply of space with demand for it, even as that demand fluctuates wildly throughout the working week.
Here, Gedye is particularly taken with the idea of a ‘digital ceiling’, a concept being pioneered by Cisco and Philips, among others. In essence, these ceilings incorporate a range of smart devices, including motion sensors, smart air conditioning and LED lighting powered by ethernet. (This gives every light an IP address and makes it just another node in the network.) These smart devices can detect, monitor and communicate with IP devices below – such as a smart turnstile in Reception or an employee’s mobile phone, for example. Gedye says:
A smart building with a digital ceiling will give employees an entirely different experience that helps them to be more productive, while giving businesses the opportunity to develop that intelligence they need, through data, to create even better experiences in future.
So when you arrive in the building, your phone can act as your security pass and you’ll be directed to a room on the fifth floor that’s already been booked for you, where the heating and lighting have already been adjusted to your preferred settings and where you can access your phone extension and desktop. And at the same time, your employer is allocating space in the most efficient way possible and needs less of that space.
Soon, CBRE tenants might be assisted in making those decisions using virtual reality (VR) , following the firm’s acquisition of real estate tech start-up Floored on 3 January. Founded in 2012, Floored’s technology is used to produce virtual, 3D office floorplans. In particular, its Protofit technology assists in preparing ‘test fits’ to help leasing companies find the best space for a particular client, while Luma creates a ‘virtual version of your property’, so that prospective tenants can take an immersive, 3D walk-through and see exactly how a space might be used to best advantage.
This is important, because in CBRE’s Global Occupier Survey 2015/2016, which polled over 400 executives responsible for managing corporate real estate, 79% of respondents indicated that, when it comes to cost reductions, they get the best results from improving space efficiency, way ahead of other options including renegotiating leases (59%), relocating to less expensive locations (26%) or better energy management (24%).
 
Image credit - CBRERead more on: Digital enterprise in the real worldFuture of workIoT robotics and AIUse cases 