
Surjith Singh
Collision 2016 is full of sexy next-gen startups vying for their moment. No, I didn’t expect to run into an ERP startup here, but lo and behold, Surjith Singh, “Founder & Chief Experiment Officer” for Niqotin, proved me wrong. Singh and his thirteen-person team have spent the last four years building indiERP, billed as “Social Cloud ERP.”
Now, every ERP vendor claims to be collaborative and cloudy – perhaps not as blatantly. But indiERP is different: it was designed from the ground up to meet the needs of Indian micro-businesses – a massive but underserved group of businesses with complicated language and technical requirements. At Collision 2016, Singh – the man behind the ruralERP Twitter handle – gave me a demo at his startup booth and explained how Niqotin is doing ERP differently.
From a functionality standpoint, Niqotin isn’t all that different from your grandpappy’s ERP. Singh and his thirteen person development team set out to build a product that was a rich in scope as classic ERP, and by ERP, I mean the “extended ERP” that includes financials, manufacturing, product lifecycle management, CRM, and some HR functions.
The first big difference is price. Niqotin is priced for its market, which is an annual cost of $150 per year, or 9,972 rupees as of today’s exchange rates. But that’s not all – Singh had to design indiERP for a specific type of customer. You might be thinking mobile-first, but that’s not necessarily the case. Singh:
India’s latest generation is mobile-oriented, but many of these businesses are family businesses. I can’t convince people who are 60 to 70 years old to use mobile devices.
Cloud, however, IS important. Many of these older users are working on older equipment. On-site installation would be a logistical and cultural nightmare. So we have two of Singh’s design principles:

must work on any operating system via a browser
must not look or feel like ERP, or no one will use it

Singh’s potential customers have either never heard of ERP, or they would avoid it due to perceptions of complexity and cost. So they need software that looks and act familiar. The opening screen looks very much like the Windows 10 tiles (pictured right).
The processes are intended to be simple: create an invoice, make a payment. Singh has a rule for his development team: no ERP jargon.
But Singh didn’t stop there. He finds traditional ERP unacceptably difficult to integrate with third party services. That’s where the “social” comes in. IndiERP is designed for external stakeholders out of the box:
ERP usually makes it hard for outside stakeholders to access the data. We built IndiERP differently:  we want external stakeholders vendors, customers, even banks, to have access to the platform.
To back up his conviction, Singh showed me a preview of their Slack integration (pictured left). The next design issue is language: Singh’s potential customer base, which he estimates at 40 million micro-businesses of up to ten people, uses a daunting amount of language variations. As Singh explained to me, when you tally it up, there are hundreds of dialects in India, stemming from twenty-two major languages written in thirteen different scripts. Sounds like a great time for the designer. Singh showed me a massive pull down menu that allows users to select their language variation.
Singh acknowledges there is no way they can program indiERP for fluency in every Indian dialect. They chose two approaches: basic translation services, and an emphasis on voice-based interactions. Voice-based connections serve a few purposes in indiERP. Singh isn’t trying to pull voice into text, as the voice to text to ERP journey is fraught with difficulties. Instead, his team designed voice messages to be tied to particular transactions, such as information about a customer order.
This would enable users to dial into the system and leave relevant messages that can be tied to transactions. Using the small device pictured right, Singh envisions workers on shop floors who don’t have their hands free to type, or who are not comfortable typing, leaving information about a production order in the ERP system via voice recognition (the device attaches directly to a PC). For Singh, this is all about making ERP accessible to his constituents, rather than pretending that everyone wants an ERP mobile app, when that’s simply not the case.
My take
Niqotin has plenty of work ahead. Currently they are in low profile mode. Singh says they have thirty customers on a hosted cloud version, but the big push will come after the SaaS release this winter. Why was Singh at Collision? Because he envisions after the SaaS launch that outside investors could play a role.
Though I’m always wary of outside investors, I can see how Niqotin would consider this route. Signh’s team has built a product that seems rich in functionality and appeal to use. While some features like voice-based integration might not live up to their ambitions, indiERP has done a good job of designing for purpose – throwing out design assumptions that won’t work for their audience, and, true to Singh’s title, experimenting with new ideas outside the ERP comfort zone.
The hard part will be building market awareness. For some young ERP companies, ten huge clients would be enough to bankroll their growth. Niqotin needs a broader play. Singh knows they are ultimately playing a volume game, and that will require a different approach to marketing than what I’ve seen from Niqotin to date.
But, as Singh said to me, they aren’t ready for that yet. For now, it’s enough to be here, making their case amidst the Uber wannabes and sexy mobile apps. To which I would ask: what is sexier than bringing nifty ERP software to underserved micro-businesses? Either I am right, or I need to get out more. Please don’t tell me the answer.
 
Image credit - On-site photos by Jon Reed.Disclosure - Collision provided me with complimentary access to Collision 2016; I covered travel expenses. Diginomica has no financial ties to indiERP.Read more on: FinancialsSocialBest of 