
Express delivery of learning
Express’ Adam Zaller is not a big fan of making employees following a list of required courses, because in that way: 

You get compliance, but you don’t get a lot of commitment.

And commitment is what the North American clothing retailer wants from its 22,000, chiefly millennial, employees. 
Recognizing that this ‘app happy’ generation is plugged into social media at play, Express decided ditch its traditional Learning Management System (LMS) and create a social media based learning platform at work. 
The aim of Saba Cloud was to give employees more control of their own learning and development and to give them a platform to learn and share ideas with their co-workers.
It’s all about tapping into the power of the crowd and supporting rather than dictating people’s choices. Zaller, Express’ Vice President of Organizational Development, explains:

I’d rather give people options and recommendations and suggestions – it’s the whole Amazon thing, ‘You’re looking at this, but everyone around you also bought a, b and c’.  People see those folks who are having success taking these courses or reading these articles. That’s one of the things we’re trying to tap into.

The results so far look good. Since the company implemented Saba Cloud in March 2015, training class consumption is up 30% year on year and 80% of employees have taken a development course this year. 
Zaller is rightly proud of this interest in career development:

That’s something I’m really excited about, because just taking a course is one thing, but taking a course that helps you develop along your career path is much more meaningful and helps you stay engaged with the company.

Within Saba, each course page shows who has registered and who has completed that course. People also had the option of putting up their photo in their profiles. Initially, just a few people put their pictures up, then it gradually gained traction and then snowballed until practically everyone was doing it. This is pretty much been the pattern for many of the features of the system.
The benefits are already beginning to be felt with the important metrics going in all the right directions – engagement and course consumption are up, staff turnover and the hours spent on learning in stores are down. Zaller adds:

We’ve been able to maintain or reduce over time our overall training spend – we’re just more effective and more efficient with the dollars we’ve been given.

Meanwhile, back-end administration is “idiot proof” which has enabled the company to cut administrative costs and time by almost a full person. It also means admin employees have more time to devote to course development.
Analytics boost
The in-built analytics is also proving a massive benefit, according to Zaller:

I’m able to look at every single data element on the site and able to swoosh them together or compare and contrast them. It’s been really great for me to start seeing trends on consumption of different courses and then how that’s impacting business as a result and how that’s impacting engagement.

That means Zaller can see which courses are popular and whether they’ve been accessed on mobile devices or through a desktop and at what time of day:

I can pull up the number of log-ins from a store and it can pull up the data and quickly contrast it with our top store data and see trends. It’s been not only fun but rewarding to see the work that we’re doing is having results in the office and the stores.
I’m able to get to a level of understanding and insight that I have not been able to in the past and it’s been very, very helpful for me for building the talent agenda.

This if far more than a course repository, it’s also created a sense of community and a way of connecting, sharing and learning from other employees. Employees have the power to create their own private or public learning circles or groups. Zaller expands:

There was a real hunger and thirst for development and learning from each other, but they just didn’t have a vehicle to do this, so we allowed and we opened up the groups capability through Saba.

So far, there are 68 active learning groups and between 320 to 350 different learning discussions are under way. 
People are actively posting articles or links to websites, discussing leadership or videos – picking up ideas from their co-workers which supplement more traditional-style courses. Zaller is hoping that this involvement by employees will grow:

My ultimate vision with Saba is that anybody can be a course developer. What I mean by that is if they have a selfie video around a skill or behavior, they can put it on the site and people can vote it into the catalog.
That just taps more into that millennial view of wanting to be a socially conscious individual and support the rest of the organization and also have recognition. So you feed off them both by allowing people to be the author of those courses. 
They are able to contribute to the society and there would also be recognition for being experts in their subject matter. There are some things I’d like to make more automated.  – we do little of that today, but it’s not automated, so that’s next on the horizon in terms of features.

Over the coming year, Zaller also aims to more proactively help staff identify their own career paths and plan their strategy – the skills, experience and training – they need to reach those personal goals. Zaller says: 

Even though you want it to happen organically you have to create time for it to grow organically and you have to prioritize it. It sounds funny and little bit of an oxymoron, but it really is true. If you don’t do that, you’re not going to have the build-out you really want.

Express has come a long way in just a year, but the community Zaller’s help create cannot stand still. There’s still a long way to go, he acknowledges: 

It’s about how do we create a community of learning and what does that look like? We’re still at the beginning of this.

My take
This is a great example of the power of social media and the power of communities. It obviously suits its young target audience of twenty-something employee – there were no cultural hurdles to jump over – but its principles hold true for any organization.
Read more on: Digital skills and trainingProductivitySocialTalent managementUse cases 