
Softbank’s justification for buying ARM reveals that Intel need not worry about new competition in the data center.
Just when the summer doldrums were settling in over the tech business and M&A activity was on hiatus in the Hamptons, Softbank shook things up with a $31+ billion friendly buyout of ARM.
At first, the rationale for a Japanese mobile service provider taking on a chip design house isn’t clear, but when you realize that Softbank increasingly has more in common with Berkshire Hathaway than AT&T, it all makes sense. Like Buffett, Softbank’s CEO runs the company more as a benevolent dictator than button-downed executive and takes a long-term view of its investments: make that very long-term, as in 300 years.
Thus, the company’s investments need not fit together like tiles filling in an elaborate strategic mosaic, but start to resemble the diversified olio of a mutual fund. Unlike the technology-averse Buffett, Softbank’s oracle, Masayoshi Son, does specialize in tech-centric information businesses and given that its core operations are as a mobile carrier, the ARM investment makes some sense as a way to increase and monetize mobile traffic.
What Softbank’s buyout doesn’t do is signal a deep-pocketed new challenge to Intel’s horizontal dominance in PCs and servers. Instead, a capital-invigorated ARM means even stiffer competition for anyone trying to win component business in mobile and connected devices.
Breaking down Softbank’s explanation
The materials Son used to explain the deal make clear that he sees Softbank’s  future in exploiting the “next paradigm shift” from mobile Internet to IoT.
As the fundamental intellectual property in most connected devices, the picks and shovels of the mobile gold rush, ARM is instrumental to this shift and should profit handsomely as billions of mobile chips turn into hundreds of billions of smart silicon embedded in nearly everything.
Therein lies the synergy between ARM and Softbank’s traditional service business: all those intelligent, connected, wireless devices will need a network to communicate over. In a Q&A with Japanese press, Son highlighted the strategic synergy between Softbank and ARM, saying “ARM will become central to SoftBank’s core business in three, five and 10 years’ time.”
An area of particular interest is autos, where cars are in the midst of a analog/mechanical to digital/electronic metamorphosis. A slide in Softbank’s presentation highlighting ARM’s opportunity in automotive shows no less than 13 auto subsystems, both large (engine control) and small (body apps like seat, mirror and window controllers) using some version of ARM processor.
With such dominance of the business already, it’s hard to see where Softbank could add to ARM’s success except in the area of autonomous vehicle control and machine learning systems. Here, NVIDIA has a lead with its sophisticated, GPU-based Drive PX platform and ARM needs some serious R&D to catch up.
Autos and deep learning could also be key to the apparent synergy between ARM and one of Softbank’s other big outside investments, Alibaba, where it owns a 28% stake. Indeed, according to the Japanese media account, Alibaba’s founder and CEO Jack Ma called after the ARM announcement and Son said “He was very enthusiastic. He told me that he is really interested in driving the China-ARM relationship.”
Softbank sees IoT, specifically the little pieces of embedded intelligence permeating all manner of industrial equipment, consumer products and wearable devices, as ARM’s growth engine. A table in Softbank’s presentation (see above) shows the market for embedded application processors growing 15% a year through 2020, while it expects mobile connectivity components to mushroom at a 53% CAGR. In both product segments, ARM owns 50-70% of the market.
ARM supplies the brains for almost all mobile devices, either directly through designs based off its reference platforms, or indirectly through architectural licensees companies like Apple, Qualcomm and Samsung use as the basis for their mobile SoCs (the A-series, Snapdragon and Exynos respectively). With the smartphone and tablet markets reaching saturation, the hyper growth phase of these ARM products appears over, however it remains a large and profitable business.
My take
One area that analysts have long speculated, and Intel feared that ARM might invade data center equipment. This was seldom mentioned (outside of embedded chips in network equipment) as a strategic reason for Softbank’s investment.
Despite continued speculation that ARM is a looming threat to take Intel’s fast-growing cloud business, the presentation makes clear it’s a no show and likely to remain that way. Indeed the aforementioned table of ARM sales and market share made clear it has less than 1% of the server market.
ARM makes its money on royalties, not products and despite the high margins in server processors, the volumes are minuscule compared to mobile SoCs, hence ARM is wise to focus on where numbers are measured in the billions. I doubt this will change under Softbank. Indeed, Son emphasized the strategic importance of getting ARM on to even lower-power (measured as both electrical consumption and computational capability) devices for IoT.
So far, those pursuing ARM for servers are chip design houses with an ARM architectural license; i.e. they take the core ARM IP and heavily customize it by designing custom cores and SoC modules.
Companies like AMD, Applied Micro, Cavium and Broadcom are still committed to ARM in servers, and both Cavium and AMCC have shipping products that target niches in the data center. Niche is the operative word. ARM SoCs don’t have the general purpose utility and scale-up performance of fourth-generation Xeons, so data center ARM is focused on particular workloads like network equipment, storage systems and Web servers, where the low power, lots of cores and ample integrated bandwidth make sense.
Despite Softbank’s intention to double ARM headcount over the next five years, I suspect most of the innovation pushing ARM further into the data center will be with license holders, whether the existing component companies or, more likely, the big cloud builders like Amazon, Google and Facebook, not ARM itself.
ARM’s existing use in network equipment is one probable exception given Softbank’s core business and where increased R&D aimed at accelerating network/packet throughput, crypto performance, trusted execution environments and other application-specific hardware modules could provide Softbank with competitive service and operating advantages. Of course, licensees can leverage any improvements in the base 64-bit architecture, but these will likely be optimized for low-power, mobile, IoT and wearable devices, not servers.
Image credit - main story, via Gartner, featured © alexbrylovhk - Fotolia.comRead more on: Cloud platforms - infrastructure and architecture 