
As a society, we’ve recently been focused on the plight of the blue-collar worker and his/her challenges in the age of globalization age, but guess what? The white-collar worker is far from living on easy street. If you understand what the one percent is all about, you might have an intuition that the vast majority of the white-collar world faces much the same predicament of job insecurity and obsolescence due to automation. there is a significant cultural component to solving for this problem on the context of having the right workforce and, at the right price.
The October issue of Harvard Business Review has a special section titled Building a Workforce for the Future that strongly suggests the so-called white collar workers are under just as much pressure as people on the shop floor.
Intellectual work is often highly mobile and much easier to move than a factory and sound business strategy says a business has to be always on the lookout for talent for a good price in any corner of the world. The idea is to be able to move work around and/or be able to spin up teams combining in-house and remote talent to get specific jobs done.
As part of its argument, HBR has an interview with Jeffrey Joerres who led ManpowerGroup for 15 years ending last year. At the start of his tenure the company was a staffing agency focused on traditional office, clerical, and industrial staffing but after 15 years of dealing in the global marketplace, the company now works in highly competitive markets for IT, finance, and engineering talent. Says Joerres,
Lately we’ve seen the emergence of micromarket analysis that reveals geolocated pools of skills. So companies are tapping specific areas for specific skills.
And by geolocation he means places like Bratislava, Kiev, and Krakow. The model is a modification of the 19th century resources extraction economy. Find a vein of talent, mine it extensively and, when the competition shows up to compete with higher wages, move on to the next greenfield. All of this sounds exciting if you’re a talented IT or finance professional in Bratislava but if you aren’t, things can look decidedly unsettling.
Man and machines
So the challenges of mobile jobs and lack of security echo throughout the economy because they are two sides of the same coin—too many people able to accept a particular kind of work vs. rapid portability of that work. The work can go to the employee and leave just as quickly. In the process, the tendency is for these competing forces to push wages down.
Various people here and elsewhere have made the point that the job for people now is to learn to leverage automation to divide work so that machines do what they do best and let people do likewise. It’s an easy solution and without a few facts it’s almost useless because it leaves us not knowing what we don’t know. It’s also untrue because no one since Solomon has been able to divide something this exactly—and actually he only proposed it. But an example from The Second Machine Age by Erik Brynjolfsson and Andrew McAfee, two MIT Sloan School professors, lays out an interesting paradigm.
You may recall that in the 1990s pitting chess grandmasters against the fastest computers tailored to chess playing was a minor rage. Humans like Garry Kasparov were able to beat the machines for a while but then came Deep Blue, IBM’s precursor to Watson, the Jeopardy champion. Although Kasparov beat Watson initially, a few tweaks to the algorithms later Kasparov was on the losing end, however it was not a runaway, the matches were close each time.
From this point, the allure of man vs. machine faded and you don’t hear about such chess tournaments any more the same way you don’t hear about computer Jeopardy tournaments today for that matter. What’s the point? In a coda that reminds us of both the Luddites of the early 19th century and the displaced workers of today, when Dutch grandmaster Jan Hein Donner was asked how he’d prepare for a similar encounter, the said, “I would bring a hammer.” Not much help.
But in a curious turn, after computers proved themselves in the chess arena, a new form of chess competition sprang up that teamed human chess players with off the shelf PCs and chess playing software. From this experience, Kasparov derived an interesting principle according to Brynjolfsson and McAfee,
Weak human + machine + better process was superior to a strong computer alone and, more remarkably, superior to a strong human + machine + inferior process.
Now we should take some license with the idea of process. In Kasparov’s formulation, process equals the software and database used to figure out next moves. That’s good and it mirrors the hoped-for results of artificial intelligence but there’s more. It also includes human oversight, since a more expert player will be able to evaluate potential moves with deeper insight than a novice.
So back to white- and blue-collar workers. White collars have an advantage in that they are (usually) more mobile and can take their skills elsewhere if local conditions are not to their liking. This is much more difficult for a factory worker when a factory leaves town for pure economic reasons but there’s something that unites them – culture.
Work culture
It’s very hard to put a finger on cultural underpinnings of success at work or the success of organizations though we know it when we see it. After all, any CEO worth her expense account will tell you that her company has values, a mission statement, a code of conduct and blah, blah, blah until your eyes roll up but that won’t tell you much. Culture is more than all that, it’s about what employees throughout the organization buy into that counts and understanding this is an exercise in sociology.
As I wrote in my last book Solve for the Customer, sociology’s main concern is the continuum from structure to agency. People adhere to structures like laws, customs, contracts, traditions, and so on until these things don’t work. At that point, they take agency by giving themselves permission to leave the organization, break a contract or the law or try a new political party perhaps. When taking agency, people adopt new structures and the process can re-initiate at almost any time.
So the question of work is a lot of things but it certainly includes a dose of cultural infusion and an important question is what are the cultural structures of a successful company? HubSpot is one company whose work culture I studied and it was highly revelatory because they had done so much thinking about it. They concentrate everything into these seven principles.

We are as maniacal about our metrics as our mission.
We Solve For The Customer (SFTC).
We are radically transparent.
We give ourselves the autonomy to be awesome.
We are unreasonably picky about our peers.
We invest in individual mastery and market value.
We constantly question the status quo.

Others will disagree with the outcomes of these observations and we don’t have time here to go into this in detail but let’s look at this from Kasparov’s perspective. As much as any company might try, the law of big numbers suggests that analyzing your employee pool will reveal a tight bell curve. There might not be any weak humans as Kasparov would say but your best workers won’t differ by many orders of magnitude from the others. The difference with the at large population will be greater, of course.
So the notion of the weak human is not applicable here and neither is a strong computer since you can get a great machine for a few bucks today, which removes an important constraint. Finally, the issue comes down to process and if you regard the list above, each entry has some relationship with a process whether it deals with transparency or selecting peers, these are all processes we participate in or at least ought to.
I am not saying that this analysis will do much to prevent a factory from moving to a low labor cost country, that’s basic economics and it’s a form of commoditization that’s been practiced for centuries. But all things equal, an approach to a company culture that strives to improve processes—especially customer facing ones—from the grass roots will enable an organization to compete effectively long after the competition has decamped. It seems to me that getting there requires an understanding of the work culture impact across these dimensions.
My take
In a commoditizing era like the one we’re currently experiencing, creating differentiation is key, but differentiation based on features or price for instance is not enough. Features can be copied, prices can be reset but what separates great companies is their agility and/or ability to invent or change direction as the market dictates. In technology terms we call this a pivot.
Workforce agility is based on work culture and if you have a culture that supports agility that’s great and even if you don’t, it’s not the end of the world. Great cultures are built over time – driven by leaders that want to bend the curve of their businesses in more favorable directions while recognizing that the conventional approaches aren’t sacrosanct just because they’re old. Culture is the most differentiating thing you can make in your company and it rises to the level of IP.
What are you doing about work culture as a way of protecting the workforce you know you have to both keep and which will also act as the magnet for like minded people in the future?
Image credit - via stock images and the authorRead more on: Future of workTalent management 