
How do you get the investment for IoT?
One of the key issues with IoT is the task of making the case for it that is going to make sense to the board, and, in particular, the Chief Financial Officer. This involves two main functions, proving that the concepts work in practice and generating the Return on Investment (RoI) data that is meaningful.
Both of these are core tasks for CIOs if they are responsible for providing board level justifications for the necessary future investment or proof of past investment success, according to Accenture’s MD of Global Internet of Things Business, Craig McNeil, particularly when it comes to RoI.
That is the challenge, but more and more companies are starting to employ data scientists, and it is them who are helping to uncover the real value of the data. And though we’d love to sell them access to our data scientists we do recommend that they invest in their own, for it is going to be on-going access to their data, and understanding it, that is going to be paramount to success.
He backed away from saying explicitly that CIOs cannot make RoI cases without basing their thinking on real data – instead suggesting that they can always read third party research and make some assumptions. But it was quite clear that his view is that the only way to make real business cases is through using real data.
This does then bring into play a side issue when building a useful RoI argument because real data can only be a historical start point. As with Cloud applications and services generally, while it is possible to predict and measure some of the like-for-like results of IoT, the potential for new applications and services that come from networking and analysing the data available means it is not going to be possible to predict even where much of the future value to the business may come from.
This is something we try and hit right between the eyes. There is a lot of unfair tweeting that there is no RoI with IoT, and I don’t agree with that. I agree that you probably can’t do a RoI for a global business, unless it has a track record of one business for some 20 years. In practice, that is challenging because there are so many things you don’t know about the future, from the cost of sensors through to new ways of doing things.
But if you go back to the idea of testing applied to a small part of a business, it is possible.
As an example, he referenced a mining company client where Accenture worked on data from a single mine. It was equipped with WiFi and a wide range of other automation tools for command and control. So the company took feeds from five data sources from the mining process and put them into the cloud.
 There the company analysed them and started to identify, in real time, where the mining engineers should dig to get a better yield of ore. This was achieved by tracking where and what time the cutting systems were operating, knowing the time it took for the material to reach the pithead assessment systems, and measuring the percentage yield of ore in the material at that elapsed time.
“In that case, it did not even need a data scientist to see the result. Mining at one location brought an obvious, higher yield of ore over mining at a different location. That is an example of the way small proofs of concept can also demonstrate that there is a RoI with IoT.”
Though a good example of both a Proof of Concept and a clear RoI, McNeil did also acknowledge that it did not answer the wider point that the real value of IoT cannot be predicted out into the future and that RoI may not be a relevant concept or metric any more. Was it possible that something different, some measurement of `potential generated value’ or some similar would be better for the future?
I like where you are going with that, it gives a new perspective or paradigm on where we are going. The statement – there is no ROI – suggests that there is no point in pursuing it, which is not an appropriate answer. But what we are finding with clients is that they are not yet ready for the `just trust me’ approach. They do have to see some tangible benefit.
It always used to be said of a certain worldwide services division of a large computer company that customers would never have the conversation with that company where the latter said: `here is the final invoice, it all works, you’re on your own’.
Yet it does seem to be increasingly the case, especially with IoT, that systems will become so complex that some large enterprises at least will always require companies like Accenture at least `on hand’, if not embedded into their business. He did not dismiss this as a likely scenario in practice, even indicating that Accenture had started to structure itself to be available to meet such a need.
It is a complex challenge. We approach it three ways. We try to allow our clients to consume as a
Accenture’s Craig McNeil
service – and they only pay if they use it if they don’t pay, but they still have an account with us, just like at Amazon. Second, we had an IoT service that they can leverage, so they use it as building blocks. Lastly, we have expertise across the board in IoT.
My Take
The issue of finding an alternative to RoI that includes the ability to factor in future value opportunities is something the whole cloud and IoT industry will need to face at some time, for that is where the real story lies. And yes the notion of enterprises having permanent partnerships with sources of expertise such as Accenture must now become part of a growing number of business budgets.
Read more on: Internet of Things 