
Now and then I find something that goes completely against the results of my research and that I must therefore challenge. Such is the case as it relates to technical innovation and resource extraction.
There’s no harm in this challenge. Since The Enlightenment and the concurrent development of the Scientific Method, peer review and falsification (a technical term basically meaning re-running someone’s experiments and being unable to get similar results) have been the tools that enabled us to advance science, technology, and civilization.
So let’s look at McKinsey’s recent article, “How technology is reshaping supply and demand for natural resources” by Jonathan Woetzel, Richard Sellschop, Michael Chui, Sree Ramaswamy, Scott Nyquist, Harry Robinson, Occo Roelofsen, Matt Rogers, and Rebecca Ross.
There’s little to dispute in the opening paragraph that says in part,
Technological innovation—including the adoption of robotics, artificial intelligence, Internet of Things technology, and data analytics—along with macroeconomic trends and changing consumer behavior are transforming the way resources are consumed and produced.
Of course this is true because it’s a tautology; a confluence of ideas that say the same thing and are mutually supporting but may give a wrong impression. The baseball great, Yogi Berra, was an intuitive master of the unintended tautology,
You can observe a lot just by watching
The McKinsey piece goes on to say that:
On the demand side, consumption of energy is becoming less intense and more efficient as people use less energy to live their lives and as energy-efficient technologies become more integrated in homes, businesses, and transportation.
While it’s true on its face the devil is in the details because there are more people using energy. So even if the individual use is more efficient, the aggregate continues to grow. It’s a conundrum first identified by William Stanley Jevons a 19th century British economist and the conundrum is now referred to as Jevons paradox.
Here’s a modern example. A recent story from USA Today quoting the University of Michigan’s Transportation Research Institute points out,
The average gas mileage of all cars and trucks sold in the U.S. in January was 25.4 miles per gallon. While that was up from 25.1 mpg in December, it was down from August’s all-time high of 25.8 mpg. As gas prices have slid, more people have been buying larger, more fuel-thirsty vehicles.
That last sentence is a killer on weirdly linking cause and effect. Compare those numbers to a Prius and yes, I own one, which gets 50 mpg…
Finally there’s this, again from the same McKinsey article:
…resource producers are increasingly able to deploy a range of technologies in their operations, putting mines and wells that were once inaccessible within reach, raising the efficiency of extraction techniques, shifting to predictive maintenance, and using sophisticated data analysis to identify, extract, and manage resources.
All well and good and I have no doubt that the free market will play a decisive role in efficient extraction and use of resources including energy going forward. Even Al Gore, who spoke at Stanford Graduate School of Business last November, has a similar belief arguing that a “sustainability revolution” is underway.
“Market forces are going to be very powerful” Gore said.”Some of the proposals [Trump] made [during the election], like bringing back all the coal jobs,” just won’t make business sense. “Companies and home owners are moving toward efficiency.”
But the thing that McKinsey and most others seem to be tiptoeing past is the ugly reality that while we might be getting better at resource extraction we haven’t and can’t move the needle on the total amount of available resources. In short, we’re running out of those resources. We’re running out of coal, petroleum, fresh water, even easily accessible phosphorus an essential fertilizer for food crops.
That we’re running out is logical and it’s been known since the 1950’s. Think of it this way, the earth is a big place but it is nevertheless finite. Everything in the earth is available in finite quantities and eventually you’ll reach a time and place when that moiety no longer exists. Think of the Passenger Pigeon, once the most populous bird in America and now extinguished by hunting.
Let’s consider the case of petroleum. In 1956 M. King Hubbert, then a geologist and geophysicist working at Shell Oil Company in Houston, Texas, predicted that the rate of oil production in the U.S. would peak in about 1970 and begin to decline thereafter. Hubbert’s prediction was remarkably precise. U.S. oil production peaked that year and began a slow decline. For the most part, Hubbert has been ignored and forgotten by history because as long as there was more oil in some other location, it made perfect sense to continue pumping and not worry about it.
The recent uptick in oil production comes mainly from deep drilling into old oil fields and hydraulic fracturing subsurface rock formations to liberate more oil. But there’s much less oil to be found with fracking which is classified as either a secondary or tertiary recovery technique, essentially a way to squeeze a little more water from a sponge.
An article in The Guardian in 2013 quoted Dr. Richard G. Miller, who worked for BP from 1985 until retiring in 2008 saying, that
…official data from the International Energy Agency (IEA), US Energy Information Administration (EIA), International Monetary Fund (IMF), among other sources, showed that conventional oil [production] had most likely peaked around 2008.
So even with fracking, the peak has happened globally.
Some estimates put the remaining oil supply at or near 1.688 trillion barrels (bbl), enough to supply world consumption of about 80 million bbl/day for 53 years, an estimate that assumes no growth in demand. These numbers were published in the 2014 annual report of BP, the oil giant. Curiously, the links to the annual report are broken and if you download a copy of the BP 2014 annual report you won’t find the numbers. You can find references to this data in news stories of the day such as this one, and this and this from Forbes.
My take
I am an optimist concerning most resource questions and I believe there are many solutions to current challenges. For example according to a recent article in Scientific American,
…with current [solar] technology, using about 0.4 percent of the earth’s surface would be sufficient to produce all the energy (transportation, buildings, industry, electricity, and so on) consumed by the entire planet.
And solar is not the only way out of the maze. Beyond the things we already know about, like wind farming, there are more exotic but very useful technologies coming along like geothermal and space based solar panel electric generation.
My point is that we can’t get on with achieving the necessary paradigm shift if we’re focusing on making our aging paradigm more efficient and thinking that’s enough. And by the way that shift represents the greatest economic growth opportunity in human history. No hyperbole intended or needed.
I’ll end with this. In another article in Scientific American Gregory Wilson, co-director of the U.S. Department of Energy’s National Center for Photovoltaics said,
 We argue so much about the silly politics of climate change and fail to recognize the gargantuan economic opportunity that this presents. The energy system is going to get re-engineered, and someone is going to do it. The Chinese seem to have recognized the significance of this opportunity.
Isn’t that the way we in the West used to act?
Image credit - Pumping Oil Well in North Dakota © Steve Oehlenschlager - fotoliaRead more on: Analytics planning and data analysisInternet of Things 