
There’s just one thing which has been a real issue for Sotheby’s, which is, our tools aren’t very good.
In an age of digital marketplaces and auction hubs, that’s an unfortunate admission from Thomas ‘Tad’ Smith, CEO of one of the most celebrated traditional auction houses in the world, Sotheby’s.
But that admission is accompanied by a determination to put that right, highlighting investment in technology and online capabilities to bring Sotheby’s firmly into the 21st century. According to Smith, this is an entirely natural development and one that it is well-placed to pull off:
Sotheby’s, when you come right down to it, has the online only as a net positive. Why? Because we have a very, very capital-light approach, we’ve got a strong brand, we’ve got a very, very strong promise with our brand, that creates a significant moat between us and others who are doing online sales. We provide promises to clients when we do them. We’re a safe place to do business online.
OK, so that’s the starting bid. It’s backed up by some impressive sounding stats to substantiate Smith’s claims that progress is underway, saying:
Online buyers spent $155 million at Sotheby’s in 2016, up nearly 20% from the prior year, despite the overall sales decline in the art market. Fifty-three percent of all online buyers in 2016 were new to Sotheby’s, up from 41% in 2015.
Another interesting data point has to do with unsuccessful bidders in our auctions, or underbidders as we like to call them. Underbidders are a crucial element to the success in the salesroom. Incremental bids appear to yield an average 15% to 30% increase in the final selling price. As we continue to see many clients choosing online as their preferred method of bidding, it’s interesting to note that in 2016 we saw a 67% increase in the total number of online underbidders in our live auctions.
Although it is early, so far in 2017 the results are also encouraging. During Americana Week, online sales were up nearly 70% compared to the prior year. 40% of the bidders in our Fine Jewelry sale in New York earlier this month participated online.
Improving the experience and opportunity for clients to participate with Sotheby’s online has been a key priority over the past 12 months and into 2017, says Smith:
Our editorial, video and social media programs have been significant factors in engaging clients and driving online participation. Clients who engage with our editorial content are 33% more likely to bid than those who don’t. We are creating more content than ever before and we saw digital engagement across all touch points, including our website, apps and social channels, grow as much as 35% year-over-year, including a threefold increase in video views.
Visitors to Sothebys.com spend 39% longer on our site than that of our main competitor, and we continue to reach an even broader audience through our market-leading social media program, with over 1 million followers and an average weekly growth of 2.9% in recent weeks, all contributing to the 57% increase in online bidders and 32% increase in online buyers that led to the overall totals for 2016.
Notable online initiatives in 2016 included the launch of the Sotheby’s Museum Network which now boasts a collection of over 300 videos. The firm produced its first original series, sponsored by Huntsman, in the form of The Treasures of Chatsworth, which featured one of Europe’s greatest private houses and most significant art collections in 13 episodes and to date has clocked up more than 1.5 million views to date.
Tooling up
But back to the tools and their capabilities as cited at the start, Smith says that there’s been progress there as well:
In 2016, we also launched apps for the iPhone, iPad, Android phone, Apple TV, Amazon Fire and Samsung Smart TV, and we have a similarly ambitious rollout of new features and functionality planned for 2017. One example is a consignment tool that will provide for a more streamlined experience for potential consignors and we anticipate being up and running next month.
It’s not externally that the tech investment is being focused, but also on improving internal systems and processes:
This year, we are embarking on a major initiative focused on improving the key processes where our clients interact with us most, and we already took a number of important steps in 2016.
On the information technology front, we began to bring our operation in line with best practices and improve the flexibility, scalability, and reliability of our systems and services. We migrated the vast majority of our corporate applications and data to the cloud, and we implemented 24/7 tech support and proactive monitoring of our global data network as well as checks and processes to ensure all live and online sales are conducted with minimal or no disruption.
All of this is impressive in its own right, but the question is how ROI is measured? How does Sotheby’s, with its centuries old business model, gauge how it’s succeeding or otherwise in a digital world? Smith says the thing he looks at most closely is what proportion of sales comes though online:
The reason that’s important to me is because I think if you think about the more and more that we do online, the stuff that goes on behind it, the massive consumer CRM stuff, the understanding and insight we have on serving our customers, the ability to use advanced digital techniques to connect the customer to marketing, to connect our salespeople more effectively to our understanding of the marketing, that our customers need, that is effective, all of that stuff behind the underlying sales number just is positive.
Another way to say it is, we just reported last year $155 million, plus or minus, in online sales. Imagine what the character and complexion of the company operationally and in terms of a client experience, looks like when that number is not $155 million but it’s $1.5 billion or $2 billion or $3 billion. It’s a completely different looking company and a very, very – and even more exciting one than the very exciting one we have.
In other words, Sotheby’s is only in the early stages of what Smith believes can be done to tap into the potential of digital reinvention:
Our view is, it’s clear that we reach a small proportion of the world’s people that otherwise could be trading with Sotheby’s. When I look at it, I say, one of the reasons we do that is because we have this fantastic machine digitally that we’re just on the cusp of experiencing the growth with. This is literally [sic] exploding and it will continue to grow, and we’re chasing it and investing in it.
First you’ll see it in the features when you use our tools and then you’ll see it in our marketing, and then you will see it actually in the online sales, and then you will see it in the results. It’s a very, very exciting thing and that’s why we’re investing more in it. We see real opportunity and real growth there. It’s great for shareholders. It’s even better for clients. And by the way, it’s plain fun for our staff.
The online auction space is a highly competitive one, of course, with plenty of start-ups. Even if Sotheby’s has the brand, can it compete with the seemingly more-agile disruptors. Smith takes a firm view on the subject:
We look at it and we say, as far as we can see, the online channel for us is not about disruption, except perhaps that we might disrupt, it’s actually about playing offense. That’s a really great place to be, which is why we’re playing as much offense as we can there and growing it as fast as possible.
For me it’s a special pleasure because I’ve spent nearly three decades, certainly more than two decades, in businesses where we were playing defence on the digital side, and let me tell you, offense feels better.
My take
Observing how global brands with huge legacies adapt to the digital world is always telling. Founded in 1774, Sotheby’s is a prime case in point. As Smith says, it’s early days, but it’s clear that the building blocks for transformation are being put in place, ideally without losing the mystique and glamour of the traditional auction house experience.
Image credit - Sotheby's Read more on: e-commerceRetail e-commerce and the omni-channel 