
A high point of any “influencer day” is when a brave customer (or two) fields questions from the punditry and shares their story. At Intacct Advantage 2016, that lucky customer was Libby Klayman, VP Finance at Sparta Systems, Inc, a leading provider of quality management software.
Klayman with Intacct CMO Clark Newby
Today, Sparta Systems was announced as one of Intacct’s 2016 customer success awards, on the strength of a fast implementation that has generated results: process efficiencies save 3-5 days of manual work per month, with an annual head count savings of $200 – 250K. But some of the most interesting benefits, like real-time operational visibility, go beyond the numbers.
Klayman was frank about what worked on her project and the issues they’ve overcome. Sparta Systems went live early in 2015, after a three month implementation. They now support two hundred Intacct users on the project accounting, and about fifteen business users.
Intacct’s approach is what they call best in class: that means Intacct customers integrate Intacct’s cloud financials with a range of other “best in class” third party systems. Sparta Systems is typical of Intacct customers with several key integrations, including the always-popular Salesforce integration, as well as Concur for advanced expense management, and Avalara for tax requirements.
Intacct evaluation and implementation
So who else did Sparta Systems consider? Klayman:
Most of the typical competitors, certainly NetSuite and GreatPlains were the other two at the top of the list. They both have their pluses and minuses. Intacct was the one that fit, from both a cost and usability perspective. I’m in the software business myself, so I think that consumer and user experience is really critical.
And what were the keys to a good implementation?
It was about a three month process for us. Considering all the integrations that we did, I think that’s pretty rapid. We had a team of people really involved in the project… We adopted the agile methodology – we mapped everything out. We did the anchors and engines thing, where we said “What works well, and what doesn’t work?” and we put sticky notes all over the place. We figured out where all of our pain points were. That got us to focus on what we needed to do – all those processes that we needed to improve, and where the gaps were.
Klayman of Sparta Systems
Klayman says change management kept the scope in check. If they needed any material modifications outside of the agreed-upon scope, they involved the impacted users. If the changes were limited only to the finance users, they had the autonomy to proceed.
Cloud integration – seamless or difficult?
Analysts are skeptical about claims of easy integration. Perhaps we are jaded from years of client-server integration disaster tales. So how did the cloud integrations with Intacct go?
We’ve had seamless integration actually. It’s usually our fault if something breaks; it’s usually not the system [Klayman jokingly relayed a Concur integration snafu that resulted from changing her own password]. That’s actually been the only issue we’ve had with integration for a little over a year now. I have to say the integration with Salesforce is pretty powerful. It’s click-of-the-button, push your orders out into Intacct, create your projects, click-of-the-button create the sales order, click-of-the-button create the revenue contract, click-of-the-button create the invoice. That’s a pretty efficient process.
Post implementation – the biggest benefits
Aside from the aforementioned numbers, what were the biggest benefits? Klayman started with revenue management:
Revenue management has to be first and foremost. Going from these manual processes to automated revenue management withing Intacct has been dramatic. We’re down to a three day close cycle. Being able to have that kind of visibility into the revenue that quickly, and being able to report back out to the board that quickly has been pretty dramatic.
The next gain? Project accounting:
Project accounting by far is the other one that’s probably had the largest impact from an efficiency standpoint. Having that one system of truth, with everything funneling in through Intacct’s automated billing, and all of the insights that go along with project accounting, has also been pretty dramatic.
So has their approach to project management changed, or is it more about the reporting and analyzing the results?
I guess a little bit of both. Again it goes back to visibility – being able to see what’s going on within the project instantly. One of the things we do that’s unique is we actually pull information from Intacct back up into Salesforce, which is something I don’t think too many companies do.
Looking ahead – the wish list
That brings us to the wish list. One of the big announcements of Intacct 2016 was a new custom report writer, which adds significant ad-hoc/adjustable reporting capabilities. Klayman said she is eagerly anticipating that functionality, slated for later in 2017. Most Intacct customers wouldn’t opt to pull information into Salesforce for reporting, but Klayman said she appreciated the flexibility to be able to do that.
Most of Klayman’s wish list items center around reporting, including the ability to report out of multiple objects. For example, the ability to report out of both projects and time expenses, or contracts and projects. But aside from pain points around reporting and a few small requests she jokingly described as “quirky,” Klayman’s focus is on getting the most out of the system. Her team is still discovering the power of Intacct:
We’ve done a lot with Intacct since we went live. I think that’s when we really figured out the power of the system. We’ve been kind of creative with different things. For example, we figured out that the purchasing module was a great workflow tool, so instead of just using it for purchasing, we also use it for expense re-allocation approvals.
Perhaps most encouraging: these operational efficiencies have enabled Klayman to work more strategically. As she said in her testimonial video:
The efficiencies that we’ve gained, in particular around revenue management, have enabled me to get more involved in the strategic decisions of the company, and be more involved in how we’re moving this company forward, and a little bit less out of the weeds, because I have a tool now that automates those processes.
Improved global dashboarding has been a huge asset:
We’re a global company, so having global consolidated financial statements at the click of a button has been able to give us the ability to provide our C-level suite instant reporting, dashboard reporting, and things of that nature. So far, using Intacct we’ve been pleasantly surprised that it’s been able to manage everything we’ve challenged it with.
Final thoughts
I’ll save a deeper evaluation of conference themes for a future piece, but Klayman’s reporting wish list and tight integration with Salesforce were common conference themes. I was honestly expecting customers to tell me about their integration struggles, but I didn’t hear that. Integration simply isn’t hard with Intacct. It’s low on the customer concern list – a genuine surprise to me, and a real asset to their best in class strategy.
Security is high on the CFO agenda here, though several customers told me their security concerns only increase their commitment to Intacct; they are wary of managing security in their own data centers and would rather trust Intacct with that mission. Revenue recognition looms large in the future – just how large remains to be seen. I found most customers had more pressing concerns, but they were happy with how aggressive Intacct has been automating revenue recognition, which has been available since the May 2016 release and enhanced quarterly since.
Klayman’s response to that question was similar: revenue recognition changes are not an overriding concern for her company at present, but they are prepping and looking ahead. She did say that Intacct’s contract management functionality was a “consideration” in their buying decision.
The most interesting question posed to Klayman involved the big picture: process mapping and pain points are tactical, but did anybody ever step back and say “What do we want this company to be, and how can this system help us be that company?” Short version – yes.
We took a step back and said, “OK, we mapped everything out, but let’s think about our business today, because our business is evolving too.”
To Klayman’s point, Sparta Systems is going through their own transformation from on-premise to SaaS offerings. Let’s see where it leads them.
Updated Oct 27 8:30pm PT with a series of very small tweaks for reading clarity.
Image credit - On-site photos by Jon Reed. Disclosure - Intacct paid the bulk of my travel expenses to attend Intacct Advantage 2016. Salesforce is a diginomica premier partner. Read more on: Cloud ERP financials and supply chainCloud platforms - infrastructure and architectureDigital enterprise in the real worldFinancialsUse cases 