
I think there were 13 of us on the first day and there is now just under 400 staff, so we’ve grown incredibly quickly.
That referenced expansion has all happened in just six years, according to Donna Hewett, operations director at global recruitment firm Spencer Ogden, which specializes in placing energy, infrastructure and engineering professionals.
While on day one – and at that time a UK-only business – its Sage HR system was fit for purpose, the system struggled to cope as the company expanded internationally. The recruitment firm needed a system that could handle the different bank holidays and labor laws across all its locations. That led the company to the door of Fairsail’s cloud-based HRMS. Hewett explains:
A big deciding factor in choosing Fairsail was the ability to be able to work in different regions and be able to be fit for purpose for those organizational leaders in those regions, because before there were a lot of workarounds we had to do in Sage.
These workarounds meant it was difficult and time consuming to report on people data, so the move to a central (and trusted) data source was a key draw for moving to Fairsail. It would also be less of a burden for IT and HR, as Hewett adds:
We wanted something in the cloud so we didn’t have a server that needed constant attention and support and we were doing our annual leave and holiday requests the old fashioned way.
That meant someone in HR had to sit there and manually add the holiday information to diaries and systems, which was not an effective use of HR resources. Implementing Fairsail has meant that HR has not had to hire more HR staff this year to cope with the volume of administration.
The last year or so, following the implementation, the firm has concentrated on helping HR get used to the new system and its processes. It’s all gone well, but Hewett is convinced that the best is yet to come:
We’re still investing time and resources in getting the most out of this and that’s going to be an ongoing process. We want to get to is a point where it’s helping our HR team to be proactive rather than reactive.
Over the next year, as familiarity and confidence grows, Hewett expects HR to be increasingly more proactive in the type of reports and services it can offer business leaders. It’s at that point that the board will begin to see a real return on investment.
But for HR and employees generally, the benefits are already being seen. Enabling staff to book vacations and carry out other simple tasks online themselves has been a huge hit with the HR team and employees alike, says Hewett:
They have control over when things get signed off and that makes a huge difference, because they could be waiting four weeks to sign off a holiday. But now can access via app and mobile. So, it makes them a bit more engaged with the business – it’s amazing the impact it’s had.
Previously, Sage-generated HR reports needed to be manually checked and required expert knowledge to produce. Hewett points out:
Every time you wanted a report that wasn’t a standard report (and there weren’t many standard reports), you had to call up support and be on the phone for an hour to get something that was a little bit similar to what you were trying to achieve.
With Fairsail, you can report on anything and everything and once you get that basic understanding of how the reporting works it’s really quite simple.
Speeded-up
It used to take two hours to complete the monthly headcount report. With Fairsail HRMS that takes just a couple of minutes to do. And, notes Hewett, business leaders are always after something that’s not on the standard report:
Every director always wants to see a little bit more. If you send a baseline report out they say: ‘Oh, can I see it like this or like that’, which is then painstaking to do. In Fairsail, you don’t dread those emails coming back, because you know you can get that information relatively quickly and you can trust it.
There are just six in the HR team globally and recruitment and it tends to be an industry with quite a high staff turnover, so a lot of their work on the HR side is onboarding and offboarding, together with performance management and disciplinaries. According to Hewett:
HR people are qualified to add a lot more value, so we don’t want them sitting there doing on-boarding and off-boarding. So we’re starting to look at that and at engagement and retention and hitting levels in terms or retention of staff and hoping Fairsail can help with that.
In a couple of years, Hewett expects Fairsail to be helping the HR team pump out proactive reports looking at performance management or highlighting areas where hiring could be improved:
We will be preventing attrition and preventing poor performance rather than just addressing poor performance and addressing attrition, which is what we’re doing right now.
Image credit - Freeimages.co.ukRead more on: HCM and the digital future of work 