
British listed bank Standard Chartered, which focuses largely on the emerging markets, has delivered a mixed set of half year results as the company nears 12 months since it launched its $1.5 billion turnaround strategy.
Despite a 46% fall in pre-tax profits to $994 million, down from $1.8 billion in the same period last year, the bank did report an improvement in bad debts that seemed to please the market. Also, net profits stood at $394 million, up from a $3.8 billion loss in the previous quarter.
Shares have jumped as much as 12% since the results were released last week.
However, what was obvious from the bank’s message to investors, was that it is continuing to put technology investments and digital engagement at the centre of its turnaround strategy.
We noted recently how the bank has committed to investing $1.5 billion in ‘digital’, following a very disruptive time for the financial sector. Standard Chartered has delivered poor results in recent years and has begun to feel the pressure from digital-first banking start ups that are challenging the status quo for traditional players.
The bank brought in new CEO Bill Winters this time last year, who announced a new strategy for the organisation in late 2015. A key part of this strategy was to step-up its cash investments “to reposition the Group’s retail client systems and digital capability, to reposition its private banking and wealth management businesses, to upgrade the Africa franchise and renminbi services, and to enhance controls”.
Standard Chartered recently announced a new video banking platform, for example, that will be launched in Bangladesh, China, Hong Kong, India, Taiwan, Kenya and the UAE by the end of 2016.
It also indicated that by 2018 it wants paper based on-boarding reduced from 90% to 10%, turn around times reduced from 5 days to less than an hour, online sales increased from 10% to 30% and branch transactions reduced from 80 million to 40 million.
Speaking about the results, CEO Bill Winters said that whilst things are more “uncertain” and “challenging” since he announced the investment strategy last November, and that economies are slower than they were at the time, Standard Chartered is making the right moves when it comes to strategic technology investments. He said:
We have our systemic investments which are the $1.5 billion, substantially upgrading our existing capabilities, both to maintain franchise and extend on the margin and to go from lower margin sets of capabilities to more solutions-oriented capabilities. We’ve got the strategic investments which are similar themes; the digitization and end to end in retail, front-end, as well as backend; the investment in this wealth management platform.
And within the wholesale bank, we have substantial investments improving our electronic connectivity with clients which is a real differentiator today. But it’s several years old now, so we’re upgrading substantially. And as well as piloting and testing some of the more cutting edge areas. So being at the forefront of the use of distributed ledger technology in trade finance, for example, where we have a discrete pilot and venture in Singapore.
New systems
Standard Chartered said that retail banking added over 40,000 priority clients in the first half of the year, as well as over 3 million active digital banking clients globally. It said that it is rolling out advanced mobile and online banking platforms across Africa and pointed to the launch of its video banking in Singapore and Malaysia.
The bank also said that in its commercial banking group it had reduced the cost base and had improved turnaround times for transactions and client on-boarding. Whilst private banking is investing $250 million to upgrade its underlying technology and core banking platform. It hopes that this will increase the number of relationships it has with private banking clients, where it had already added 500 relationships in the first half.
Winters was keen to highlight to investors that these investments were a differentiator for Standard Chartered and that they were heading in the right direction. He said:
The other big thrust on our retail side has been the digitization of that business end to end. We’ve got many best in class online banking systems today. If you live in these markets, you’ll recognize that Standard Chartered online and mobile banking apps are, in many cases, regarded as the best in the market.
We get, awards surveys tell us that we’re very good. Of course, we’re not relaxed about that at all. We’re investing heavily to make sure that we both cement those leads and extend. But we’re also digitizing the rest of our process. Those are big investments. They’re taking years, but we’re very much on track.

Interestingly, Winters also pointed to investments in tackling financial crime as a way in which Standard Chartered can actually win more business. He said:
Financial crime, we have continued to make this a top priority in the Bank, financial crime compliance and prevention. We’ve invested heavily, as you saw in Andy’s slides and as we’ve said repeatedly. We’ll continue to invest to get best-in-class systems and infrastructure. We have a long way to go to get to the point where we are satisfied ourselves.
I can’t make relative comments to other banks, but we intend to be the best-in-class to the point where it’s a real competitive advantage for us and not just something we have to do. We’re getting some recognition for the efforts that we’ve made. I’d say that the tone with our regulators is good. They’ve recognized the efforts that we’ve making; also, that we have further to go.
My take
Standard Chartered obviously has a long way to go. It’s results weren’t consistent and there was plenty of bad to balance out the good. Having said that the bank’s relentless focus on technology investments and keeping up with the pace of digital competition is a good sign. This is one to watch over the coming 12-24 months, and it will be interesting to see whether it can pull it off.
Image credit - Images sourced via Standard CharteredRead more on: Financial services and fintechFintech 