

Innovation by Schultz
Starbucks is playing the long game…Never in our 23 years as a public company has the Starbucks brand or our business been more relevant or been stronger.
That’s the position Starbucks CEO Howard Schultz finds himself in as he predicts that next year will see the coffee giant’s annual revenues top $21 billion in 2016. There may be little sign of the firm upping the amount of tax it plans to pay outside the US, but that’s enough, as several commentators have noted, for Schultz to stand everyone on the planet a free tall latte!
That aside, it remains the case that Starbucks digital transformation efforts have paid dividends. The firm occupies, as Schultz poetically puts it:
a front-row seat at the intersection of the physical and digital worlds like no other company anywhere in or out of retail. Our unique combination of assets that includes a growing global physical footprint of now over 23,000 stores, deep consumer engagement and trust in our brand, millions of customers every day and breakthrough mobile and digital technologies are together enabling us to extend our reach and deepen our emotional connection to customers everywhere in ways that were not imaginable even a few years ago.
By anticipating and beginning to invest many years ahead of the mobile technology curve, Starbucks today is defining customer-facing and partner-facing mobile and retail experiences of the future. And the technology innovations we are introducing are further strengthening our brand, improving our efficiency and in-store execution, increasing our profitability, enabling us to further extend our lead over competitors and, most importantly, enabling us to deliver an elevated Starbucks experience to our customers.
That pays back in terms of customer loyalty which in turns leads to “unparalleled frequency” with which those customers return to make purchases, this demonstrated, says Schultz, by:
the robustness of our business, the unprecedented increases in global traffic we are seeing, and the amount of currency preloaded on our customers’ mobile devices. We continue to leverage all these assets in ways that are accretive to our business and to the heritage of our company.
Mobile upwardly
Mobile and app-centric innovation is key to this, he adds:
Our industry-leading mobile app has emerged as an evolving platform and profit driver of its own, creating multiple touch points that will continue to drive incrementally and create new business and profit opportunities for us in the future.
But the growth in incrementality you are seeing today is only the beginning of an exciting evolution of Starbucks’ business that commercialization of our new proprietary technologies is enabling, and it all is made possible by the investments we have made and continue to make in our mobile, digital, and loyalty programs.
The partnerships we’ve recently announced with The New York Times, Spotify and Lyft are the first of many partnerships that will enable us to increasingly leverage and monetize the platform and our other technology investments.
Through these investments and the best-of-class mobile and digital experience that Starbucks delivers, we believe that we are building an unassailable position that will only strengthen and become more relevant as today’s increasingly mobile-first consumer economy evolves.
There’s no room for complacency however, adds Schultz:
Despite our industry-leading position in mobile and digital today, we are continuing to push the envelope and now have line of sight on the next-generation of features to excite and delight our customers and our partners.
Mobile payment now accounts for 21% of all transactions in our US company-owned stores, and although we only completed the rollout of Mobile Order & Pay across our system 7500 U.S. company-owned store portfolio in September, we were already operating at a run rate of over five million transactions per month. And that figure, believe it or not, is growing by the hour.
It’s because of the amount of traffic we have, the millions of people and the fact that the core customer is a Millennial customer, the most important consumer in the world today, we have many, many companies who want to partner with us and integrate their products or services into the Starbucks Experience and specifically, certainly they want to do that in terms of what we’re doing in terms of mobile technology.
Loyalty
Then there’s the My Starbuck loyalty program, now boasting over 20 million members worldwide, a major asset to be leverage, according to COO Kevin Johnson:
Data shows that My Starbucks Rewards customers spend three times as much as non-MSR customers. The Starbucks digital experience is a key enabler of the loyalty program that engages customers and provides us with digital feedback to constantly improve the experience and attract more customers. It is a virtuous cycle.
Johnson joined Starbucks from the technology sector, not the retail one. He says:
In my 34 years in the technology industry, it is difficult to point to another instance where an in-store experience has been extended to a digital experience in such a seamless and elegant manner. Many others in the food and beverage industry are now trying to follow in our footsteps by building a mobile app.
From what I have observed in the market, Starbucks has built something that is differentiated from all of the others. Where others are attempting to build a mobile app, Starbucks has built an end-to-end consumer digital platform anchored around loyalty. This platform enables us to deliver new features faster, create a more integrated experience, and personalize those experiences for the consumer.
I believe this approach provides a significant differentiation from others who are struggling to replicate the success we have experienced.
It’s a point picked up by Schultz who adds:
We’ve always viewed ourselves as merchants. When we think about the digital experience and the mobile experience with regard to mobile payment and Mobile Order & Pay, the most important thing that we try to consider is the customer experience. As merchants what can we do to surprise and delight the customer so that the mobile experience and the digital experience is not something that’s dilutive but actually something that is accretive?
All those players that are now trying to get into this business, what I notice is that they’re in a utility business. They’re in a commodity digital experience. That is not who we have been as a retailer, and that’s not who we’re going to be as a digital purveyor of the Starbucks Experience.
My take
Starbucks continues to set the agenda.
Read more on: CRM and customer experienceDigital and content marketinge-commerceRetail e-commerce and the omni-channelSocial 