
Jon Yates
The technology sector is suffering from a well-documented skills crisis, with the number of people working in or entering the IT industry unable to keep pace with the rapid growth in new vacancies.
One organization doing its bit to try and tackle the IT skills problem is The Challenge, which has teamed up with Salesforce to launch a technology apprenticeships program.
The Challenge, which launched in 2009, was set up with a basic premise – connections matter. As Jon Yates, co-founder and director at the organization, explains:
There’s rather a simple idea at the core of it – that networks really matter and connections really matter. How do we make sure if that’s true, that we give young people the connections they need to succeed, partly to succeed in work and also that they’re good citizens. How can you vote if you don’t understand your country?
Yates says the outfit designed a simple but challenging coming-of age program for teenagers, promoting social mixing and life skills, and ran it for about 150 kids. The scheme got a boost when it caught the eye of David Cameron, in his pre-Prime Ministerial days.
When Cameron became PM, he decided to roll out the program nationwide. The Challenge was key to growing what has since become the National Citizen Service (NCS), which now serves about 100,000 15 to 17-year olds across the UK each year. Yates recalls that the organization then wanted to take on a new challenge of its own:
About four years ago, I got set the difficult second album problem – what do we build next? How do you give young people the networks at the point they enter the jobs market? If someone is leaving school or college, how do you make sure they’re taking a really good step?
He became interested in the technology world, and got to know the team at Salesforce, who at the time were focusing on issues around diversity and supporting young people. Out of this came a one-year apprenticeship, aimed at school and college leavers, called Step Forward. The scheme, which currently operates just in London, is a complete package for wannabe technologists, according to Yates:
We wanted something that will get you excited about technology, prepare you for a set of interviews, get you a great job, give you the training you need to be really good at Salesforce, give you the mentoring you need to deal with any stuff that’s going on outside of work, and give an employer the ability to hire someone who is trained, keen, affordable, and available and ready to work. The core is connecting people from the world of employment to the world of education.
Stepping forward
The Salesforce program launched in 2016, and Yates says the organization was “overwhelmed with applications of interest” for the 20 places. In its first year, the scheme has apprentices placed with a variety of organizations from one-woman bands to Bloomberg.
Step Forward currently has 200 apprentices overall, including the 20 on the Salesforce program, selected from the 250 London schools it works with. Yates is keen to point out that the scheme is open to students from all schools and backgrounds:
We’ve always been completely unbiased between the most prestigious private school and a comprehensive in the most deprived area. As it happens, we always tend to over-represent people who are poorer, from ethnic minority backgrounds, and who face more challenges. But we don’t overwhelmingly over-represent them.
What a modern-day David Cameron might lack or someone who’s had a very advantaged background might lack is the network and connections to understand what life might be like for everybody else. If someone is going to be the future CEO of a big company, they really need to understand the context that they’re leading in.
Step Forward currently boasts 20 percent higher completion rates than the national average for apprenticeships, and nine out of 10 of its graduates are either in work or going onto further study just a day after completing the program. A year later, 100 percent are in this position.
So what’s in it for businesses? According to Yates, it’s a much cheaper way to recruit tech talent than pretty much any other model. Firms cover the apprentice’s £9,000 salary on top of a £3,000 fee to Step Forward:
If you’re a small company, you can’t afford to spend the time solving that problem. Well, we can solve it for you because we can bring the candidates and get them into your business and train them. If you’re a big company, you could solve that problem but actually there’s still a massive economy of scale of one organization going into all these schools on these companies’ behalf.
Larger firms with a pay bill of over £3m each year are also liable for an apprenticeship levy, which came into place in April 2017, leaving businesses looking for a way to invest their money for the greatest return. Yates adds:
Wouldn’t it be good to spend it solving a significant problem you’ve got, which is getting great talent.
From Salesforce’s perspective, the firm is ensuring a new generation of workers are trained on its platform. In return, Salesforce is picking up the cost and resources for the soft skills training and helping to get companies on board. Yates explains:
Salesforce is priming the pump to get it going. Because of their involvement and their advice, this is the only approved Salesforce apprenticeship in the country.
The Challenge is also benefitting internally from Salesforce systems, and relies on the firm to manage all its programs, activities and participants.
Yates explains that the Salesforce platform is vital for simplifying operations, for example matching students with employers based on skills, locations and commute times; and also keeping costs down for its NCS summer program, when it transports around 50,000 young people around the country:
The amount of money we spend on minibuses is potentially extraordinary. But if all the data is in Salesforce about where everyone exactly needs to go, then we can calculate what is the most efficient way to do this process. We’re minimizing the spend on petrol and maximizing the spend on actual youth work.
Looking ahead, Yates is hopeful that the relationship with Salesforce will help inspire more young people to consider a career in technology. The organization is aiming to increase the number of Salesforce apprentices to between 60 and 90 this year, and is always on the lookout for more IT companies to join the program and help raise awareness of the varied job opportunities in the industry:
Technology is one of the more popular areas but its popularity is held back by people not knowing that much about it. Young people like the idea of tech, so they find it exciting, but they don’t often know the brand names. Even a company like Salesforce, most 17-year olds have never heard of it, and Bloomberg has exactly the same problem. They’re getting most of their careers advice from a parent or a teacher, who also don’t know about these things. Therefore they tend to bias towards the more familiar, which might not be the right career option at all.
Image credit -  Argus - Fotolia.com.Disclosure - At time of writing, Salesforce is a premier partner of diginomica. Read more on: Digital government and public servicesHCM and the digital future of work

