
Katie Buchanan
The secret to ensuring a successful corporate social responsibility strategy is to focus on a small number of “bold targets” that align with your brand, believes Katie Buchanan, Head of Sustainability at Virgin Media.
She joined the company, which provides fixed and mobile telephone, TV and broadband internet services to businesses and consumers, seven years ago and says that sustainability had been a corporate concern at the UK-based firm since it was set up in 2006. 
But it was only about two years ago in the wake of its 2013 takeover by US cable tycoon John Malone’s Liberty Global and the subsequent appointment of Tom Mockridge as chief executive, that such focus really started coming to the fore. Liberty Global is currently Europe’s largest broadband business. Buchanan explains: 

Two years or so ago, we had a lot of short-term sustainability targets, but they didn’t tell a clear story of what we were trying to achieve or impact. The change came right from the top, however. The CEO said: ‘You’ve clearly got some great stuff going on, but we need to focus.’ It takes a long meeting to update someone on 25 goals and our employees couldn’t list any of them. So we made a conscious decision to think about strategy in a more joined up way and to consider what it meant to us. It was about setting a clear direction of travel and painting a clear picture of what we intended to do in order to provide the focus to enable tangible change.

After consulting with people both inside and outside of the organisation, the consensus was to “do fewer things very well” and, just as importantly, to “take a long-term view on the issues that matter most to us”, Buchanan adds. The upshot was the creation of its “Digital for Good” sustainability goals last year, which have also been nicknamed “Five in Five” as there are five of them and the aim is to see them realised within five years of launch (that is, by 2020). These goals comprise:

Nurture an engaged workforce which represents the diversity of our customer and communities
Grow our business without increasing our carbon footprint
Create the opportunities for 100,000 small businesses to grow in the UK’s economy through digital
Transform the lives of disadvantaged people in the UK through digital technology
Improve the sustainability performance of every new customer product.

Positive employer brand
The objective was to write the goals in plain English rather than jargon in order to make them as simple as possible to understand and, therefore, easy for staff and customers to get behind. And a year on, Virgin Media has already made progress in achieving them and hitting its annual milestones in the process, not least in the area of diversity.
Buchanan’s colleague Sharon Murray, who works for the company’s People (HR) function and heads up a three-person culture and inclusion unit that was set up 18 months ago, is responsible for strategy here. But as she points out, her team does not just focus on diversity and inclusion in isolation. It also works to increase employee engagement in the round:

It’s all driven from an internal employee agenda. So the ‘culture’ piece is about working in a way that helps us to get the best out of our staff so they feel connected. But within that, we also focus on inclusion to help ensure the organisational culture is positive for everyone. As to how you ensure it’s not all just viewed as a pink and fluffy tick-box exercise, we saw that the operational lever to pull on there was the sense of collaboration generated under the broader sustainability agenda.

This sustainability message, Murray says, is especially important these days in terms of attracting new talent into the organisation. She explains: 

The next generation in particular are keen to work for brands that are ethical, inclusive and sustainable. It’s hugely important for your employer brand so it’s also important that you don’t just pay lip service to it. You have to have a culture that lives up to the promise and it has to make an impact.

Another important consideration is creating a workforce that is as diverse as your customer base in order to ensure you understand its needs properly. As a result, in gender terms, Virgin Media boosted the number of women in senior roles by 2% to just under a third of the total in 2015, compared with a European telecoms industry average of 20%. The target is to have females occupying two out of five senior roles by 2020.
Influencing change
But the firm still has work to do in terms of ethnic minorities, people with disabilities and members of the lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender communities. For example, although ethnic minority workers are well-represented in customer-facing roles such as retail and call centres, there appear to be issues around career paths and career progression. Murray says: 

We’ve been engaging with people to try and understand their day-to-day experience so they’ll feel comfortable disclosing their situation to us. But the aim is to set concrete goals once we understand the opportunities and challenges and how best we can support people. It may seem like softer stuff, but in the longer term, we’ll also look to actively recruit with diversity in mind. 

The organisation has also consolidated the number of local charities its supports across the UK from 31 to a single national one in the form of Scope , which represents the interests of people with disabilities. The aim of the move, says Buchanan, was to have “a bigger social impact”. She explains: 

We as a company are about digital technology so it’s about seeing how we can use it to drive and transform people’s lives. So when setting our goals, one place to start was with the idea of digital innovation. The idea is that your approach to sustainability has to sit with your brand because it has to be true to the business. So align your brand – I’ve leant on that over the years, especially for communications.

Buchanan’s team of five sits within the corporate affairs function, which also houses regulatory and communications activities. As inclusion is considered an important sustainability issue, she works closely with Murray who is a “key stakeholder”. But her team’s main goal is to “drive sustainability performance and progress and have the governance in place to do so”. Buchanan says:

You need really good, clear governance and accountability. So we have an executive member who is responsible for each of our goals, with sub-committees beneath to drive things. Ensuring accountability at the top is very important as the goals reflect our commercial strategy and so we meet with executive members every quarter. 

Another role of Buchanan’s team is to position and communicate the organisation’s sustainability agenda both internally and externally and to encourage employees to live it while at work. Murray has a similar influencing role. As she concludes:

We guide strategy and thought leadership, but it’s not our job to ensure everyone feels included or engaged. Our role is to influence change, not to make sure it happens ourselves. It’s about building strong relationships and working very closely with other key departments to encourage people to embed it into their daily practice. That’s what works.

My take
While ‘sustainability’ can seem like a big topic, it seems like one of the secrets to ensuring initiatives are, ehem, sustainable is to break them down into small, manageable, very focused chunks and align them with corporate strategy and goals.
Although Virgin Media’s sustainability efforts in general, and diversity activities in particular, are at different levels of maturity, the fact that the provider has a clearly articulated roadmap that does just that should stand it in good stead. 
Image credit - Virgin Media Read more on: Digital skills and trainingDiversityHCM and the digital future of work 