

SuiteWorld
The announcement by Netsuite CEO, Zach Nelson of a formal partnership with former bete noir  Microsoft has some hidden benefits for Netsuite that were perhaps not immediately apparent during the SuiteWorld keynote presentation.
To revisit the main points, NetSuite and Microsoft are palling up to connect the former’s cloud ERP tools to Office 365, Windows and Azure. Deliverables will include:

A  link between NetSuite’s software and Microsoft’s Azure Active Directory that will let customers take advantage of single sign-on to applications, and centralised management of user authentication and passwords.
Connecting NetSuite’s ERP tools and Microsoft’s Office 365 online productivity suite, letting users access both suites via a single interface.
Allowing customers to integrate NetSuite data with Excel and Power BI for Office 365.
NetSuite will also move off Amazon Web Services and onto Azure as its preferred cloud infrastructure provider.

According to Netsuite’s Chief Marketing Officer Fred Studer, one of the key attractions is the coming of the Windows 10 operating system and the potential for a soup-to-nuts, write once, use everywhere common environment that stretches from smartphones to large datacenters.


Studer told me:


It is an important part of our thinking. [CTO] Evan [Goldberg] started working with it a couple of months ago and raves about it. We will certainly be exploiting it.


Fred Studer
But it is not the only advantage he sees in the new relationship. For example, Netsuite will be bundling Office 365 into the Netsuite as a standard offering, on the basis that the vast majority of its customers are already users of Microsoft Office.


Perhaps more important, the fact that Netsuite is being moved off Amazon AWS and onto Microsoft Azure as the host platform opens up some new possibilities to add BI and analytical services.
This was picked by a number of analyst commentators as a key point. For example Holger Mueller notes:
That is a key win for Azure, giving the catch up Azure is playing with AWS. It does not mention where NetSuite runs production – which is a larger and harder engineering problem to address. But Azure runs Oracle, so what is not happening today is something that could happen tomorrow.
If NetSuite can offload its Capex spending into datacenters to a partner like Microsoft, it will only be a good find for overall investment into product at NetSuite. We see Infor playing this card successfully (only with AWS).
Studer’s pitch here is that the ability to use Azure’s resources to provide comparative benchmarking capabilities, where individual businesses can track their own operations and performance and compare them with the average results for specific functions across the whole dataset of users.


This has long been a target service offering, but has always been considered difficult to provide with any degree of consistency and reliability. Now it looks as though the Microsoft partnership has given the company the way to achieve this.
Quid pro quo?


Interesting to note here that, despite having Netsuite bundle Office 365, there is no obvious reciprocation on the part of Microsoft.
As an ex-Microsoftie himself, Studer could see the funny side of being asked whether the men and women from Redmond end up reselling Netsuite or perhaps short-life’ing some elements of its Dynamics product line:


I was at Microsoft when the partnership with Salesforce was formed, and that did make for interesting times within the Dynamics division. We aren’t looking for the same situation this time.


But there is an obvious pay-back for Netsuite, in that it gains access to the huge network of Microsoft partners, some of which rate amongst the largest SIs to target the enterprise space:


We have already had several key members of the Microsoft ecosystem in touch since the announcement this morning, looking to add Netsuite as a go-to-market product.


My take
This does have the look of being a real win/win for the pair. Apart from anything else, Microsoft partnering with a company that could be seen as a direct competitor in the ERP sphere suggest something of a sea-change in its approach to the world of the customer.
Disclosure – at time of writing, NetSuite is a premier partner of diginomica. 


Read more on: Cloud platforms - infrastructure and architectureCRM and customer experienceDigital and content marketing 