
Fred Studer, NetSuite
The generally stagnant and staggering economies across Europe could be a happy hunting ground for Netsuite over the next few years if CMO Fred Studer has his way.
Even in the UK, it is widely assumed that once this week’s General Election is over, the regime of austerity will continue under the next Parliament. And across Europe that regime looks set to continue for a good while yet.
Speaking at an analyst briefing at SuiteWorld, Studer said that this is creating an opportunity for Netsuite to turn some established SAP users. These are the European businesses that are now finding their markets either flat or in decline, leaving them with the dilemma of either investing in upgrades to existing SAP implementations, or continuing with the old and increasingly outdated systems they already have.
This creates an environment for such pcompanies where the ERP capabilities available to them plays a growing part in restricting operational agility in meeting new opportunities that do arise. This in turn provides Netsuite with a lever that Studer is keen to use:
We are working to identify those types of company across Europe at the moment, and what we can offer them is not a rip-and-replace for their core SAP system, but a range of new tools and capabilities, on a subscription basis, that work round the core that extend its capabilities and performance. Once they get to see how they work and what they add, we can move to extend what we can offer them.
He sees this approach – of gaining their attention with supporting tools and then moving in to convince them of the efficacy of upgrading the ERP systems to Netsuite as well – as being ideally suited to the needs of financially challenged companies.
My take
This is likely to be a growing trend, and not just in the ERP market. It could be one of the key drivers of a growing trend towards greater penetration of cloud services.
Disclosure – at time of writing, NetSuite and SAP are premier partners of diginomica. 

Read more on: Cloud platforms - infrastructure and architecture 