
UPS Worldwide? Hmm
If you run a service on the scale that UPS does then you can expect the odd cock up and you can certainly expect your fair share of haters. My experience with the service has mostly been OK but some things are badly broken. Take this example.
I had a package due for delivery that had import duty attached to it. I had no idea how much was involved but heh, you suck it up. Or I would if I had been able to take delivery. UPS attempted to deliver twice while I was away. I had no idea until the person sending the package asked if I had received it. A check on the UPS site informed me that I was close to ‘three strikes and you’re out.’ The only option was to collect but the only place to collect is nine miles away. That is despite the fact the nearest UPS is two blocks away. OK – I can suck that up. The notices I received didn’t tell me how much to pay but did warn that the only way to do so is via a check at the time of collection.
I haven’t written a check in close to 18 years, maybe longer. I don’t know what a check looks like these days.
Thinking slightly sideways, I go to the nearest UPS to see if I can get help. A number is offered which only provides options to buy more stuff, track a shipment or arrange a delivery. There is no option to handle what I am trying to do. Back to the local store who have another number I can try. On this occasion I get through to someone who tells me I can pay over the phone by credit or debit card. Other than the fact this is the most insecure method of dealing with the problem I am amazed that I cannot do the same at the UPS collection point.  “It’s the process, stupid” I hear silently ringing in my ears.
At the end of the call, the person on the other end tells me it will be 20 minutes before the payment is fully processed after which I can collect the goods. Three hours later I’m in an Uber on my way to the collection place. I figured that with the experience so far, 20 minutes would not be enough time. I don’t mind the hassle because I’m rather looking forward to the goodies and heck, the duty was only $24.43.
But imagine my ire when the folks at the UPS collection point have no record of the payment and have never heard of anyone ever collecting an overseas package where the duty was paid over the phone. Are you kidding me?
A back and forth ensures between the collection people and folk on the phone  on numbers I gave them because they’d never heard of the brokerage department number. (Brokerage handles the payment stuff – apparently.) By this stage, the supervisor is in panic mode because, quite rightly, she doesn’t want to get her butt kicked for letting a package go without proof of my $24.43 being paid. We eventually get sorted out, the collection staff are very apologetic and my very patient Uber driver didn’t disappear in a hissy fit. But it took a good 20 minutes of messing about.
The lessons must be obvious for anyone to see.

UPS needs to provide easy access to the right information for anyone picking up or receiving packages that carry import duty or other charges. There must be many thousands of those every day so this isn’t an outlier issue. The UPS site is woefully inadequate in that regard.
UPS people tasked with delivering packages should note the amount due in cases where a later pick up is required.
It should be possible to nominate the nearest UPS store at which to make a pick up and settle any charges.
It should be possible to not only reset the delivery date but make payment for any duty or charges online. Paying in person with a check is archaic. Paying over the phone using a credit/debit card might get the job done but it’s insecure.
Internal communications need a reset or the processes governing how phone payments are cleared back to the collection center need rework.

I won’t pretend that any of this is straightforward in a large organization and with practices that go back to the days of the Pony Express. But if UPS wants to remain relevant in modern logistics then some things just have to change.
Read more on: Frictionless enterprise 