
In what is becoming an increasingly irritating and uninformed trend, TechCrunch (and it is not alone – just one of many) sucks up the sharing economy Kool-Aid and emphatically declares that services like Uber and AirBnB will disrupt corporate travel. What a crock. Here’s what the author says:
Sharing-economy startups like Airbnb and Uber are challenging traditional travel vendors – and in the process, they’re forcing many businesses to reevaluate travel policies and conventions that are pillars of the current system.
No facts just a statement. A far better analysis would have said that Uber is replacing the taxi that the business customer would be taking anyway. As for AirBnB…can you honestly see a company executive sharing a bedroom with some random traveler? But more on that later.
How about this?
For example, a multinational company that commits to one airline can often secure a flat discount, free upgrades, free baggage check and last-minute rates that are as much as 75 percent lower than what a leisure traveler would pay. A hotel chain might offer discounted rates, free breakfast, free last-minute cancellations and more.
Really? Whoever told the reporter this must be some well connected and privileged traveler. I can say from long years of experience that the enterprise travel systems I’ve sometimes been forced to use are often times expensive and/or offer deals that are far from convenient. I regularly best any corporate system using services like Tripit, Kayak and Booking.com. Nothing to do with the so-called sharing economy and everything to do with what works best for the routes I need to travel.
Let’s get to some facts:
We’ve found that Airbnb saves 41 percent, or an average of $102 per night, compared to hotels. If services like Uber and Airbnb make employees’ lives easier and save their companies money, there’s no reason not to use them.
Where is this coming from? Not TechCrunch but Let’s Talk Strategy:
Rocketrip, a travel management platform, recently found that booking through Airbnb instead of hotels saved around 41%, or an average of $102 per night (as cited in February’s edition of Entrepreneur Magazine). Although these savings vary by city, there is no doubt that booking through Airbnb as an alternative to traditional hotels will save companies considerable amounts of money and add to their bottom line.
OK – but is that it? Not at all:
It is fair to point out that some standard hotel amenities may be missing in an average Airbnb rental such as maid service, room service, a lobby bar, and a rewards system.
The article then goes on to make seven claims where AirBnB is a better alternative:
1) Convenient proximity to meetings 2) Space that makes after-work feel like vacation 3) Gourmet kitchens for cooking with colleagues 4) Comfortable meeting space for off sites 5) Easy access to running trails or beaches 6) Larger homes for family companions or group getaways and 7) A homier neighborhood feel for extended stays or relocations.
Ummm…maybe but a stretch in many circumstances. If my observations are anything to go by, AirBnB suppliers are learning fast that they can make out like bandits at times of high demand. One place I used to stay at in the Bay Area jacked prices progressively 10%, 25% and eventually 35% over a period of 18 months, putting the cost out of kilter with hotel rates. It’s a scenario I’ve heard repeated elsewhere. That’s not to say that AirBnB doesn’t represent a disruptive choice but I am far from convinced that it represents a viable alternative for the average business traveler.
Having said that, the UK government supports such services. Recently, The Telegraph reported: 
The Department for Business, Innovation & Skills (BIS) added that it will give civil servants the option of making the most of what is known as the “sharing economy”, where such options “are cheaper and more convenient than hotels and taxis”.
San Francisco AirBnB availability – late April 2015
Interesting. More recently, AirBnB recently introduced a business focused service but does it work? Here’s a suggestions map of San Francisco for the end of April. None of the properties are remotely near the center and with prices ranging $159 to $600 per night.
If price was my main issue then I might be tempted because central downtown hotel prices at that time are averaging $350-400 per night. But that’s not the case.
In my experience, the business person’s most precious commodity is time and most desired need is location convenience. In this scenario, it is questionable whether AirBnB makes the cut.
More to the point and as colleagues on Facebook have correctly pointed out, policies designed to both allow for economic control  while providing safe alternatives are what determine the choices many of us make.
The TechCrunch author is right to point out that business travel is in sore need of disruption. But it must be an open question whether we are anywhere near close to seeing that translate into a balanced mix of services business wants at prices that travel managers are willing to sanction. Whether that includes players in the sharing economy is an altogether different question.
Bonus points: if you’d like plenty of detail on AirBnB in the San Francisco area then check this out.
Image credit: Change, Same Green Road Sign Over Clouds © Andy Dean – Fotolia.com

Read more on: Future of workSpend management 