
According to the US Bureau of Labor Statistics, the Millennial generation overtook Generation X in 2015 as the largest segment of the US workforce. As a result, much in recent years has been written and discussed regarding the topic, particularly around how organizations can effectively hire and retain millennials, a group that seems to view the world through different colored lenses.
Perhaps most telling, when it comes to their views, is that loyalty is much less important with this segment, and the reasons for pursuing a career or staying with an organization go far beyond salary. Millennials instead emphasize things like training, diverse opportunities, mentorships, collaboration, and work-life balance.
Indeed, the traditional human resources playbook does not seem to apply here, and there are serious implications. For example, according to the Millennial Majority Study, 58% of millennials expect to leave their jobs within three years, and 53% of hiring managers cite that it’s difficult to find and retain this mysterious demographic. Modern technology enables digital transformation that drives sustainability and efficiency, and when embraced, can positively impact all facets of government, especially as it relates to reaching millennials, engaging them, and attracting them to government service.
Yet while these statistics and others like them are certainly concerning, government organizations are faced with an even more alarming reality. Not only are millennials even more woefully under-represented in public sector organizations, and similarly difficult to find, hire, and retain — a significant segment of baby boomers within government are eligible for retirement over the next five years. They will leave not only a costly hiring cycle in their wake, but also create a training and mentorship vacuum that will not easily be filled.
We cannot be seduced into thinking that adding a training program here, instituting formalized mentorship relationships there, or implementing flexible work schedules will magically solve these challenges on their own. Of course these things help with retention, but how do we get millennials interested in government service in the first place?
And once we get their attention, how do we effectively close the deal and bring them onboard where those training programs, mentorships, and work-life balance elements can play their role?
It starts with survival
In today’s digital age, government organizations are increasingly finding themselves competing, whether it be for constrained resources, citizen engagement and mindshare, or talented individuals to fill its ranks. And effectively competing requires an effective communication and outreach strategy, one which uses modern tools to reach millennials where they are, which happens to be on the web and on social media.
The importance of Facebook, LinkedIn, Twitter, Instragram, and individual websites should not be underestimated or dismissed simply because, as non-millennials, we don’t value these channels or outlets. These outlets, despite how it might perplex us, are where millennials go for information and engagement, and too often, our websites in government are archaic and poorly designed, and our presence on social media is either non-existent or barely there.
Ultimately, interacting with government should be as easy as ordering something on Amazon, or downloading an app on your phone.  Embracing social media and committing to effective digital citizen collaboration and engagement is critical for reaching millennials, which lends itself to efficiency.
Survival breeds efficiency
Government organizations do not have to ‘survive’ in the traditional sense of the word. While private sector organizations are required to innovate, evolve, adapt, and grow more efficient or risk extinction, government organizations are sustained by virtue of their tax base, sales tax, and other fees, and in some ways have the luxury (or burden depending on your perspective) of inaction for fear of change or failure.
But technology today enables things that were science fiction a few short years ago. Most of the population now carries what equates to a computer in their pocket, and we can ask Siri, or Google, Cortana, or Alexa a host of questions and get immediate answers. These technological advancements and efficiencies extend to the enterprise, with pharmaceutical companies and research laboratories analyzing unthinkable amounts of data in the cloud to solve some of our most pressing problems.
Technology continues to evolve and is available to both the public and private sectors alike. Government just needs to step out of its collective comfort zone and embrace digital disruption in the public sector. Millennials have come to expect these technologies both as consumers and in the workplace.
Efficiency leads to talent
Whereas digital transformation, a survivalist mentality, and the use of technology to breed efficiency are cornerstones, a deliberate approach toward hiring for organizational and cultural fit is the lifeblood. Effective hiring practices, ones that go beyond traditional knowledge, skills, and abilities, must be deployed to isolate individuals whose characteristics make them the best fit for an organization at large.
Given the challenge of diminishing personnel budgets and the need to recruit as previously outlined, it is more important than ever to employ technology that adds science-based evidence to the process and allows organizations to make decisions that result in the hiring of individuals that are both qualified and generally fit within the organizational culture. The cost of hiring and training millennials is too high to have them walk out the door three years later.
Ultimately, to achieve these ends, government organizations must accept transformation as a journey that starts with leadership and commitment. We must be deliberate and strategic in our approach to these challenges.
Image credit - .GOV on blue digital background © Denys Rudyi - Fotolia.comRead more on: Digital government and public servicesDigital skills and trainingInforPartner ZoneTalent management

