
My last piece with Tableau CPO Francois Ajenstat looked at the state of Tableau, and the stories that stood out at the 2018 Tableau Conference (The state of Tableau 2018 – CPO Ajenstat on Tableau as a data platform, and the push for analytics ubiquity).
That includes the impact of AI, and how Tableau is faring as it pushes for enterprise scale.
One thing stands out to me – and it’s not the tech or the growth. It’s the reality that Tableau’s core audience – the data analysts who are so adept and slicing and dicing – also need to change. Ajenstat’s response?
A big, big trend that we’re seeing is all about storytelling. How do I communicate my insights to drive impact? And that’s where the analysts can’t just be quants; they can’t just be crunching the numbers – they need to be communicating what the numbers say.
Bingo. But something else was bothering me. How can we claim to embrace the power of data in a world where socialized ideology often triumphs over any semblance of data objectivity? Granted, that’s outside the scope of what Ajenstat expects to be asked about at an enterprise event. But he was willing to go there. I built up to it.
First, I asked him: with so many things going well for Tableau right now, what’s the biggest challenge ahead for 2019? Ajenstat:
One big thing we did as a company in the past year is: we’ve made a transition to subscription, which has been really, really well received. And we’ve been accelerating our pace of development in delivering more features. With those two things together, the next really big thing we have to do is focus on customer success.
Customer success? That’s nothing new, but subscription puts it front and center:
That’s not saying that we haven’t focused on customer success, but customer success is now critical when you’re in a subscription world, because we have to demonstrate value, we have to demonstrate adoption, we have to demonstrate that customers realize the investment that they made.
Shouldn’t data-driven companies outperform others?
Ajenstat unknowingly stepped into my latest tantrum: where are the advanced business benefits? If you do analytics right, you get a single source of truth; you can see events in real-time; you can put in alerts, and head into predictive scenarios. We’ve all heard those customer stories, and they’re good ones. But – how does that translate into business results? In other words:
Yeah, we’re all more data-driven, but what does it actually mean? Shouldn’t the companies who are exceptional at this be getting exceptional results? My unsolicited advice to Tableau: document those kinds of business stories. So I asked Ajenstat: what customer stories resonate with him?
The one that came to my mind is the Coca-Cola story. This particular one is how there’s this one guy who owns the relationship between Coca-Cola and Walmart. And it’s all about: how do you prove the value that Walmart gets from Coca-Cola? Better regional management, better promotions. He basically started using the data, and changed the relationship dramatically.
Now it was a value exchange, rather than just a transaction. And they have built new programs as a result of this, with tons of growth savings as a result of that… They have hard ROI, and they have soft benefits.
What I really want to hear is enterprise-wide stories of data shifting culture and ROI, but departmental or single-vendor-relationship stories are still relevant. That’s a great way of building momentum for that bigger shift. By hammering away on ROI, I don’t want to diminish the so-called “softer” benefits. Ideally, softer benefits like employee morale can be quantified – and they absolutely matter. Ajenstat talks about that “Eureka!” moment:
Every vendor – Tableau included – has the example of the Eureka moment, as they call it. We had one with a large aerospace company, where they gave interns for the summer access to Tableau and data and said, “Just go play,” and they went and turned up $27 million of savings… There’s always these stories. What I think is different with Tableau is that these stories aren’t exceptions; they end up being the norm.
How can data analysts inspire business users?
Stories about data discovery spreading in organizations are great, but we shouldn’t universalize them either: it’s not always easy for data analysts to inspire business users. I had one Tableau customer express his frustration about the lack of perceived motivation and data interest. So I asked Ajenstat: what advice does he have for those struggling to share the data gospel?
We like the positive reinforcement of trying to showcase successes so that other people want to lean in. There’s also the intimidation of the first time. “Is my work good enough?” Or “I don’t know what to do.”
“Data doctor days” are one tactic that can help:
A lot of customers have started doing these “doctor days,” where they have office hours, essentially, so you can bring a problem in a safe environment to help solve it with the experts. Those kinds of techniques start creating the virality, so they want to join that community internally.
But change is hard, and change doesn’t just happen overnight. It does take time, but it requires a series of successes, a series of encouragements, to get people on the journey.
Along those lines, I heard a lot more about Tableau/BI centers of excellence at this year’s conference. Some might find the “center of excellence” concept incredibly boring and corporate-sounding, but it’s really just a fancy way of saying that you provide some structure around your company’s analytics passion (check my use case, How Nationwide Insurance uses Tableau to drive its data-driven ambitions). I find the trend encouraging.
The power of data versus hyper-partisanship
However, I found it striking to be amongst so many passionate data lovers during a time when the value placed on facts > beliefs seems to be at an all-time low. Once we reach that state of irrational fervor for a partisan agenda, we are biased only to facts that meet our agenda. Before too long, we are socializing “facts” that aren’t facts at all, as long as they bolster our partisan narrative.
I find that behavior destructive to the data-driven mindset Tableau laudably advocates. The essence of a data mindset is about challenging your biases and assumptions. I don’t have any illusions that Tableau can fix this problem, but can they play a role?
Ajenstat avoided a political position, and I don’t blame him. But he did say this:
We believe in the power of data and facts. But you can present the same data in different ways to drive your argument.
Tableau makes the case for data-driven public service
This goes back to Ajenstat’s storytelling point. In other words: let’s say you have important data – data that can serve a social good. Ajenstat says how you frame that data makes all the difference:
There’s a really popular story that Andy Cotgreave and their team did about deaths in the war in Iraq. The same data, presented in different ways, has a tremendous impact on the story you want to tell. Where one can show a red chart of death that looks disastrous, another shows, actually, that deaths have been on the decline. Same data.
A lesson I’m learning from Tableau: pick data battles you can win. No, I can’t persuade rabid partisans (and elected officials) to stop tweeting putrid lies, but – as Tableau has shown, you can use data to rally people to pursue, for example, an end to malaria in Africa.
Think that’s just PR? Tableau’s partnership with PATH in the #VisualizeNoMalaria initiative has already helped drive a 90% reduction in malaria-related deaths in southern Zambia. It was a memorable keynote, bolstered by Tableau’s announcement that they are doubling down on their Tableau Foundation investment, donating $100 Million through Tableau Foundation to Help Solve Global Challenges. Ajenstat:
It’s all about taking action. If I can go drive data about homelessness, or about opioid addiction and drive the right prescriptions, that’s the right thing. What the data will do is drive the conversation of: what are the next actions to take? How can we help?
Just how many problems we can solve with data – without getting gridlocked into partisan angst – remains to be seen. But one thing can’t be denied: Tableau’s social purpose energizes its community, and, I suspect, makes that community more appealing to younger generations, who expect more social responsibility from their employers – and rightly so.
Since Ajenstat was a good sport on my axe-grinding questions, I’ll give him the last word. On the Tableau Foundation:
It has a true impact on people all over the world, and if we can help bring the power of data to more organizations, more NGOs, more nonprofits, the better the outcomes will be.
He’s not dreaming: the UN has chosen Tableau as the analytics solution for the United Nations. As the UN pursues their development goals, data will be at the center of it. Whether it’s climate change or gender diversity, data via Tableau will be in the mix. Can’t argue with that.
Updated November 14, 7am US ET, with subheading and a few minor tweaks for readability.
Image credit - Photo of Tableau CPO Francois Ajenstat keynoting at Tableau Conference 2018 provided by Tableau.Disclosure - Tableau paid the bulk of my expenses to attend Tableau Conference 2018.Read more on: Analytics planning and data analysis 