
As I Tweeted earlier today:

Holy crap – Chabot steps down as CEO at @tableau https://t.co/hgwUMbgb80
— (((Den Howlett))) (@dahowlett) August 22, 2016

Christian Chabot and Adam Selipsky – all smiles
We don’t normally care too much about executive reshuffles since they have limited appeal and impact on the buyer community. This, we think, will be different.
The last few quarters have not been good for Tableau. A massive drop in the value of the company’s shares, following a miss at the end of Q4 FY2015 was followed by a  revenue pop for Q1 FY2016 but with a soft outlook and massively increased operating costs. Q2 FY2016 saw a slight miss on revenue but an even higher climb on costs. While I didn’t comment on these results at the time, it seemed to me that Tableau was suffering from three problems.

It doesn’t scale well. That’s a continuing refrain we hear from customers and consultants in the field.
It has no effective operational cost control. Losses are ballooning as counter intuitive increases in stock based compensation hit the profit and loss account.
Sales and marketing costs at 103% of revenue using GAAP measures is obscene for a company knocking on the door of a billion dollars in revenue.

It turns out the company had been looking for a president but found along the way that some of the candidates on offer would likely make better CEOs. Enter Adam Selipsky, the person who grew sales at Amazon Web Services from start up to something north of $14 billion in the current year. In a press release, Christian Chabot, the outgoing CEO said:
“Adam is going to take Tableau to the next level,” said Chabot. “His experience in making AWS the world’s leading cloud platform, his passion for servicing customers at a global scale, and his authentic team player attitude make him an extraordinary fit for Tableau.” Continued Chabot, “He is the right person to lead Tableau to the next stage of growth.”
I tuned into the analyst webcast earlier today and while Selipsky wasn’t on the call, Chabot was clearly back on his evangelism stump.
Adam shares our view that the importance of the cloud is vastly under-estimated by our industry, analysts and dare I say it customers. Tableau has a great start compared to our competitors.
As might be imagined, much of the focus was on probing around the role that Selipsky will take and what that means for the existing management team. And yes, while Selipsky’s experience in a cloud native environment is important, Chabot spent much of the call talking up his successor’s ability to reach into the IT department of the larger enterprise. We have seen this playbook before with the appointment of Keith Block at Salesforce who was, among other things, brought in to lift Salesforce from being a departmental buy and into an enterprise player. So far, that has proved successful at Salesforce but Tableau has a different set of problems.
First, and as a matter of urgent technical necessity, Tableau must either get its solutions running at scale in the public cloud and/or at enterprise class private data center scale. The land and expand strategy of the past has not fully played out but the enterprise sale is out of reach as competitors like Microsoft come in with cloud scale BI, while other competitors like SAP and Oracle are also vying for a piece of the vizualization pie, albeit with limited success to date. And let’s not forget IBM which is carving out its own patch among the very customers Tableau would dearly like to win.
The question then comes, can Tableau’s engineering efforts match the rhetoric we hear from Chabot and the sales nous in enterprise that Selipsky brings? Right now we are hearing that job 1 for Selipsky is to finds a new head of sales, since Kelly Wright plans to retire at the end of the year. From my perspective, the fact we are 8 months past Wright’s announcement speaks volumes to Tableau’s indecision about its operational shape, even as stock options were being handed out like candies at a kids’ tea party. Recruiting the right sales person will undoubtedly be important but I’m not sure that’s the right first step. I’d prefer to see sales and marketing operations brought under control along with a significant increase in development spend to match Tableau’s cloud ambitions.
Chabot, for his part says he will continue in his role of ‘seeing over the horizon’ and looking at strategy as chairman while retaining his evangelism role. Quite how that will work without him and the new CEO treading on each others’ toes remains to be seen. Chabot has been the face of Tableau for 13 years and it is hard to imagine that he will step too far out of the showman’s limelight.
These will be interesting times for Tableau customers. If past history is a good teacher then over time, I would expect to see smaller customers get frozen out as prices are adjusted and rebalanced to reflect a firmer enterprise focus. That of course is speculation but we do have precedents for that outcome. What Selipsky does to bring some measure of operational control is an altogether different question and one not addressed on the analyst call.
The good news is that Tableau has recognized the need for someone to come in and take the company to its next level. It is no surprise then that the stock got a 5% pop in after hours trading.
Image credit - Via Tableau websiteDisclosure - Salesforce, SAP and Oracle are premier partners at time of writingRead more on: Analytics planning and data analysis 