
As noted in the first part of this two part article, lack of real-world experience within the academic context means that many security applicants simply lack the practical expertise required by employers to hit the ground running.
As a result, Paco Hope, principal consultant at software and application security consultancy Cigital, sees graduate apprenticeships, or post-college paid internships as they’re known in the US, as crucial to plugging the gap.
But both countries are also trying to find other ways to tackle the skills crisis. The US Department of Veterans Affairs, for instance, provides former soldiers with grants to help them or their dependents obtain a cyber-security degree or certificate.
The Federal IT Security Institute has also been offering veterans specialised training opportunities to prepare them for federal government work via The Wounded Warrior Cyber Combat Academy since the winter of 2012.
But the UK, it seems, has been leading the way in the field of apprenticeships since launching its national Cyber-security Strategy in 2011, one of the objectives of which was to ensure the country had access to the skills and capabilities required.
To this end, government IT quango e-skills UK (now the Tech Partnership) was tasked by the UK Commission for Employment and Skills to create the necessary infrastructure to make it happen. So it took on training providers, recruited willing employers and put a framework in place to offer government funding.
Some 200 school-leavers have since been hired as cyber-security apprentices by a range of public and private sector organisations including IT consultancies, CGI and Atos. The Civil Service is also currently advertising a further 50 vacancies for over 16s in England and Wales to join its two-year Tech Industry Gold accredited initiative this summer.
Higher apprenticeships
But it doesn’t end there. Also in the pipeline are a number of so-called Higher Apprenticeships to train young people to work in Secure Operations Centres – rooms in which operators monitor internet traffic to spot anomalies that could indicate an attack, viruses and the like – as cyber-intrusion analysts.
These two-year apprenticeships will have the equivalent of degree status, but can be converted into Honours degrees if participants write a dissertation for one of the approved universities such as Bournemouth, Royal Holloway or Glasgow Caledonian.
The first intake is scheduled to start later this summer on a course that has had lots of input from employers ranging from BT, IBM and defence company, QinetiQ. Ian Glover, president of industry governance and certification body CREST, says:
Universities are a good answer to the skills shortage, but there should be additional routes in to the profession. Degrees are an expensive option that aren’t open to everyone so, to get the numbers and the quality required, we need multiple entry points.
But not everyone is convinced that apprenticeships are the best solution either. Although SecureData’s Greeff believes that the sentiment behind such government-driven programmes is the right one, in his view, they have “never delivered real results”. He explains:
I think businesses are better at sorting out what it takes for themselves rather than governments. And there are better ways to incentivise people than paying for apprenticeships such as giving tax rebates for training. These are things that we’re doing already anyway but would mean it cost us less.
SecureData runs a training academy of its own, which offers paid “internships” complete with training for up to 24 months in a kind of “try-before-you-buy” arrangement – although the initiative is aimed at graduates only.
Cigital’s Hope is generally more positive about the apprenticeship idea, however. He thinks on-the-job training is the “right answer”, not least because he believes the market is crying out for more practical skills than those often available.
Just like in the building industry, there should be two tiers – the bricklayers, the plumbers, and then the architects. Not everyone has to be an architect, but it’s the security equivalent of bricklayers that’s lacking at the moment.
Nonetheless, Hope is concerned that, if structured support is not available once apprenticeships are complete, young workers could end up in dead-end jobs that they “can’t be promoted out of unless they get more training”. He explains:
Where the idea breaks down is that you do an apprenticeship and then it’s over after two years. But if you don’t follow it up with a nice, structured career plan, the danger is it won’t work for people who don’t have a strong academic background. It has to be an on-going commitment.
Steven Babb, technical risk, compliance and assurance leader at Vodafone and international vice president of ISACA, believes that the association’s Cybersecurity Nexus programme could help fill a gap here, however.
Launched last year, the scheme is intended to offer everyone from beginners to established leaders in the field a single online venue from which to access learning and development resources, cyber-security research, guidance, mentoring as well as a wider community to network with. Babb concludes:
Higher apprenticeships and the like aren’t going to be enough on their own. But they will, in conjunction with the universities, ISACA and business, help to deal with this complex problem. A situation like this really needs a range of measures.
My take
As ever, the devil is in the detail so we’ll need to see exactly how these apprenticeships are implemented and run before it is possible to make proclamations about how successful they are likely to be in helping solve the skills crisis.
If they just become another means for business to get hold of cheap labour, they won’t benefit anyone in the long-term. If they can provide apprentices and their employers with practical, transferable skills on a sustainable basis, then perhaps the model is one that can be picked up and run with elsewhere.
Read more on: Digital skills and trainingHCM and the digital future of workSecurityTalent management 