

Joined-up HCM
The cloud platform is fundamentally a different beast from an on-premise platform.
Which is why many organizations count on cloud adoption to transform the way they do HR, according to Mike DiClaudio, advisory principal in KPMG’s people and change practice.
While cloud platforms are crucial to achieving HR transformation, all too often, organizations’ expectations have fallen short, according to KPMG’s report Cloud HR: The future belongs to the bold.
Often, notes the report, the gains made are often tactical, such as better access to self-service for managers and employees, rather than strategic business gains.
So, while 63% of the 854 executives surveyed in KPMG’s 2016 Global HR Transformation Survey expected improved value from HR to the business, only 24% reported that Cloud HR actually gives HR the ability to drive greater business value.
There are certainly benefits a-plenty to be had from swapping beasts from on-premise HR to the cloud. Whether the aim is a simple technology refresh or full-blown HR transformation cloud platforms not only enable but force organizations to do things differently, right from the get-go. As DiClaudio notes:
You can’t just document all your requirements and lob it over the fence at the technology provider to code – because coding doesn’t exist.
Instead of coding and customizations, cloud-based HR more standardized. Customers have a number of choices, but they cannot expect a custom-fitted solution. That requires HR to let go of previous engrained thinking and question the way it does things. The focus must be on the outcomes it wants to achieve. DiClaudio expands:
When you start to have that dialog you start to think about your business problems differently. It’s not, ‘how do I make the business happy by doing whatever it is they say?’ and more ‘how do I meet their objectives, while still producing something that’s efficient?’ So the implementation ultimately forces the organization into a different frame of thought around how to solve the problem.
Data models
Once up and running, HR will be dealing with substantially different data models that are more portable and more accurate, because they are not pulled from multiple sources. Having a single version of truth is crucial for managers to make informed, quick and accurate decisions. And they will be able to make those decisions because cloud-based systems are also much more user-friendly – designed from the outset from the user perspective and not from the database outward, as ERP systems were.
Given these benefits, it’s not surprise that the number of organizations buying on-premise software is “dropping pretty dramatically”, according to DiClaudio.
Of the three main technology vendors, Workday only has a cloud platform, while Oracle And SAP are only investing cloud-based platforms and have provided an end-of-life date for their on-premise systems. DiClaudio adds:
Those organizations buying or upgrading to existing on-premise solutions are doing so for a myriad of reasons, none of which are around future-proofing their organization, but an inability to see past existing customizations or fantastic financial terms or the like.
DiClaudio is clear that while there may be simple return on investment and low-level benefits of treating a move to the cloud as a simple technology upgrade, to reap major strategic benefits requires planning and strategic rigor. He explains:
It’s one thing to say to a manager you’re going to have access to a bevy of data or a bevy of reports and all sorts of control over transactions that you never had before, but what does that mean for the manager ? What does that mean for the role of the manager? What does that mean for their job as an individual contributor or the employee of those managers? Do they have a higher expectation for that manager to provide them with better experience of their job? But getting into the secondary or tertiary level of thought is well beyond the scope of most technology implementations.
Adopting cloud-based HR without looking at changing the vision, the processes and considering the impact on workers would is setting up organizations for disappointment. DiClaudio says:
It’s as if you’re buying a much faster vehicle, but never driving it faster than you would your last vehicle.
Part two of this discussion with KPMG’s Michael DiClaudio on Monday examines in more detail how this vision needs to change.
Image credit - HCM Read more on: HCM and the digital future of work 