
Digital age learning, according to Sarah Otley, VP, next generation learning lab director at Capgemini University, which is part of the global consultancy, technology and outsourcing firm Capgemini, has created a “paradigm shift” in learning.
Essentially, digital learning is a very different beast from the previous predominantly classroom-based, face-to-face learning or even the virtual classrooms of a few years ago. While digital technology is a key element behind this massive switch to digital learning, explains Otley, this is far bigger an issue than technology alone:
Digital learning at its simplest is any form of learning not face to face, but that isn’t really what we’re talking about: it’s about how do your respond in a digital age to what learning needs are when there is such a need for personalization – it’s trying to get underneath that, rather than just the ‘channel’ debate.
The technology is clearly an enabler, but that’s not what this is about. It’s a fundamental change in the learning organization, which needs to be agile and needs to be learner-centric. Expectations from learners are massively higher because they have such a wealth of technology in their daily life.
Corporate learning in the digital age is about giving people the choice and control to manage their own learning – both in terms of what they choose to consume, but also how they consume it. There’s also a massive switch in when they want to access training, according to Otley:
We learned things just in case and now people learn just-in-time at the point of need.
So learners want to find the answer to a problem or a training need when they have a specific problem or question that needs answering. We’re also understanding more about neuroscience and how the brain works – showing for example that it’s better to consume learning little and often rather than binge learn.
Otley adds that the real situation is actually a little more complex and we’re seeing a polarization of learning content rather than a replacement. On the one had we have just-in-time training needs – finding out how to change the tyre on your car, for example, when you have a flat. Alternatively, there are longer term requirements, such as career development, which won’t be solved in a five-minute ‘how-to’ tutorial. Corporate learning today needs to serve both sets of requirements.
Whether just-in-time or just in case, there’s a recognition that learning needs to be continuous, because jobs are changing so quickly, requiring constantly refreshed skills and because people will probably have more than one career over their longer lifespan.
This learning also needs be highly personalized. But training departments, for the most part, struggle with this. At CapGemini, says Otley, learning today is more than having a catalogue of courses available to people on the learning management system (LMS). It’s a combination of “the people, the conversations, the courses and resources”, as well as the LMS, she says:
It’s about, how do you find the people? How do you get them connected to the conversations that are going on so they can add, augment and learn and get on the right course that’s relevant to them and how do you connect people to these resources?
Personalization is the key to getting this right, Otley notes:
Just because I’m in the same grade as someone else sitting next to me, my learning needs are different.”
That all sounds great, but how are companies supposed to get from LMS-led training to a more agile, digital approach? One thing they must do is experiment, says Otley. Learn from their own learners what works and what doesn’t. Pilot new things, get feedback.
While the scale of the changes to become a digital age learning organization is immense, it’s important to take that first step and just do something, she says:
This is a long road, so don’t beat yourself up about this. Let’s be realistic. What we’re trying to do is to get learning very much integrated with the business rather than being an afterthought and we are consciously saying we won’t do everything for everybody – you can’t do everything for everybody.
So choose areas or groups to target and then set up pilot schemes, try out new technology and see what works.
Learning also needs to be integrated with the business – could it be linked, with for example, the performance management system and can courses be automatically recommended to individuals. This is all part of making learning part of normal day-to-day activity for its workers, rather than an afterthought.
One area that Otley is confident makes a big difference, and also needs a lot improvement, is analytics:
I think this a real weak spot in learning organizations – it’s the Achilles Heel and we all recognize that.

 
 
 
 
 
Sarah Otley will be talk more about how she sees the future of digital age learning at HR Tech World, Amsterdam.
 
Image credit - Computer Keyboard e-Learning Concept ©  Artur Marciniec - Fotolia.comRead more on: Digital government and public servicesDigital skills and trainingHCM and the digital future of work

