
One plague of the holiday season is the onslaught of hackneyed retrospectives and predictions, usually in the form of a Letterman-esque listicle. Sadly, tech writers are just as prone to such banalities as their media colleagues. Since I detest these as much as anyone, I won’t add to the hokum with my own, however as the temporal odometer rolls over, it is a good time to assess the things worth watching in the coming year and look beyond the day-to-day headlines.
As in the past few years, explosive growth in the enterprise use of cloud services will surely continue and as I’ve discussed over the past two weeks in covering re:Invent and managed services, AWS will garner much of the attention. But AWS is old news and I’m more interested in its competition. While Microsoft is currently the largest challenger and I expect it to finally demonstrate significant progress in its Azure-everywhere hybrid strategy, I will be looking past it to Google and IBM in hopes that the public IaaS/PaaS market doesn’t end up a duopoly.
Don’t overlook Google Cloud
Google was a pioneer in hyperscale data centers and cloud software design, but very late to the public cloud market, launching in 2012 a full six years after AWS. However the year after appointing VMware co-founder Diane Greene to head Google’s cloud business has been full of technology innovation and enterprise outreach – both of which should bear fruit in 2017.
Google has long contended that pricing for cloud services has not kept pace with technology-fueled hardware efficiencies. It casts its pricing philosophy as “a commitment to Moore’s Law”, explaining that historic IaaS price decreases of 6-8% don’t reflect 20-30% annual improvements in underlying hardware price-performance, a gap it believes prevents public cloud from displacing legacy data centers. In response, Google also “introduced a series of measures to help optimize our pricing around how our customers use compute, storage and database resources” including per-minute price granularity, automatic sustained use discounts and a simpler pricing model.
Cloud users have noticed. As I discussed elsewhere, an interesting case study comes from the online education site Quizlet, whose infrastructure team evaluated its existing provider, AWS, against Google and others prior to building a major update. As I describe:
Quizlet then benchmarked the performance of attributes most relevant to its application, CPU, memory, networking and disk I/O, and modeled its cost on both platforms. Quizlet chose Google after determining that it offered ‘better core technology, in particular, its networking and disk technology,’ while finding that Google had a superior pricing model with strong plans for the future.
While AWS continues to whittle at service prices, its overall pricing model and reliance on upfront contracts for discounts remains Byzantine and ripe for disruption.
On the technology front, Google was an early adopter of application containerization for its internal software. it has migrated that expertise to Google Cloud Platform (GCP) by aggressively pushing container services and cluster management, notably its homegrown, now open source, Kubernetes project. GCP’s core IaaS (Cloud Engine), container (Container Engine) and PaaS (App Engine) are as good as anyone’s – however the knock on it from Gartner and others is that it doesn’t match AWS or Azure for breadth of services. While true, I think this is less important for greenfield, 12-factor cloud-native applications than legacy enterprise app migrations or modernizations. Google designed a service for developers in its own image. As more organizations rethink application design for a cloud-first era, GCP’s portfolio should look less limiting.
I do agree with Gartner that GCP needs to significantly improve its enterprise hand-holding (sales, marketing, partner ecosystem) and functionality (migration, management, legacy infrastructure integration).  As I conclude elsewhere, GCP is “a poor choice for cloud laggards and organizations looking for a place to offload legacy virtual infrastructure and applications,” but ideal for cloud-native applications, particularly those using data analytics or machine learning – which will get a further boost after GCP introduces GPU instances in early 2017. Likewise, I concluded:
GCP’s container and automation features also make it a good platform for organizations that have adopted DevOps, continuous integration and delivery processes, and microservice-based application architectures.
What about IBM?
Three years ago when IBM acquired Softlayer, most people expected it to be the beginning of a frontal assault on AWS. It hasn’t worked out that way, and while Softlayer offers some impressive technology like bare metal and POWER servers, it seems designed more as a managed service extension of legacy enterprise data centers than a true AWS competitor. A convenient on-ramp to the cloud, but not the destination. That would be Bluemix and IBM’s cognitive/Watson services, where Big Blue is making significant progress in coaxing its conservative customer base to embrace cloud-native technologies.
The PaaS market is both less monolithic, with many competing approaches, and more competitive, with one estimate showing Amazon’s top three competitors, which includes IBM, to have collectively greater share than AWS. Indeed, IBM highlights a separate market estimate claiming that Bluemix is growing five times faster than the other leading PaaS players.
IBM has wisely worked to integrate Bluemix into the DevOps toolchain via a continuous delivery service, and has incorporated blockchain and distributed ledger services that have tremendous potential in the financial services and healthcare industries where IBM has long-established technology relationships. The growing ecosystem of startups using its blockchain services demonstrate that Big Blue is breaking through to cloud-first developers both within and beyond the confines of big enterprise IT.
IBM’s recent announcement that it is investing $1 billion and hiring 25,000 employees over the next four years – largely to address growth in the areas of cloud computing, cybersecurity and artificial intelligence – is more than just political PR. It is a demonstration that the company’s ‘strategic imperatives’ are turning into business accelerants. Much of this investment will go towards IBM’s cloud services and given the way AWS dominates the IaaS market, I expect the majority of cloud effort to be directed higher up the stack to PaaS, application, data analysis, AI and machine learning services.
My take
Amazon is one of the most competitive companies of this era, so I have no illusions that AWS will start coasting and focus on margin expansion and profit maximization at the expense of technology innovation. However, we’re still in the early phases of cloud technology and application development and adoption, so the market is still unstable and ripe for further disruption. Theory and historical evidence tell us that the disruptors are rarely the market leader, hence in 2017, I will be paying close attention to the second tier of cloud service providers.
Much like the auto and semiconductor industries, cloud services require global scale and enormous investment, which naturally creates an oligopoly. Thus I see little hope for smaller cloud players to broadly compete outside their niches with the likes of AWS, Azure, Google, IBM, Oracle, Salesforce and a few others. Although Microsoft is the largest threat to AWS world domination and is sure to surprise us in 2017, I also expect big things from Google and IBM. Each has the core technology, resources and a customer base – cloud natives for Google and big IT for IBM – which provides the foundation for serious cloud competition for AWS.
Image credit - Business woman with big ruler, cloudy sky © adam121 - Fotolia.comDisclosure - Oracle and Salesforce are diginomica premier partners. Read more on: Cloud platforms - infrastructure and architecture 