
Graze box
With three digitally-enabled end user organizations speaking on a panel on digital transformation organized by Accenture, attention turned to the impact of mobile technology on customer engagement as well as the potential rise of wearables in the workplace.
Anthony Fletcher, CEO of health snack provider Graze, says that the way his customers engage with the firm has changed in its five years in business:
The stat which I cite is that 60% of interaction with Graze now comes from a smartphone or tablet. Fifty percent of our customers have their first experence of Graze through a smartphone.
It’s absolutely an opportunity and a threat. You interact with people more frequently, but at the same time it’s far more challenging to create an experience which works on a phone.
Graze is only five years old but this mobile wave is still one of the things that came along. We were working on a desktop design and we had to spot mobile coming and change our mentality.
Will the same thing happen with the emergence of wearables devices? For Lloyds Banking Group, Phil Allen, Director, Digital, Wealth and Retail Investments, says there is a lot interest in new wearable tech and its potential:
For customers to be able to get information without having to get their mobile out of their pocket is obviously the next step. We’re looking at biometrics and wearables. We’ve used the Nymi band to authenticate a customer logging in using a heartbeat.
But it’s important not to get carried away by the latest ‘next big thing’, cautions Arif Harbott, Chief Digital Officer at Booker Group:
We haven’t really mastered mobile and tablets yet. There’s still a lot we can do with those devices before we move on to wearables. If you flit around to all the new devices there’s a danger that you don’t do any of them well.
For its part, Booker Group is looking into new ways to exploit mobile technology to improve its customer experience, says Harbott:
We’re looking at how we can use location and data from mobiles in our stores and use technology to reduce the friction. The two biggest pain points in our business are coming into a store – because you have to be a business and a member – and check out.
So we’re looking at how we can use location and mobile data to make those friction points easier. When you turn up in the car park and you’ve got the app and we know where you are, you shouldn’t then need to check in. You should just walk in to the store and as you do, a note should ping off to the area manager saying this is one of your best customers, but he hasn’t been in for a few weeks so you should go and see him.
And as you’re going round the store and want to find out where eggs are, you should have little app on your mobile and just say ‘eggs’ and it takes you to the eggs. Then you can scan your products as you’re walking through the store and there’s no check out because we know what you’ve got, what your credit information is and we can automatically bill it. We’ll have point-of-sale information. So if you walk past Coca Cola and we know you buy a lot of Pepsi, why won’t we send you an offer for Coke?
IoT incoming?
The Internet of Things is another approaching wave that needs to be considered. Allen predicts:
We will start to see more collaboration and cross-pollination of ideas between industries. I’ve got Hive installed at home. On the face of it it’s a boy’s gadget, control your heating from your mobile.
But look at it through a different lens and it’s got a great capability to do something about something that insurance companies hate – flooding houses. Hive will not allow you to get frozen pipes. I don’t know why insurance companies aren’t picking up on that and saying that if a customer has this product installed they’ll get a better deal because clearly they have a safer home.
Those are the types of collaborations you can see with the Internet of Things.
Booker Group
For his part, Fletcher looks at the Internet of Things from an internal organizational perspective:
I get more excited on the Internet of Things inside the organization. Because we are a digitally native company we have a beautiful cloud data warehouse. In our factory we have data scientists.
I was wandering past someone’s desk one day and saw this beautiful graph. Someone had wired one of our manufacturing lines into the data warehouse and produced this extraordinary visualization of how efficient our line is.
Ten years ago that’s the sort of thing a top of the range manufacturer would have had.
 My take
Three different real-world organizations with valuable insight into the challenges and the opportunities of digital transformation. Such peer group testimonies always provide the most powerful takeaways from seminars such as this one organized by Accenture.
Read more on: Analytics planning and data analysisCollaboration sharing and digital productivityCRM and customer experiencee-commerceFrictionless enterpriseFuture of workIdentityInternet of ThingsUse cases 