
Facebook is big, profitable, growing, and at a crossroads. The social network that started in a Harvard dorm room is no longer the cute app that people can use to hook up. It’s going through its terrible two’s as in its second decade and there’s plenty of evidence that the world wants it to use its indoor voice and to play nicer in the sand box.
Several recent news items provide background.
First, governments all over the world are trying to rein in its anything-goes approach to its presence on their turfs. In the West we might think a lot of the right to free speech but that’s far from a universal truth especially in the East. An article in the New York Times highlights Facebook’s fungible approach to free speech in repressive societies like Vietnam where according to authorities, the social network:
…had agreed to help create a new communications channel with the government to prioritize Hanoi’s requests and remove what the regime considered inaccurate posts about senior leaders.
It’s hard to tell what’s worse the company’s stand on the first amendment in the U.S. or its capacity to be easily rolled over on the subject by foreign dictators. It seems they’ll do anything to gain market share with which to sell ads. Facebook is happy to aid and abet repression while at the same time it stonewalls investigations into how its service was leveraged in the 2016 election.
Perhaps most dangerous to life as we know it, Facebook is not in control of its sales process or its platform. In the mad rush to sell, sell, sell, their algorithms sold questionable ads to people fronting Russian institutions during the 2016 election. After denying it for months, the company finally came clean admitting as much last week. In the process they gave up a number of ads to the authorities and cancelled the accounts of fake individuals. So much for fake news, there are now fake people to worry about.
More reporting from the New York Times:
Facebook has identified some 2,000 other ads that may have been of Russian provenance,
and CNN chimed in that
…we may not be able to set the number at 2,000, it could be higher.
Worse, it’s clear that law enforcement doesn’t know what it doesn’t know. Another Times story says that
The users who purchased the ads were fakes. Attached to assumed identities, their pages were allegedly created by digital guerrilla marketers from Russia hawking information meant to disrupt the American electorate and sway a presidential election.
The Times also said that we still don’t know what the ads looked like, the content, who paid for them, and how many Americans interacted with them. There’s even more to the story.
This is important because it profiles a company and an industry that grew fast, reaps huge profits and is poised to influence how we live and it is being coy about its legal rights and responsibilities. It is fair to say, as other have, that Facebook is facing an existential crisis with the potential for significant legislative blowback in its home market. Yesterday, in his daily email newsletter, Den Howlett noted:
In his weekly round up Azeem Azhar says:
Scott Galloway, an NYU prof, is incendiary: The worm has turned against big tech, and it’s overdue. The GAFAs (Google, Apple, Facebook, and Amazon ) each have their own vulnerabilities, he argues. Their “small-ball strategies of tax avoidance, obfuscation, and the idolatry of youth and the dollar, may turn big tech into smaller tech.”  Could these Internet companies be regulated like utilities, asks The Economist?
As a former utility regulator, I think there is a case to be made that now these firms have reached such dominant status, sensible regulation might be required. Precedents include Standard Oil, the East India Company, and AT&T. Making the AI case for breaking up the big firms, AI pioneer Yoshua Bengio, argues:
AI is a technology that naturally lends itself to a winner take all.

Whatever happens next, this is a difficult road to tread. On one hand we have federal law, the Electronic Communications Privacy Act 1986, which prohibits government from unduly spying on electronic communications. While that might seem reasonable, should the protections of this law apply to foreign governments intent on disrupting a US election at the same time that the Federal Elections law prohibits any spending on American elections by foreign entities?
In many cases, social networks like Facebook, Twitter, and other social sites like What’sApp, WeChat, Snapchat, YY, VKontakte (Russia), QZone (China) are awakening to their responsibilities in free societies, or have reached critical mass to impose significant strictures on the free flow of information around the world. It’s a situation that cries out for the “R” word, regulation, before freedom of speech becomes a quaint memory.
My take
Some friends say this is no different from the U.S. having tried to influence elections overseas for decades. They are right about US attempts but the US always did so in an above board manner. Americans identified themselves for instance as the Voice of America. They didn’t invent fake news but simply reported the truth (as they saw it), which was often bad enough. In the 1960’s former Illinois Governor and UN ambassador Adlai E. Stevenson II told the Soviet Union,
I offer my opponents a bargain: if they will stop telling lies about us, I will stop telling the truth about them.
That’s the fundamental difference between then and now. A cynic might argue that recent electronic snooping by the U.S. government under the Patriot Act is no different. I disagree.
In disguising their efforts to upset the 2016 U.S. election, the claim is that Russians hid their efforts in social media, inventing fake identities and made effective use of psychological research to plant ideas that divided the American people. They didn’t need to hack into voting machines (though they are alleged to have done some of that too).
In the aftermath, a bigger set of questions arises for civil societies and for heretofore unfettered social media companies like Twitter and Facebook. Is there a point beyond which appearing to protect cherished values like free speech does more harm than good? More specifically, is there missing nuance to such positions?
The EU for example is chafing under the open rules of a Vox Americana and has circumscribed the entire digital industry albeit with certain companies top of mind under the GDPR rules, set to come into force next year. Facebook and the other big American companies that make up GAFA are certainly in the legislators crosshairs.
European governments (and let’s not forget that’s a market equally as big as the U.S.) have serious objections to how these companies operate and it would not be surprising to see initiatives to regulate or even break up these behemoths. It would be smart if the GAFA members plus Über and a few others, decided to short circuit the uproar and develop a set of rules to live by that go beyond not being evil, whatever that means. But that’s not how free markets typically work in the United States. But as Howlett said in his newsletter on thw wider implications:
Anyone relying upon any or all of these companies (and Microsoft perhaps) needs to pay attention because there will be ripple effects that impact the development of the digital enterprise. It may mean reduced services. It will almost certainly mean more scrutiny over ads. It may mean a further fracturing of the social channels and an intensifying of the need to find better analytics with which to understand behaviors.
In the case of Facebook and Google, it is much more serious because the way the GDPR rules are written, will require a rethink of their business model.
This one is going to be interesting to follow.
Image credit - Johnson via fotoliaRead more on: Data privacyIdentityRegulation 