
Last week, I placed an order with Amazon around 9 o’clock on a Monday evening. It was for a project my daughter was doing at school; and rather than driving all over town to find 100 cellophane treat bags with multi-colored twist ties, I decided to take the easy way. I needed the package by Wednesday, so I kicked in a few extra dollars (less than the cost of my gas) to make sure it arrived on time. I was shocked to find it on my doorstep at 8:45 the next morning, less than 12 hours later.
This is the world in which a growing number of people on our planet now live. As a consumer, I couldn’t be more pleased. I have more choices than ever before, and continue to be surprised – even delighted – by the service I’m receiving. But for all the businesses out there working to meet my increasingly high expectations, I can only imagine that a story like this is daunting. Not only do customers have the bar for acceptable service reset on a regular basis, their preferences can also turn on a dime, leaving suppliers holding the bag with inventory that’s no longer wanted and scrambling to make the most of the latest trend. The infrastructure and systems required to survive in this highly competitive environment [link to PDF] grow more complex by the day.
The challenge of control
At the root of the challenge businesses now face is control – or more accurately, a lack of it. In a time not so very long ago, manufacturers controlled the production of their goods from start to finish. Suppliers were local – customers largely were too – and ERP systems were the beating heart of any successful operation.
Contrast that with today, when it’s estimated that 80% of the information companies need to effectively drive their businesses now resides outside their own internal systems. It sits with suppliers, customers, shipping companies, freight forwarders, customs expediters, financers, and others, any of which could easily be located on the other side of the world.
The result is that companies no longer compete on the quality of their own products and services alone. They compete based on the performance of their networks (whether they like it or not). And managing those networks is far from easy. Highly volatile shipping prices must be monitored, an increasing number of hand-offs tracked, and unexpected breaks in the supply chain (caused by everything from bankruptcy to natural disasters) handled.
To add insult to injury, none of these processes resides solely within a single company’s ERP system. Communication most often takes place through what are rapidly coming to be seen as antiquated means – email, fax, phone calls, and swivel-chair EDI.
The future belongs to networks
This convergence of events is leading to a question that could rattle the cage of many an enterprise software provider – what is the value of static information stored inside a company’s own ERP system? And ergo, what is the value of ERP? An increasing number of companies are coming to the conclusion that siloed ERP systems represent the past. The future belongs to networks.
In fact, supply chain networks are already changing the paradigm [link to PDF] by giving businesses what they need to compete in today’s ‘I need it now’ environment – visibility and with that, a much greater degree of control. Entire ecosystems of interdependent businesses are coming together in cloud-based environments that give them visibility into each other’s operations and allow them to see information in real time.
Instead of multiple versions of orders residing in each trading partner’s system, a single version can be accessed and kept up to date at all times. Instead of massive blind spots between the shipment of goods and their arrival at the designated location, progress (and hiccups) can be tracked in real time all along the way. Suppliers have visibility into their customers’ manufacturing schedules, so they know what’s coming and can plan accordingly. Manufacturers, likewise, have visibility into the operations of suppliers, so they can find alternatives and avoid missed deadlines if their needs can’t be met. The benefits are far-reaching.
In just one example, a major provider of high-tech electronics has saved millions of dollars in working capital by having visibility into the entire logistics process. Thanks to its cloud supply chain network, it can determine when goods from other parts of the world have passed a geo-fence into the United States, transfer ownership automatically to its customer, and complete the sale far faster than was ever before possible. Compare this to the traditional method of waiting for products to arrive and get checked into a customer’s warehouse before invoicing can occur.
Expanding the model
To date, cloud-based supply chain networks have mostly been the domain of large retailers who have both the capital to set them up and enough influence to ensure their trading partners get on board. For these enterprises, the proposition to their networks is simple – join us or we take our business elsewhere. However, most partners don’t need a lot of convincing, as there are plenty of benefits to go around. What will be interesting to watch is the progression of this model to the second tier, the speed of which will largely be determined by how affordable the technology can become. Cloud adoption will also be a gating factor.
Even more fascinating is the prospect of this concept expanding outside of the supply chain environment and being applied to businesses that don’t sell tangible goods. Is there really much difference between creating and tracking orders for a service (like consulting) versus managing those same activities for shoelaces? Or is giving a bank visibility into a system integrator’s capacity any less valuable for shaping business plans than a manufacturer being able to see a supplier’s inventory levels for finished cotton? In principle, the answer is no. In practice, businesses that are used to holding this type of information close to the vest may take some convincing before they’re willing to give trading partners that level of access.
One thing that is abundantly clear is that the connected economy is here to stay. Those businesses that can continually adapt and plot out the best course for navigating it stand to put some significant distance between themselves and the competition.
Image credit - Wrangler herding wild horses © Jeanne Provost - Fotolia.comRead more on: CRM and customer experienceDigital transformation - frictionless enterpriseInforPartner ZoneSpend management 