
It’s easy to make assumptions in the world of technology. ‘Experienced’ IT managers – as in, anyone older than Mark Zuckerberg – have a reputation in some quarters as dinosaurs standing in the way of progress, desperately trying to lock out end users.
Fortunately for Tandridge District Council in Surrey, this has proved not to be the case. I had the opportunity to talk to its head of IT, Stuart Mitchenall, just 24 hours before his retirement after 40 years of service, who leaves behind a legacy of championing a modern integrated platform approach rather than siloed legacy systems.
Tandridge took its first baby steps towards modernisation back in 2011, prompted by the government’s Digital Agenda and a need to reduce costs. The initial thinking was around how to transfer the majority of its transactions onto an electronic base and gain the community’s agreement to shift functions to the internet – but first the council had to get internal buy-in for the shift. Mitchenall explains:
The planning sat with the web team initially, as this was seen as very much being to do with the web site. But our web site was managed by our communications side, not the technical side, and each business area in that structure of the council owned its own pages and processes. Trying to get them all to act homogeneously and take the same direction at the same time was proving very difficult.
This was partly because it was involving only the web team and they were seen as peripheral, and partly because the business was separated into operational silos and didn’t really see a need to act in coordination.
Business change for a platform approach
As the council went through the process of working out how to become a digital organization, it soon became apparent this would be a business reorganization project rather than simply a technical implementation, with huge potential benefits for staff and residents. Mitchenall explains:
If we get it right – and I hope we will – citizens will get more or less 24/7 cover. They will be able to access any service that we can offer as an online integrated service, 24/7. A lot of the time at the moment, it’s 9-5. The lifestyles of citizens and staff are getting more and more flexible. In the office environment, we’ve moved away from compartments and paper to open plan and electronic.
The plan we have is, instead of using a generic site, the citizen will have a personalised account. When they log on for any business they’re doing with the council, we expose it to them as much as we can.
As discussions about the broader transformation project continued, Mitchenall pushed for Tandridge to begin using Salesforce’s Force.com development platform, to promote a more integrated approach to applications and start the move to online services. He says:
I got into platform technology in 2010/11, and by 2012/13, we were beginning to implement Salesforce at Tandridge.
Salesforce is a platform for us. People think of it as a CRM, I think of it as a platform. It’s a means of running the business, it isn’t just a customer service interface. We’re using it for planning, building control and charges services, and none of them actually run customer services. They’re using the applications and workflows to deliver their businesses effectively.
Resistance
However, not everyone at Tandridge felt the Salesforce love, and Mitchenall admits it was not very popular for the first two or three years after deployment.
All of the traditional systems, all of the legacy systems that we’re using in local government at the moment are targeted at silo applications. The business areas that use them have been using them for 15-20 years and are relatively comfortable with that conceptually. So the idea that you need a single platform across the whole authority to better service the customer is culturally at odds with the idea that you need all these specialist areas delivering all these specialist services using their own bits and pieces of software.
We had nothing equivalent to the Salesforce platform other than Salesforce itself for the last four or five years. The silo systems were dedicated processes for running planning, housing needs, any council services. They tended to run on unique software heavily tailored for that service. Salesforce is a much more out of the box approach.
The council’s finance team also had to get used to the whole new world of monthly subscription costs under the software-as-a-service (SaaS) model. Mitchenall confesses:
That has been a major challenge. We went from Capex, paying for one thing, using it for 10 years and throwing it away, and moving to paying for what we do on an ongoing basis.
Despite the challenges and initial reluctance, around half of the local authorities in Surrey are now either implementing or using a Salesforce system, or moving onto the cloud. This change of heart was aided by a change in role for Mitchenall that came five years ago, managing strategic development of IT across all 12 Surrey authorities.
The transformation project is taking rather longer to gain traction than the move to Salesforce. It took until mid-2016 to go to committee to require the organizational restructuring proposal. The council then employed management consultants to see how it needed to be remodelled, which completed at the end of 2016. In February this year, it went to committee again to agree the project.
Mitchenall attributes finally getting agreement for the strategy to a change of council lead in early 2016.
This led to support for change. It wasn’t a political party change but a personality change. They became more anxious to modernize, and to gain the benefits of making the authority more effective and efficient, and driving better services through the community. Before, we might have been more concerned with maintaining the levels of service we had already.
A single vision
Tandridge is now in the process of finalizing the plans and costings for its channel shift, moving away from post and the telephone, to email, the web and the internet. The council is also looking into deploying further Salesforce products, for legal services and FinanceForce for running its finances.
Mitchenall expects all the changes envisaged in the strategy to be implemented within the next two years, adding that once Tandridge is underway with its overhaul, other Surrey authorities are likely to follow with their own digital transformation projects.
We’ve got a more coherent single vision. Everybody is doing bits of the thing, other authorities are ahead of us on a certain path, but we’re in the forefront of adopting the integrated approach. They’re already using Tandridge as an example to follow.
If all goes to plan, the reorganisation project – with technology and the Force.com platform at its heart – will repay for itself within three years, according to Mitchenall. He also expects to see a reduction in the roughly £1m Tandridge spends on IT each year (exclusive of staff costs), for areas like software licensing and equipment refreshes.
I’d expect that figure to reduce via a single platform as it will become much less complex. In our virtualised environment we support about 180 applications; we only have a staff of 250. That will reduce. If we don’t get it down to a third of that, then we’ll be doing badly.
Through increased use of the cloud, the council will also make savings on on-premise equipment, leading to lower electricity bills as the cost of air-conditioning decreases, for example. Mitchenall adds:
But the real savings will come because of the restructuring of the council. The forecast is between a 15-20 percent reduction in manpower. When the council costs are about 80 percent manpower, it’s much more important to make manpower savings than the other 20 percent that IT is in.
IT is the enabler of change. If the business thinks that the change it will get comes from the cost of the technology, it’s not really working the right way.
And on the eve of his retirement, is there anything Mitchenall would change about local government IT?
If there was anything I could change, I’d try and improve the rate that people realise you have to change everything about the way you work, not just tidy up around the edges.
And I’d do it quicker.
Image credit - Images sourced via author Disclosure - Salesforce is a  diginomica/government premier partner. Read more on: Digital government and public servicesLocal

