
Casey Carl
In the first part of this article, Target CEO Brian Cornell outlined the firm’s strategic direction in digital. In part 2, Chief Strategy and Innovation Officer Casey Carl puts some meat on the bones as the firm pursues annual growth in digital channel sales of 40% or more.
Carl heads up the Target enterprise strategy team which sets the strategic agenda for the corporation, identifies the critical priorities and investments, and determines key capabilities needed to position Target for sustainable market share growth. With all that in mind, Carl has a to-do list that includes:

being more declarative about what Target stands for
leading with mobile
managing supply chain and inventory differently to support the new ways guests want to shop
strengthening data and analytics and technology capabilities to support the firm’s approach to loyalty, localization, and personalization
fostering a new culture of innovation and entrepreneurial spirit to create disruptive capabilities.

Such corporate objectives have been shaped by close examination of the firm’s recent performance. Carl explains:
As technology moved from a support function to core capability and a guest-facing experience, we saw that we were too reliant on third-party vendors, and we lack a strong bench of in-house expertise.
And as consumers rapidly embraced digital, we reacted too slowly. We played catch-up, and we treated the businesses separately, while competitors who doubled down their investments and moved to integrate their organizations grabbed market share.
We learned a lot, and we will not be caught flat-footed again. But this work was also instrumental. And have made very clear where we should focus our efforts to reposition Target as a growth company once again.
Underpinning future direction is the destination, says Carl:
To truly become a growth company in retail, the future is digital. The key for Target, of course, is to fully integrate it into every aspect of the guest experience.
We have been making considerable progress on this front. Digital sales are growing at a breakneck pace. We delivered a 50% increase in digital conversion last year and sales grew three-times faster than the industry average.
Much of that growth is occurring in our signature categories, including home and apparel. Not only are we closing the gap, but digital sales are beginning to play a meaningful role in achieving our overall financial goals. Digital sales accounted for more than half of our total comp growth last year.
This is being driven by a number of different factors, adds Carl:
First and foremost, we brought in the right digital expertise to both the business and the technical teams. Second, we aggressively invested in technology and supply chain infrastructure. We are spending $1 billion on supply chain and technology infrastructure this year alone, and that’s on top of an aggressive amount of spending in the last two years. When you look across our competitive set, this positions us as a leading retailer, both as a percentage of CapEx and in total dollars.
We’ve made some dramatic improvements to the user experience. We have reconfigured our team structures to move faster, and we took friction out of the guest shopping experience. More than 70% of our digital experiences are brand-new including our desktop, mobile apps, and registry experience.
We’ve adapted our operating model to give our teams the right structure for greater agility and faster speed to market. In the year ahead, we will continue to invest and expand these capabilities, including moving to more cloud-enabled technology to expand capacity, improve speed, and reduce overall costs.
Mobile first
Mobile leadership is one of the most emphasised objectives, says Carl:
If you look at our guests and how they want to shop, mobile is truly the new front door to Target. Now, this is a staggering statistic – 98% of Target guests shop digitally, and the vast majority of that shopping occurs using a mobile device.
From a routine trip for groceries to creating a wedding registry, almost everything begins on mobile. Last year mobile traffic grew 44% and conversions shot up 69%.
But an important focus for us isn’t how we grow mobile as a sales channel, but how we will apply a mobile-first approach in every way we engage with our guests. Every touchpoint is an opportunity to inspire, to anticipate a need, and to help simplify our guests’ busy lives.
To that end, mobile has its own to-do list, starting with evolving the user experience by improving in-store location and navigation capabilities, greater mobile payments integration, and testing new technologies like iBeacons to make shopping even more personalized.
One major success story so far is the Cartwheel mobile coupons app which has generated more than $1 billion in sales from 13 million users. Carl notes:
With more than 13 million users, it’s one of the most downloaded retail apps ever. And we’ll continue to test more personalized and meaningful offers with a guest set that enjoys the gamification of shopping and the savings that this app provides.
There will also be modifications to supply chain management as Carl explains:
It’s no longer about simply moving goods from factory to shelf. It has become a guest-facing operation capable of driving significant sales. Fulfilment choice has become a baseline expectation. The key is to continue to improve the overall experience.
In 2013, Target rolled out store pickup chain-wide and today 12% to 15% of digital orders are routinely fulfilled in store, with seasonal peaks, such as the run-up to Christmas where the percentage rose to 50% of all digital transactions. Carl adds:
Store pickup is not only a convenient option for our guests. It’s delivering meaningful savings on our shipping costs as well. Ship From Store, which we launched last year is operating in 136 stores. It allows us to dramatically improve speed to guests and saves significant shipping costs, as these locations are much close to where are guests live. In fact, we can reach 91% of all Americans within one to two days by shipping from these locations.
Another key area of focus is around data and analytics, which Carl admits is where Target is playing catch up:
Today, we have lots of different data sources that give us unrivalled insights into our guests and their preferences. But we are not getting as clear a picture as we could because this work has been largely decentralized. So we’re bringing all of our data and analytics together under a newly created center of excellence to help us scale these capabilities even faster.
This is essential to support the push towards personalization:
Guests live in an on-demand world and they expect personalized experiences, offers, promotions, content, and more, that’s curated to their wants, their interests, and their needs. Our goal is really about building the foundation, so we’re providing a unique Target experience for each guest every time they shop.
In just six months we created a personalization engine that combines our in-store and online purchase and browse data. We are currently one of the only retailers leveraging the power of both sets of data at this scale. We have already launched product recommendations with this capability. We rolled it out on Target.com to all guests last fall, and we’ve seen conversion increase by more than 30%.
This year we’ll focus on more personalized email marketing, more tailored promotions, and targeted offers with Cartwheel in our flagship app. In addition to developing a centralized function for data and analytics, we are also prioritizing efforts to improve our technology performance, including updating our development and our delivery models.
Carl also wants to see what he calls a “rekindling” of a spirit of innovation across the company:
We need to be creative in imagining new ways to leverage our existing strengths and assets. And we need to build more innovation muscle, so that we’re prototyping and developing a pipeline of new revenue streams.
In pursuit of this, Target has set up an enterprise growth initiatives team based in Minneapolis and San Francisco to identify, evaluate and concept new products, services and platforms. The remit of such teams is wide-ranging, from immediate issues such as assessing opportunities internationally through to longer term planning around questions, such as what Target’s role might be in the Internet of Things:
There’s a huge market opportunity around connected devices, up to $3 trillion, but no retailer has capitalized on it yet. From Fitbits to Sonos sound systems, our guests love these products. But in most cases they don’t fully understand how they work or if they can work together. How could Target connect disparate experiences from a Nest Thermostat to your Apple Watch and create a platform for consumers? How can we help guests better understand these products potential?
While it’s too soon to tip our hand, we’re getting close to unveiling a really exciting new project where we’ll help entrepreneurs test concepts, get first access to new products and convene with others in inventing new technologies in the Internet of Things space. This team is also focused on developing products and solutions that we can bring to market ourselves.
Read more on: Analytics planning and data analysisCloud platforms - infrastructure and architectureCRM and customer experienceDigital and content marketinge-commerceInfrastructureMobileRetail e-commerce and the omni-channelSocial 