
How often have you clicked on a website and then waited…….and waited……while a dozen or so different elements to the `page’ are delivered to your screen? The answer is probably in the hundreds, for so many online services use a visitor’s interest in product/subject `X’ as an excuse to try and sell them product Y and subject Z as well.
These invariably come from partners, and the web content is sourced to your page by them: and they all turn up when they feel like it, or that is what it seems at times. The clicked-on service hangs and hangs – annoyingly unusable – while it waits for that one last item to turn up. And it is not uncommon for there to be up to 30 or more of them contributing to any one clicked `page’.
Such service provision does not constitute a service. In fact, it can be one of the main causes of users – potential customers – abandoning websites and trying elsewhere. Yet the ability to deliver a service that the chosen customer-base can work with, feel good about and want to return to is one of the key objectives for any business, whether operating in the cloud or not.
It is up to the service providers to fulfil that capability for their customers, so that those customers can provide the right end user experience for their own, yet it still seems difficult for service providers to grasp this nettle.
A couple that have recently done so are Gravitant and Jenne. They have taken different approaches to the problem, and as they are targeting specific market sectors with different requirements. This just goes to show how flexibility and agility can help a business identify the right solution for the particular needs of their customers.
Both, however, fall into that broad church of service aggregation – pulling together the tools, utilities and applications needed to deliver the type of service a customer’s customer is going to require.
Gravitant, for example, is aiming at providing enterprise users with the tools needed to deliver, continuously and at scale, multi-sourced services. It has just added a centralised fulfillment hub and expanded API gateway to its existing cloud brokerage platform, cloudMatrix, with the specific intention of giving enterprise users the ability to offer continuous delivery of multi-sourced digital material.
The fulfillment hub, coupled with an expanded API gateway, allows organisations the flexibility to define and automate delivery of IT services across their ecosystem while maintaining governance and security. This centralised approach unifies the order, execution, and management of a multi-sourced solutions across legacy and cloud resources, by delegating and tracking execution, centrally. It offers solution blueprints that capture and track app and infrastructure changes, and a self-service store where users can single click order solution blueprints.
Packaging
Jenne, is a US-based value-added distributor of a broad range of business telephony and cloud services solutions to both end user businesses and Value-Added Resellers selling into the telecoms marketplace. It has set in train a plan to build a portfolio of cloud services solutions by adding new partnerships with vendors of cloud-based applications, tools and utilities. The aim is to provide customers with a broad range of tools with which to build the specific business services that meet their needs.
It has recently filled out this portfolio with tools from Alert Logic and Mitel, which join Digium, Plantronics DaaS Pro, RingCentral, AvayaLive Video service, Lifesize’s Cloud video conferencing solution, and ADTRAN’s ProCloud solution for WiFi and switch.
The former is providing Security-as-a-Service (SaaS) for on-premises, cloud, and hybrid infrastructures, while the Mitel partnership brings MiCloud, the company’s hosted business communication portfolio, to the party.
Alert Logic’s SaaS offering delivers security insight and continuous protection for customers, together with the classic cloud advantage of potentially lower cost than traditional approaches. It is managed by a team of experts and is claimed to provide network, system and web application protection immediately, wherever a customer’s IT infrastructure resides. Jenne will be targeting resellers looking to offer Alert Logic solutions across the marketplace, from enterprises, through small- and medium-sized businesses and down to start-ups.
MiCloud ties voice, collaboration, and mobility in a single, scalable, unified communications solution. This is also being pitched by Jenne at its reseller partners.
My take
There needs to be much of this approach, with service providers targeting specific markets, sourcing applications and utilities that meet the needs of those markets, and providing their customers with at least packagable, if not pre-packaged, solutions.
Read more on: Cloud platforms - infrastructure and architectureThe new professional and IT as a service 