

Brian Cornell
In many ways, you can say, we lost our brand balance.
That’s the stark confession from Brian Cornell, Chairman and CEO of retail giant Target, as he explains how the firm intends to get back on track and live up to its Expect More, Pay Less brand promise. He admits:
Quite frankly, as we look back, we can see that we decoupled Expect More, Pay Less during the great recession.
But today, we have a clear vision of how we differentiate Target in this marketplace and deliver what the guest expects from us. I can promise you, we will not lose our balance again.
A core part of that commitment comes from a drill-down focus on digital. Last month the firm announced that it had hired Mike McNamara, the architect of UK retailer Tesco’s digital success, to pull off the same trick for Target.  Cornell says:
We are absolutely thrilled that Mike McNamara will be joining our team as our new CIO, and he’ll be able to advance this very important work for us. Mike spent 15 years at Tesco, and has a proven track record, as a leader in technology and in digital. Mike’s insights and expertise will help us remake technology at Target.
While waiting for McNamara’s arrival, Target has clear ideas about the general direction of travel for its digital strategy. Cornell explains:
We will be a leader in providing the guest the ability to shop anywhere and anytime they want, in stores, online and with their mobile devices.
Welcome guests
At a more detailed level, this is all about re-engineering the Target experience around the customers or ‘guests’ as the firm refers to them and being channel-agnostic. Or as Cornell puts it:
Delivering products in whatever way is most convenient for our guest, with a focus on experience in an environment that’s simple and energizing. That’s because the guest becomes much more valuable when they interact with us in more than one channel.
Specifically, compared to a store-only guest, a guest who shops both in-store and through our digital channel, shops about three times more frequently, generating three times the sales and over two-and-a-half times more margin dollars.
Importantly, in-store sales from these guests are much higher than store-only guests, meaning that digital engagement doesn’t take away from our stores. It actually creates additional store trips and sales, as our guest develops a deeper and deeper relationship with our brand. What this data shows us is that we’ll be much more successful, if we meet the demands of today’s guest, no matter how they choose to shop Target.
Part of that also means becoming more localised and personalised. Cornell states:
Today’s consumer expects us to have locally relevant assortment and create a shopping environment that reflects their local community. This is not a new concept in retail. Based on the experience of others who are further down the road, we believe this presents a meaningful opportunity for Target over time.
We’ve just begun to scratch the surface in this opportunity. We’ll be investing to build the capabilities to deliver a much more relevant in-store and online experience going forward. Similarly, today’s consumer expects to receive relevant personal offers and experiences, and we’re investing to build digital capabilities to make Target a leader in this space.
Three years from now, Target will be a different organization, concludes Cornell:
We’ll be a leader in the digital and mobile commerce space. We’ll also be much more nimble, we’ll be much more agile and we’ll be an even more guest-focused company than we are today.
I believe three years from now we’ll have enhanced those critical capabilities [in] data, analytics, technology, They’ll position us well in the future marketplace. And I’m absolutely convinced we’re going to recapture that innovative spirit. It will be rejuvenated at Target. It’s going to keep us fresh and it will redefine us in this new marketplace.
So in many ways, the transformation isn’t the end of our story today. It’s really the beginning of the next stage in our company history. And if we accomplish these goals, more importantly, when we accomplish these goals, we’ll create a company that is very well-positioned to compete in a new marketplace.
So that’s the big picture. How it translates into action is another matter. In the second part of this article, Target Chief Strategy and Innovation Officer Casey Carl shares some of the detail of that.

Read more on: Analytics planning and data analysisCRM and customer experienceDigital and content marketinge-commerceRetail e-commerce and the omni-channel 