
The result of the EU referendum back in June was a shock to many, and business is still collectively thinking through the impact on its operations here in the UK. Given a significant proportion of the technology industry has used the UK has a base for its European operations, many concerns have been raised.
Will trade be more expensive? What about access to skills? Data sharing with the EU, how is that going to be impacted? Does it even make sense anymore for a global business to use the UK as a launchpad for European business?
The problem with answering these questions to date has been that we have been very little guidance on Prime Minster Theresa May’s plans for negotiating our way out of the Union. Will we still have access to the single market? What happens to the free movement of people? What about trading tariffs?
Beyond being told “Brexit means Brexit”, we have largely been left in the dark.
That is until earlier this week when May gave her most detailed speech to date on the plans for the UK’s life after the EU – where it appears that we are heading for a hard Brexit. And by that, we mean completely the UK exiting the single market agreement in favour of being able to control its borders.
In her speech on Tuesday, the Prime Minister said she wanted to “allow for the freest possible trade in goods and services”, but added:
I want to be clear: what I am proposing cannot mean membership of the single market. It would, to all intents and purposes, mean not leaving the EU at all. That is why both sides in the referendum campaign made it clear that a vote to leave the EU would be a vote to leave the single market.
She went on to say that she did not want to be “bound” by shared external tariffs, but instead would be “striking our own comprehensive trade agreements with other countries”. May said:
We want to buy your goods, sell you ours, trade with you as freely as possible, and work with one another to make sure we are all safer, more secure and more prosperous through continued friendship.
The response
Industry and business have still been fairly mixed in their response – with some welcoming the clarity of the agenda, some lamenting the exit from the single market, with others simply stating that it’s too soon to tell what the final deal will entail.
However, techUK, a member’s organisation that seeks to represent the interests of British tech and has more than 900 members collectively, welcomed the speech, but also warned that the timescales for May’s negotiation were ambitious and that the focus should now be on securing free trade between the two markets.
Deputy CEO of techUK, Antony Walker, said:
A smooth and orderly Brexit will be essential to achieve the vision for a global Britain.
The European Union is a hugely important market for UK tech, and is the destination for over 40% of UK digital exports. Similarly European businesses are highly integrated with the UK’s technology sector. There are big incentives on all parties to get Brexit right. The PM made this clear today.
The UK tech sector is highly integrated with suppliers and customers across Europe and depends everyday on laws and regulations set at European level. Leaving the Single Market will have a bigger impact on tech than the rest of the UK economy. That is why it is essential that the government does everything that it can to secure a soft landing for Brexit. The Prime Minister’s objective to reach an agreement on a future partnership arrangement within two years followed by a period for phased implementation appears a sensible approach although businesses will be looking for further detail.
The crux for tech will be about building a bridge between membership of the single market and a future free trade agreement. That bridge needs to be solid and dependable if businesses are going to have confidence in it.
Tech businesses will be realistic about the difficulty of achieving this within these timescales. Government will need to understand the needs of the sector in detail and persuade its counterparts across Europe of the benefit of striking a positive deal. The risk of falling off a regulatory cliff edge in two years’ time has not gone away. However if a smooth and orderly exit can be achieved from the EU then the UK’s thriving tech sector can go on to be the powerhouse of Global Britain.
Influence
In addition, techUK today announced the launch of an independent advisory panel, which will provide the organisation with advice on how UK tech can make a success of the European Union. The panel consists of figures from economics, legal, venture capital, civil society, a senior MEP and a former Head of the UK Civil Service and will help shape the work of techUK’s ongoing Brexit programme.
On the panel sits:
• Lord O’Donnell, Chairman, Frontier Economics and former Head of UK Civil Service
• Syed Kamall MEP, Chair of the European Conservatives and Reformists
• Professor Diane Coyle, Professor of Economics, University of Manchester
• Vicky Pryce, Board Member, Centre for Economic and Business Research
• Tom Hulme, General Partner, GV
• Tudor Aw, Partner (Technology Sector Head), KPMG LLP
• Ruth Boardman, co-head International Data Protection Practice, Bird & Bird LLP
• Rachel Coldicutt, Chief Executive Officer, Doteveryone
The organisation said that in addition to shaping techUK’s future Brexit work, it would make sure that policy makers in the UK, Brussels and beyond are aware of the issues facing the tech sector as the Brexit process develops.
Commenting on the formation of the panel, techUK CEO, Julian David, said:
It is fantastic that these experts will help shape our work on ensuring we have a Brexit that works for the most dynamic and fast-moving part of the UK economy, providing greater insights on the impacts of exiting the European Union on the UK tech sector.
It is critical that we not only make a success of Brexit for the tech sector, but help other industries successfully navigate the process and create a landscape that allows us to capitalise on the benefits of the digital economy for all.
With the breadth and variety of these figures alongside the vibrancy of companies in techUK’s membership, I am confident that techUK and the Government can work together in making that vision a reality.
My take
The impact on the ground of Brexit thus far has been mixed. Whilst some organisations have said that they will continue to see the UK as a preferable place to do business, others have expressed great concern about the access to skills and the protection of their European employees in the UK.
It’s going to be a long, long road until we know the true impact of exiting the single market. And although May’s speech provided some clarity, I would argue that we still know very little about what that means in reality.

Image credit - UK flag Brexit stormclouds from EU balloons below © meatbull - Fotolia.comRead more on: Digital government and public services

