
Tech London Advocates was founded by Russ Shaw in the April of 2013. After leaving his job at Skype, Shaw saw the bourgeoning London technology scene as an opportunity to give something back to the community. With the support of the national government and London City, Shaw self-funded and formed a private sector led, but not-for-profit, organisation that aims to both promote the London tech sector, but also help deal with all the challenges facing it.
What started out as a pet project, has turned into highly engaged community of over 4,000 advocates across London and the globe. The group grows by advocates introducing other advocates to the community and now has 35 working groups that focus on a number of different issues.
I got the chance to sit down with Shaw at the opening of Okta’s new London office last week, where he explained:
I have working groups focused on immigration, education, women in tech (our largest group), health tech, fintech, retail tech. Those groups – I always say to them, don’t boil the ocean – just do some basic things that can help start-ups and scale ups at a grassroots level grow, thrive, survive.
So it might be making introductions from an investor point of view, we use a collaborative database where we can match investors to start-ups. A lot of start-ups and scale ups want help and advice, so we have a service called Triage, where advocates can go and give an hour, two hours a month of help and advice to a start-up.
Shaw is incredibly positive about the London technology sector, citing how over the past few years the city has proven itself to be a bed of activity outside of Silicon Valley – with more funding flowing into the capital and more companies making successful exits.
However, one thing that’s clear, is that the biggest challenge facing London’s technology companies at the moment is the result of the EU referendum earlier this year. Brexit has the potential to seriously impact companies and their employees, which is why Shaw is working hard to ensure that the government understands the importance of protecting these businesses and people. He said:
[Our biggest challenge} is navigating through Brexit and understanding it, because there is a lot of confusion. We won’t have answers for a while yet to come. So what I say to people is – assume we will lose freedom of movement. Build contingency plans with that in mind. Assume the worst. I’m hoping we will be able to keep EU nationals here. Build those thoughts into your plans. But if we get more than that, that’s great.
Brexit means Brexit
With all indications from the current government that the UK is likely heading for a ‘hard Brexit’ (meaning we leave the single market in order to gain control our laws and borders), there’s a good chance we may lose the freedom of movement of people across the EU.
Freedom of movement has been great source of talent for firms in London, including the technology sector, and losing that rich resource pool could spell trouble for the tech community. Shaw explained:
We did a number of things post-Brexit to support the community, because one-third of London tech is made up of overseas workers, one in five is from the EU. We were all very disappointed with the result, but that community in particular felt very battered and bruised. So we were there to say let’s help that group.
[Losing freedom of movement] will have an adverse impact. There is no doubt about that. Getting access to talent from all across the EU has really helped many of these businesses. I think we have to push on the government very hard to say we cannot lose skilled migrants. Let’s keep developing our own homegrown talent. We have been equally vocal on that. But that will not be enough.
Because hundreds of thousands of digital jobs are going to be created over the next few years, we are looking at the government and saying we still have to keep that overseas talent pipeline open.
Shaw said that he hasn’t had conversations with the current government, but he does have a close relationship with the current London Mayor Sadiq Khan and a number of other high profile influencers. To help lobby on skills, Tech London Advocates has put together a post-Brexit tech and tech talent charter, which he has passed on to the Mayor and others in the hope that it will help advise government on how to maintain access to people in Europe. He said:
We have proposed a Tier 5 tech visa, as a way to streamline that. I know we have an entrepreneur visa, I know we have the tech nation visa – but the tier 2 path is still a very tricky path if you talk to people. So if we can expedite it and come up with a tier 5 tech visa, built around the other tier 5 visas for entertainers, artists, sports people etc, maybe that’s a way forward.
We will push hard on them to say, if freedom of movement goes, you got to come up with something that’s going to keep that talent flowing in. We are also learning from this talent, the knowledge transfer that we benefit from is going to be fantastic.
And if this doesn’t work? Will companies likely leave London and the UK for pastures new? Shaw said:
I think inevitably many will. Or they will say they’re not going to shut down their business and move elsewhere, but they will open up offices in other markets where immigration is a bit more open. It will be interesting to see what happens with the US under Trump, because I think there is a worry about the visas there. Is that an opportunity for us to say, look, if you can’t get into the US come to the UK?
I do think the government understands this and gets this and knows we need to bring in talent globally. They want skilled talent to come here, there’s no doubt about that. They want them to set up businesses here.
But aside from the economic impact, Shaw is also aware that it’s people’s lives that are at stake. He said that he was very aware after the referendum of the emotional impact on people and the message they were sending to friends and family back in their countries of origin. Shaw said:
They’re upset. I think it has calmed down a bit. But I was at an event the day after the referendum, and there were tears. People were asking – do I have to leave now? There was a lot of confusion.
One week after the referendum I placed a full page ad in City AM thanking EU nationals and overseas workers that are working here. And then two weeks later we launched a London tech hotline, offering advice and help, telling them not to go anywhere. But they did go back to their networks and said think twice before you come here. That’s the reality of this.
Other challenges
Whilst the Brexit threat is looming, Shaw was also very positive about the London tech scene’s
Russ Shaw
progress in recent years. He said that the city continues to see more early stage businesses form, and there has been an increase in start-ups moving to the scale-up phase. He said:
When I set up this group there was a sense of London being creative, dynamic, you can start a business here – but can you see this through? I was very worried about that, as were we all. But now we have a good, strong ecosystem that can go from early stage idea to successful exit. By doing that, that attracts more businesses from all parts of the world to come here. But it also attracts more investors to put more money here.
So what are the other major challenges facing the capital, apart from Brexit? I had assumed that VC funding was the main priority, but Shaw said that this has dropped down the ranks in recent years. He said:
If I were to rank it, maybe three or four years ago VC funding was probably top of the list. It’s probably now dropped down to number four or five. It’s still an issue, don’t get me wrong, but the number one issue is talent.
Do we have enough talent to support the huge growth that we see in the start-up and scale-up community today?
In conjunction with that, diversity and talent. 21% of London tech is made up of women, you’ve got to get it to 50/50. We don’t have enough minorities in the group. What about the LGBT community? What about people with disabilities? We are focused on talent as that overarching mantra.
There are also still issues around infrastructure. Broadband speeds are not where we need them to be. There are still too many not-spots in London. That’s clearly an issue. Property prices too. We’ve got great co-working space, but London is an expensive city.
Also, transport. It will be great when Crossrail opens up. I think we got a decision to build another runway at Heathrow? Getting around the city is a challenge. Those are some of the issues that we see.
Image credit - UK flag Brexit stormclouds from EU balloons below © meatbull - Fotolia.comRead more on: Digital government and public servicesHCM and the digital future of work

