
Set up in 2008 by Nominet, the official registry for UK internet domain names, the Nominet Trust has since invested more than £25 million into projects that employ digital tech to bring about positive social change. Each year, it also produces a list of its top 100 most inspiring innovations, such as the work done at The Level Market. 
After years of working in international aid and related fields, Stephanie Cox noticed that workers always came up against the same “pain points” when disaster struck – where to get hold of quality supplies quickly and at a reasonable price.
But her “aha moment” came during the ebola crisis in 2014. An officer in Sierra Leone told her that they had run out of household water filters so she started ringing people who she thought might be able to help. The issue was that there was no comprehensive list or centralised resource available to assist in locating them. From this realisation came The Level Market. Cox says:
But I ended up smacking my head with my hand. That morning I’d ordered shoes for my nine year-old on Amazon and it occurred to me that there was no similar kind of marketplace that meets these basic needs. You could purchase a lego set more quickly than clean drinking water in Sierre Leone.
At that point, Cox was running a consultancy business but started working on developing her own online, transactional marketplace at weekends and evenings, devising not only the business strategy but also learning about tech. She persuaded her father to invest and also found a select group of business angels via a Meetup group of tech company founders in Colorado, who put her in touch with trusted offshore developers.
The website itself enables buyers, which currently include the Red Cross and Save the Children, to compare products directly, receive custom pricing and obtain delivery quotes using a single form rather than having to make individual enquiries by phone or email – a time-consuming process when at least three quotes are often required to satisfy audit guidelines.
TLM, which has been operational for about six months, now employs four people, but has been incorporated as a for-profit, public benefit company rather than a not-for profit. Cox explains the rationale:
We want to make a profit as we want the business to be sustainable and that includes financial sustainability. We didn’t want to be on the fund-raising treadmill.
The organisation, which is based in Golden, Colorado, currently has more than 55 suppliers and stocks 250 or so curated products. It takes a commission on each sale, which is mostly paid for by bank wire transfer, but eventually plans to charge suppliers for listing too.
But ultimately, Cox has even bigger ambitions for the site – the vision is to become “the Amazon for aid” or the “Alibaba for humanity”. This means providing people in disadvantaged communities around the world with a vehicle to trade their goods, which are held in various warehousing centres around the world in order to cut shipping costs. As she says:
It’s about offering a level playing field so that a woman creating a great product in Zambia can trade with a man in Libya who could use it to help alleviate poverty in his area. That way everyone benefits.
Next in this series, Cath Everett focuses on the National Holocaust Centre and Museum.
Image credit - PinterestRead more on: Digital enterprise in the real worldUse cases 