
While the withdrawal from the Paris Accord on combating climate change dominated the headlines and left the tech industry up in arms late last week, there was also a reminder from Tech Mahindra of another cause of tension between the White House and Silicon Valley.
Back in April, US President Donald Trump signed an Executive Order for tightening the rules of the H-1B visa program to stop alleged visa abuses, adding that he was enforcing ‘Hire American’ rules to protect jobs and wages of workers in the US.
Indian outsourcing firms such as Infosys and TCS have been cited by supporters of the H-1B action as being primary targets for the changes. Last week, senior management at Tech Mahindra put the issue back on the agenda by criticising the likely impact of the administration’s policy. Vineet Nayyar, the company’s Vice Chairman, said bluntly:
Trump’s America First agenda and focus on curbing the immigration especially around H-1B visa policies will hurt the IT sector, the non-proposed radical shift in policy related to visa quota and allotment thereby leading to a tough application procedure and higher cost of Indian IT companies looking to bring talent to the United States.
It would be America that would suffer, he added, arguing that firms such Tech Mahindra would adjust and adapt to survive:
Many other countries like the UK, Australia, Singapore, etc., have also tightened the visa requirements. We all will have to realign our business models to the new realities and have already optimized our visa requirements and focus on local hiring. Having said that, I would add that I do not see that as a major setback. There are adequate numbers of engineers available in these countries who can be hired and of course part of this work can be shifted offshore.
But on the other hand there do seem to be signs that the H-1B clampdown is working in a way that the current administration can point to as delivering positive results. For example, Infosys has committed to upping its domestic US workforce by around 10,000 in order to service clients in North America, an announcement that won public approval from the White House.
Meanwhile Tata Consultancy Services (TCS) annual report has revealed that the firm only applied for a third of the H-1B work visas in 2016 and 2017 that it did in 2015, citing increased US hiring as the reason for this. Ajoy Mukherjee, TCS EVP Human Resources, is quoted as saying:
We have significantly ramped it (local hiring) up in the last couple of years, replicating many of the programmes that have worked very well for us in India, such as partnering academic institutions and engaging with high school students. All this is helping us bring down our dependence on work visas. In 2016 and again this year, we have applied for only a third of the visas we had applied for in 2015.
More to come
The Trump Executive Order also called upon the Departments of Labour, Justice, Homeland Security, and the state to take action against fraud and abuse of visa programs . There has been an indication of how that works in practice in the form of a letter from Acting Director of U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services James McCament to questions from Republican Senator Chuck Grassley.
Grassley had posed his questions following a report by TV show 60 Minutes on outsourcing, You’re Fired, which looked at the example of IT workers at Disney who found themselves having to train up their outsourced replacements who were recruied in part via the H-1B scheme.
The Disney case had been brought up several times during the US Presidential Election campaign, following which Disney had stated:
Approximately a year and a half ago, we reorganized our Parks and Resorts IT department, taking it from a team that focused primarily on maintaining our existing systems, to one that is more focused on developing new capabilities. A focus on innovation is critical given the constant evolution of technology.
Approximately 250 people were affected by the re-organization, and we were able to hire back more than 100 of them in other positions with Disney. In addition, since the reorganization, we have hired more than 140 other US IT workers into technical roles within the Parks technology team, and we are currently recruiting candidates to fill more than 100 IT positions.  The Parks US IT team will ultimately be larger than it was prior to the re-organization.
But outsourcing in the Magic Kingdom remains a hot topic in the US. McCament says in his letter:
US Citizenship and Immigration Services (USCIS) has participated in multiple investigations regarding the possible misuse of the H-1B visa program by employers, such as…Disney, as well as the firms contracted by those companies to provide H-1B workers. USCIS continues to review information from previously filed visa petitions and site visits at these companies and will refer its findings to US Immigration and Customs Enforcement if violations of the legal requirements can be substantiated.
In response to being asked what USCIS needs to enforce the new regulations, the reply from McCament was:
As the President noted when signing the Buy American, Hire American Executive Order, “Right now, widespread abuse in our immigration system is allowing American workers of all backgrounds to be replaced by workers brought in from other countries to do the same job, sometimes for lesser pay’. The President is committed to ensuring that jobs are first offered to American workers before allowing employers to import foreign workers.
The Department is interested in working with you, as Chairman, to increase the oversight capabilities and enhance the authorites we have to deter and prosecute H-1B visa fraud. USCIS is working with the Secretary’s Office and the Office of Management and Budget to clear a set of legislative reforms to be sent to the Committee on the Judiciary that could improve the H-1B visa program. Pursuant to the Buy American, Hire American Executive Order, the Department will be providing recommendations to enhance the program’s integrity and to better protect US worker who may be disadvantaged by the program.
My take
Climate change and gender/sexual equality are the two big battles that tech leaders have been tackling over the past week or so, but H-1B is not an issue that’s going to go away. Skilled immigration is going to continue to be a problem that the tech industry and the Indian outsourcing sector will have to work around. As Tech Mahindra CEO CP Gurnani noted:
If we were to say, ‘Am I concerned about some of the protectionism or some of the geography challenges?’, yes, I am. But at the same time I do believe that we are as much a local company now. I have six centers in US, I have two centers in Canada, and I have two centers in Australia, three centers in UK. We are trying to adopt ourselves, but the technology people are not so readily available.
So there will always be a little bit of a challenge. In global trades, it is nothing new. I know that it may have a marginal impact in terms of the kind of projects we do but if we continue to be innovative, and if we continue to look at alternate methods, I think this would not be, this is a surmountable challenge, that is the way I look at it.
Image credit - YouTubeRead more on: Digital government and public servicesHCM and the digital future of workRegulation

