
Matt Hancock
Timing is everything. Following news at the weekend that the UK Parliament had been subject to a cyber-attack that took out email accounts across Wesminster, up pops Minister for Digital Matt Hancock to set us all straight about tech security.
Speaking at the Margaret Thatcher Conference on Security – I know, who knew?!? – Hancock began his speech with the by-now-obligatory ‘don’t things change fast?’ schtick:
I wonder, if the child born in 1820, when the fastest anyone could travel was by horse, and any information could travel was by pigeon, would have experienced more change over a lifetime than a child born in, say, 1970, or 1980 will experience over their lifetime?
Let’s just settle this one once and for all, because it’s a question that keeps being aired in some form or another almost every time a politician does a digital pitch.
The answer is no, no that child nor any other realised anything about the speed of change, the PC, the iPad, mobile phones, the Internet etc etc. OK? Let’s move on.
The thrust of Hancock’s address was how society rises to the challenge of new technology, starting with jobs. And again, we address the future by trawling the past for comparisons:
Harold Wilson feared the machines would take all the jobs. John Maynard Keynes lamented a future of “technological unemployment”. The Luddites smashed looms because they were replacing the hand-weaving technologies of the time.
And I should know, because they were led by the Hancocks of Nottinghamshire, and I’m descended from them.
You know, I’m not entirely convinced that this endorses credentials to pushing through a digital revolution in government, but anyway…
This is followed by a concession that “jobs are being destroyed”. but a follow-on that new jobs are being created with the bold claim that:
Some say the new blue collar job is coding.
It’s not entirely clear who has been saying that, but the point is succeeded by another historical quote, this time from Baroness Thatcher herself:
As Margaret Thatcher herself said: “Technology is the true friend of full employment, the indispensible ally of progress, and the surest guarantee of prosperity.” We need to make that true today not by burying our heads in the sand but by equipping people with the skills they need to thrive with the new technology.
Society
Next up, the impact on society itself of technology and here we move into what has become a familiar theme from the current government – the dangers of the internet:
While the internet brings incalculable benefits, so too it brings harms, and to harness its benefits we must mitigate these harms.
Parents worry that their children may be vulnerable online in ways they don’t understand. Customers worry what tech companies are doing with their data. Citizens worry that terrorists can use the internet to plan with impunity.
The basic problem is that technology is developing faster than the speed at which society has built new rules to deal with the challenges it creates. As a result, we do not yet have a shared understanding of what is and isn’t acceptable online.
This is what the government is going to fix, says Hancock, via its Digital Charter, one of the few non-Brexit policy commitment in the recent Queen’s Speech:
It is the role of Government to lead the way in closing this gap and ensure the right balance between freedom and security in the new digital age.
The Internet grew up on a libertarian dream that a lack of rules would bring out the best in everyone. It does bring out the best in most people. But just like offline, not everyone. That’s human nature. So we need to ensure both that people are free, and are kept safe, online as well as off.
And to end, a patriotic rallying cry:
The stakes are huge.
On both counts, the impact of getting things right will be enormous. No country yet has managed it and if we can do so we will have a big advantage, strengthen our digital economy, and make our country more secure.
Ultimately, the prize is significant.
My take
Not really anything we haven’t seen or heard before, which rather sums up the current state of UK government digital transformation – very little practical detail and too much focus on clamping down on the dark side of the Internet.
It’s amusing though that the one thing missing from this address to a security conference was any real discussion of, well, security.
Maybe next time.
Image credit - YouTubeRead more on: Digital government and public servicesSecurity

