
It may not be a headlong rush, but the number of large hosting and cloud services provider businesses starting to offer Microsoft’s Office365 as part of their portfolio of cloud services continues to grow.
Following on from Huawei and Equinix, the latest to join the party is Telecity, down in the heart of London’s docklands. What is more Adi Ayyagari, who heads up the company’s Cloud IX division, feels it offers some advantages that others lack.
The key advantage is that it provides users with a single connection for all their services. They can connect any-to-any services together to build comprehensive and complex collaborative environments. So having Office365 officially available from Microsoft as one of those services is an obvious move for both parties.
Telecity already has plenty of traction amongst the large enterprise community, and it is the large enterprises where widespread use of Microsoft Office is likely to be found. Having it available, and having it in an environment where building collaborative services is possible, is likely to prove quite attractive to them.
In the process, it effectively buries the integration issues within the service, taking the time and cost of engineering the connection and collaboration between services out of the hands of the customers. In addition, there are no set-up costs for such connections, so according to Ayyagari the charges for services are very predictable. Users only pay for the virtual circuits that they use.
On the supply side, Telecity is seeing the big CSPs such as Amazon and Microsoft going local, turning to operations such as Telecity in order to provide customers outside of their core US marketplace with secure services. Ayyagri says:
Telecity underpins the European internet, and now spreads out into Africa and the Middle East, so the big CSPs are turning to us to provide the secure services they require. They are already using Cloud IX.
The other key advantage Telecity claims is that using it gives the big CSPs access to markets, such as those in Africa, where they do not have any current points of presence. In addition, it runs over the Layer 3 Network Layer of the Open Systems Interconnection (OSI) model, making services more resilient and robust.
Starting to see demand from customers for connection to and inclusion of Microsoft’s Office365 services. Telecity’s customers range from industrial verticals through to a channel of telecoms companies that service down to the SMB level.
Hybrid
Ayyagari is also seeing a significant increase in their use of hybrid architectures which require the integration of existing IT applications and services:
We give quick and easy access to these markets for service providers like Microsoft, and we also provide that for large organisations. Cloud IX is already used by many large enterprises looking to exploit services in areas such as Africa.
He claims that, as of today, this level of service is unique, though he acknowledges that in such a fast-changing sector this is unlikely to stay the case for too long. He also sees the service becoming more widely available, particularly through the telecoms carrier channel.
The company is starting to see what he called a `fair amount’ of interest growing in using Office365, particularly when coupled with Skype and Sharepoint. This key driver here seems to be the possibilities of building collaborative systems that combine content creation, reduced latency and the chance to use dedicated bandwidth rather than running services over the public internet.
The arrival of Office365 – with Microsoft Office now established as a venerable as well as still pretty dominant legacy system – in Telecity’s portfolio raises the issue of how the company deals with customers looking to migrate to the cloud. This is particularly relevant with the arrival of Office365 as it might be the inducement to migrate to the cloud that such customers might require. Ayyagri says:
Cloud IX offers a pretty low barrier to businesses migrating to the cloud but there are still issues for many of them. The integration of legacy applications and new cloud services is still the Holy Grail they are seeking, but there can often be people problems to overcome as well as issues with Governance.
There can also be technical and commercial barriers as well. For example, moving to the cloud means that there is often an unstated expectation that there will be no lock-in, but that is not always the case with legacy applications.
My take
For a lot of businesses this is the bedrock of the business, and getting Office in the cloud and collaborating with other applications and services, without too much hardship and across markets where European enterprises are likely to do business, may well be the stuff of life for them.
Read more on: Productivity 