
Lund in action
In early May, it will be two years since data warehousing and analytics company Teradata announced the appointment of board member Victor Lund as its new CEO, following the abrupt resignation of predecessor Mike Koehler.
Shares in the company surged on the news, reflecting hopes that Lund might be able to inject the lethargic Teradata with a new sense of urgency, after years of torpor and lacklustre financial results. This week, at the company’s Teradata Universe conference in London, Lund joked over lunch that not everyone seemed so enthusiastic about his appointment at the time:
For some financial analysts, it was a question of, ‘Who is this 68-year old grocery guy, anyway?’ I didn’t like to tell them I was actually 69 at the time.
Lund’s referring to his long career in retail, and in particular, his 22 years at the American Stores Company, the owner of US drug stores, liquor stores and supermarkets such as Albertsons, including five years as the company’s CEO between 1992 and 1997. But he’s also served on the boards of many others, including at Del Monte Foods and Delta Air Lines, and in the tech sector, he spent six years as non-executive chairman of the board at cloud retail apps company DemandTec, before its acquisition by IBM in early 2012.
Making his mark
There’s no two ways about it: given his age, Lund is unlikely to want to serve as CEO of Teradata for the long term. In fact, he’s said as much. But, at the same time, he has also emphasized that he doesn’t want to be a ‘caretaker CEO’, simply keeping things ticking over at a company clearly crying out for more radical changes. He wants instead to transform Teradata and make his mark in his time as CEO there – so two years into his turn at the helm, how’s that working out and how does he characterize the company today? He told me:
Transformation work is always interesting, always challenging. I feel we’re now confident about where we are and we’re learning a lot […] I think the technologies that matter, we have. We just needed to put them together in a way that made sense to the way the market is moving.
This is an interesting point, because for many years, Teradata appeared resolutely behind the curve and perfectly happy to be there. Executives seemed blind to the arrival of new technologies, from cloud to Hadoop, and even once they were identified and recognized as trends, the tendency was to dismiss them as inferior to Teradata’s proprietary data warehousing technology. In short, complacency was a big problem.
A lot has now changed. Cloud, for one, is a big theme for Teradata. The company this week announced the results of a survey of executives from 700 large, global organizations, which claims that more than two-thirds (69 percent) of organizations want to run all of their analytics in the cloud by 2023.
If that’s true, then Teradata needs to move in the same direction as its customers – and do it fast. That has involved a radical rethink of the company’s business model. At this week’s event, chief operating officer Oliver Ratzesberger summed up the direction of travel for Teradata as a move away from structured data warehouse technology, based on-premise, on proprietary hardware, with limited, costly purchasing options for customers and risk of lock-in. Instead, he said, today’s Teradata wants to give its customers the ability to analyze anything, deploy anywhere (that is, on premise or on private/public/hybrid cloud platforms) and move between those deployment options at anytime. Says Ratzesberger:
This is in keeping with our two year-old strategy of ‘Teradata Everywhere’ and I’m happy to say it’s resonating well with the customer base.
So as well as the business model rethink, substantial engineering work has been underway for some years to de-couple Teradata’s software from its hardware, he adds, in order to provide more flexible deployment options and to tackle the company’s own reliance on sales of data warehousing hardware appliances.
Signs of change
The strategy may be starting to bear fruit. It has, for example, opened the door to Intellicloud, which Teradata launched last year: this is an on-demand service that enables customers to focus on identifying data warehousing and analytic workloads that will answer their business questions and rely on Teradata for the set-up, management and support of software and infrastructure.
In the US, Intellicloud can be supported by Teradata on the customer’s behalf on a managed cloud basis, on public cloud infrastructure (AWS and Microsoft Azure), or on the customer’s own premises. Elsewhere, the choices are more limited – but the US is a good indicator of the way choices will expand in other regions. For example, Intellicloud is already available on the AWS public cloud in London, Frankfurt and Dublin, with Azure expected later this year.
Then there’s the Teradata Analytics Platform, announced late last year, which aims to integrate the company’s own Teradata and Aster technologies with newer analytical engines such as Spark and TensorFlow and to provide access to programming languages such as Python and R. In other words, this is about putting Teradata at the centre of a more integrated ‘ecosystem’ of analytics technologies for customers who need serious scale. It’s Teradata finally acknowledging that it can’t hope to meet all the analytic needs it customers to have but make the most of its longstanding, ‘trusted partner’ status with many of them.
But as Lund readily admits, there’s still a lot of work to do. For the 2017 financial year, which ended 31 December, revenues at Teradata were down 7 percent from 2016, although in fairness, the decline was mainly due to the 2016 sale of Teradata’s marketing applications business (which included Aprimo, bought in 2011), and also to the shift to a more on-demand business model, based on subscription based licenses, rental of hardware, cloud adoption and so on. The company posted a net loss of $67 million, versus net income of $125 million a year earlier.
The work must continue – and 2018 could be a make-or-break year for Lund’s transformation strategy, as customer enthusiasm for IntelliCloud and Teradata Analytics Platform is put to the test. Whether Lund will stick around to see the results isn’t clear. The promotion of Oliver Ratzesberger from chief product officer to chief operating officer in February may be a clue as to the way that Teradata’s succession planning is headed. A new culture must continue to develop at Teradata, too, to match its new strategy and new products. As Lund puts it:
Teradata was a company that had one product for 35 years, right? We’ve been on a journey to do what everyone else is doing, but do it better. Clearly, we’re not done yet. In some ways, I hope we never are.
 
Image credit - TeradataRead more on: Analytics planning and data analysisCloud platforms - infrastructure and architecture 