
Tesco has confirmed it’s abandoned plans to dispose of its data analytics arm Dunnhumby, news that came on the same day as the grocery giant saw half-year profits plummet by 55% to £345 million.
Dunnhumby, which provides data on the buying habits of 700 million shoppers worldwide, had been touted on the open market with an asking price said to be in the region of £2 billion, a price tag that many market watchers reckoned was too high.
This, coupled with the ending of a marketing partnership between Dunnhumby and US supermarket chain Kroger with the consequent loss of access to that firm’s customer data, meant that offers for the business weren’t exactly flying off the shelves.
The decision to pull the sale came after offers from potential buyers failed to meet that target, with £700 million rumored to have been among the highest offers. WPP was the last man standing in terms of bidders, after the likes of Google Ventures and TPG bailed out.
Tesco bought a 53% stake in Dunnhumby for £30 million in 2001. The company’s tech was responsible for Tesco’s Clubcard success and the supermarket wanted to make sure rivals couldn’t tap into the same resources. It subsequently increased its stake to 84% in 2006, before buying out the rest of the shares.
Reverse turn
Pulling in £2 billion from the sale of Dunnhumby would have done a lot to help Tesco reduce its financial woes. The firm is still reeling from a £6.4b billion loss last year, one of the biggest in UK corporate history, and is £21.9 billion in debt.
It’s also living under the shadow of investigation by the Serious Fraud Office, the Groceries Code Adjudicator and the Financial Reporting Council.
Tesco brought in Dave Lewis, a former Unilever executive, just over a year ago to turn the business around and it was him who identified Dunnhumby as an asset that could be sold off. But yesterday he confirmed that following “a comprehensive strategic review”, that plan had been dropped. He insists this is not a major issue:
We looked at all the options around Dunnhumby, a very extensive process. And actually when we looked at it and we looked at what it meant to retain that business and what we could see in that business going forward, we thought it was a more value-creating option for us to keep it within Tesco.
I’m very happy that we keep it within Tesco. It was never a problem with the Dunnhumby business. It was an opportunity to see whether we could raise funds from it because we felt we could keep the competitive advantage and not own it. But if the value that’s available outside is not as great as what I can see inside then, as I’ve been really very clear, I wouldn’t dispose of any Tesco asset for anything less than the value that I think it’s worth.
He added that the sale of Homeplus, the firm’s South Korean unit, for £4.2 billion last month meant that Tesco’s position had changed from:
a situation that was very different to where we are today. We did recognize [Dunnhumby] was an asset, that we could still keep the competitive advantage and not own it. Therefore we asked ourselves as part of self-help whether we could realize value externally. There was an awful lot of interest in the asset so we did it in a very full review. Fast forward to now. Our position has changed somewhat, the sale of Homeplus, cash generation from the business, other things that have changed.
So very happy for it to stay within our business. Very happy for us to invest in modernizing some of what it can do against both the customer offer within Tesco, but actually more broadly. We have some plans for what it is we can do.
We’ve obviously looked at what internal looks like against any option and we think there’s more value to be had internally so we’ve kept it. It’s as simple as that. It probably won’t be how it’s written up, but it’s as simple as that really.
As Lewis predicted, that wasn’t how it was written up by the mainstream media, which focused, not unreasonably, on the lack of offers coming in to meet Tesco’s £2 billion valuation for the business. What happens next with Dunnhumby remains to be seen.
Magnetic north
Away from all that, Lewis pitches the line that despite the appalling decline in profits, the Tesco turnaround is happening, with a renewed focus on the customer experience at its heart:
The magnetic north for our business, for me and everybody that works in it, is serving Britain’s shoppers a little better every day. If you work in Thailand, it’s about serving Thailand shoppers a little better every day. It works at every level for us. If you come back to the UK, if it’s Reading, it’s serving Reading shoppers a little better every day. And if it’s your local store, it’ll be that community, a little bit better every day.
[We are] being really clear about what this business is all about, and it’s about serving. It’s about serving customers. Can we do something better for them? It’s a purpose that allows people to make a decision when I’m not in the room, when their boss isn’t in the room, if it’s better for the customer, do it.
If every colleague, if every one of the 325,000 people that work for us in the UK, were every day able to give one customer an experience which was better of Tesco than they expected, we start to rebuild the brand and the business. That’s what we’re committed to doing.
There are some encouraging trends to be found within the Tesco operating results, particularly around online grocery shopping, which is turning in growth levels of 14%. Lewis says:
The growth still continues very strongly and we still hold around 50% market share in grocery home shopping. We’ve made some changes in general merchandising around making that a more sustainable, and by that I mean a more profitable model and not just nakedly in the pursuit of growth, but still growing nicely given the changes we’ve made. And actually clothing has been quite a strong performance, both in store and online.
In grocery home shopping we’ve taken some action around delivery size. So we’ve raised the minimum order quantity from £24 to £40. That was something that we did a couple of months ago and it’s part of an ongoing play. So grocery home shopping for us is profitable and the changes that we’ve made make it more so.
The firm has also been investing in technology to improve its processes, with Lewis citing the example of a new app that managers can use to improve product availability:
It allows you, if you’re a store manager, to intervene in terms of sales-based ordering. So at the shelf edge you can get involved and be able to either serve a customer better in terms of informing them about availability or indeed to intervene and make your own order so that you, as a store manager, have that influence over what stock you need at what time.
Availability was a very big issue for us a year ago. We are now, across all measures, at an all-time high. We’ve never had a service level in the Tesco estate which is as good as it is now. On the 1,000 lines that we identified back in October, we now have a 96% level of availability.
My take
Whatever the PR party line is about “strategic review”, the reality is simple: Dunnhumby didn’t attract the attention or the price that Tesco was looking for.
With that in mind, taking it off the market is really the only option, but the big question now will be what to do with it to make it into a turnaround asset rather than a disposable one.
The overall results are ghastly and it’s difficult to remember that at one point Tesco was pointed to as a great example of a flourishing and successful business. That all seems a long time ago now.
We’re gearing up now for the all-important Christmas season, when all the supermarket chains compete for that high-value food and drink spend.
Lewis has a reputation as a marketer, so it will be interesting to see just how that plays out when it comes to the Tesco ad campaigns their year. Winning the hearts and wallets of the Christmas dinner planner is heavily dependent on the success of your ad campaign.
But Tesco badly needs to find something nice under the Christmas tree.
Read more on: Analytics planning and data analysisCRM and customer experienceDigital and content marketinge-commerceMobileRetail e-commerce and the omni-channelSocial 