
Tesco’s decision to hang on to its data arm dunnhumby is going to result in a series of new propostions, according to Tesco CEO – and the level of commitment can be judged with the appointment of Guillaume Bacuvier, currently vice president of advertising solutions at Google, to head these up.
The dunnhumby operation is credited with helping grocery retailer Tesco to dominate the UK supermarket industry through the launch of its Clubcard loyalty scheme and its enablement of highly personalised offers for Tesco. The retailer acquired full ownership of dunnhumby, whose client base includes more than 1,000 suppliers and major retailers in 50 different countries, back in 2010 when Clive Humby and Edwina Dunn sold the retailer their last remaining shares.
But despite the successes in the past, incoming Tesco CEO Dave Lewis elected to put it up for sale in 2015 as part of his turnaround strategy after the supermarket chain found itself under pressure from low-cost incomers, such as Lidl and Aldi, and the rise of online grocery rivals, such as Ocado and latterly Amazon.
The asking price however was too high – said to be around £2 billion – and after a “strategic review” of his options, Lewis changed his mind and decided that dunnhumby would remain part of the Tesco assets.
Simon Hay, who had been CEO of dunnhumby for the past 6 years, stepped down after 25 years with the company following discussions with Lewis. That left the Tesco boss looking for. a new leader to take the dunnhumby division into new areas. That person is Bacuvier, of whom Lewis says brings significant international transformation experience and a deep understanding of data-led advertising solutions and of analytics and customer insights:
We’re at a place where our opportunity [is] to invest and grow dunnhumby significantly as a stand-alone business inside the Tesco group. You’ll see some changes in how it is we go to market with dunnhumby, a whole different offer based on Guillaume, his team and his expertise.
The role won’t be without challenges. The UK Groceries Code Adjudicator watchdog is rumoured to be set to investigate allegations that Tesco’s buying clout gives dunnhumby an unfair advantage. According to reports in the London Evening Standard, one supplier is quoted as arguing:
dunnhumby acts as a conduit between the supplier and the buyer so it’s hard not to use them if you supply Tesco.
Another complained:
We’re being asked to keep food prices low, but the price of using dunnhumby keeps rising at or above inflation. The software they brought in last year was full of bugs, the consultancy is useless and the fees are high.
Meanwhile Lewis’s turnaround strategy for Tesco appears to be delivering some results, reporting a 30% rise in group operating profit to £1.28b billion in the year to the end of February. But there’s still a lot of work to do, most notably around streamlining unprofitable stores and boosting the online proposition:
We’ve changed the convenience model in our Express stores, so that’s about 1,700 stores that are changing. We’ve done in terms of online to make that a more customer-centric but much more commercially sustainable business model.
But the reality is that while Tesco’s online business is not loss-making, it is delivering a sub-par return. Lewsis concedes that it’s a mixed bag:
The way that I would look at it is [I am] very happy with what we’ve done on Grocery Home Shopping, really very happy with what we’ve done on Grocery Home Shopping. The particular challenge in online for us is still in general merchandise.
Do we lose less than we did a year ago? Yes, we do. Do we get to a place where we would want it to be? No, it’s not. So there’s quite a big program of work going on to address it. But within it, I’m really quite comfortable with where we are on food, more challenged in the general merchandising space.
Earlier this month when it was claimed that Tesco is the brand most associated with Brexit and potential price rises, according to a study by marketing tech company Amobee. When the amount of Brexit-related digital content engagement between December and March was analysed, Tesco beat Marmite into the number two slot.
The positive interpretation of this ranking is that it’s due to Tesco’s very public slapping down of suppliers who bumped up their own prices, citing Brexit as an excuse. That led, most notably, to Tesco dropping 22 Heiniken products from its shelves. So in this case, every little did indeed help.
My take
Lewis has done wonders to stabilise Tesco’s decline and needs to be given credit for that. That said, there’s a long way to go yet as the firm’s share price drop showed yesterday. The dunnhumby future direction needs to be planned out with great care. Some fresh blood and new thinking can only be a good thing there.
Image credit - TescoRead more on: Retail e-commerce and the omni-channel 