
Just kids on Facebook.
Four damning words that sum up criticism of the UK police service’s attitude towards online harassment, according to a critical report from HM Inspectorate of Constabulary (HMIC).
The report – Digital Crime and Policing Study: Real Lives/Real Crimes – contains a series of comments from police officers which it says indicates a:
worrying lack of understanding both of the threat and risk to the victim and, as a consequence, a failure positively to support them.
These include:

I do not use social media; how am I supposed to investigate it?
What do they [the victim] expect us to do about it?
He will not carry out the threat to stab her; otherwise he would not have posted the threat online.

One of the most alarming comments came in relation to a teenage girl subjected to abuse through her social networking account who took an overdose at one point due to her despair. The report pointed to this as a case in point, adding:
It is, therefore, all the more disturbing that one officer told us: ‘It is just kids on Facebook’. Such a response is indefensible.
The report states:
The essential point to remember is that the gravity of the offence and its impact on the victim is not lessened because it is carried out online.
In some ways, the vulnerability of the online victim may be increased because the number of people who become aware of the allegation or who read the script of the offender cannot ever be fully known.
We found that some police officers and staff were dismissive of complaints about the misuse of social media sites.
HM Inspector of Constabulary Steve Otter says:
Digital crime is not a lesser crime; it is as pernicious and disruptive as any other and merits an equal response. The public has the right to demand swift action and good quality advice about how best to deal with those who commit digital crime from every police officer or member of staff with whom they come into contact.
It’s not just the police response to social media bullying and harassment that comes under fire. The way cyber-crime, such as fraud, isn’t getting the urgent attention it demands, according to the report:
In some instances, we were told that the victim had to wait several days before a police officer visited because his or her case was not considered important. Some victims were passed immediately to Action Fraud, regardless of whether that was the appropriate course of action.
The study goes on to add:
In two separate forces, we were told by neighbourhood policing officers that they didn’t understand the process and they would advise victims who reported frauds to call 101.
With that in mind, HMIC makes a series of recommendations:

Show that the police service takes digital crime and its impact seriously.
Better tailor support and advice to victims of digital crime.
Develop better awareness of how to investigate digital crime and the evidence required to support such an investigation.
Establish a more consistent and coordinated response by the police within and across force boundaries.
Keep the victim of digital crime better informed of progress in the investigation.

Victim attitudes
The HMIC study also highlighted complaints from officers about the length of time it takes for devices to be examined. This has a knock-on effect on the willingness of victims to co-operate with the police because they don’t want to be without their digital devices.
Some forces have resorted to outsourcing the examination of gadgets to private firms, with one unnamed one spending more than £180,000 in a year.
HMIC argues that the will require the transformation of a significant proportion of the current policing model and concludes such transformation will require both governance and funding:
The case for strong leadership and co-ordination nationally is duplicated at a local level. While the minimum levels of capability may be set at a national level, it is for forces and in particular chief officers, to ensure that they are provided at a local level.
Stephen Kavanagh, chief constable, of the National Police Chiefs’ Council (NPCC), says that additional resources are being allocated for digital investigations:
The scale of cybercrime in the UK continues to grow and law enforcement must evolve to meet the threats posed by digital crime.
The NPCC, College of Policing, Home Office and the National Crime Agency are working in a multi-agency group to make sure that every officer has the skills, knowledge and access to technology to carry out digital investigation.
We will be allocating funding and resources for digital investigation which will be invested to build the skills, knowledge and capabilities needed to protect all members of the public, including the most vulnerable, from harm.
But the victims themselves are also called upon to re-examine their attitudes to support improvements in police attitudes. Digital natives who now use online services and digital tech to organise their lives have a confidence in using such technologies and dealing with problems associated with them. This has an unfortunate side effect, warns the study:
It is not surprising, therefore, that many victims consider their first encounter with digital crime as something that they should seek to overcome themselves – after all, they will have had the experience of addressing successfully non-criminal difficulties in the past.
While entirely understandable, it is important for those who are victims of digital crime to appreciate that they are exactly that – victims of crime. And the prompt reporting of what has happened may help the police to secure a positive outcome for the victim.
My take
An important study with some uncomfortable conclusions that need to be taken on board.
Read more on: Cloud platforms - infrastructure and architectureCRM and customer experienceMobileRegulationSecuritySocial 