
Did you know that Instagram has over 25 million business profiles and 2 million advertisers worldwide? Did you also know that of the 800 million Instagram users, 200 million plus visit at least one business profile per day? With stats like that, shouldn’t every business, especially B2C brands, have an Instagram account?
Your Instagram business profile
The big draw to having a business profile on Instagram as opposed to an individual user profile is the analytics you get. After all, the whole point of a social account is to engage with your customers, promote your products, build awareness of your brand, and, in some cases, drive conversions. So you need to know how effective your efforts are right?
There are a few ways to share content on Instagram: posts, stories, and live feeds. Posts are your typical picture or short video and caption. Stories are a series of pictures or videos in a slideshow format. Stories appear at the top of your timeline and disappear after 24 hours. Live feeds are exactly that – live streaming.
With an Instagram business account, you get real-time metrics on your stories and promoted posts. You can see metrics such as:

Ad Impressions
Reach – the number of unique accounts who viewed a post or story
Website clicks – to URLs in your profile
Profile Views
Likes, comments, and saves on posts
For stories – impressions, reach, taps forward, taps backward, replies, exits

There is some question of the benefits of having a business profile on Instagram. Although you do get some great analytics, there tends to be a loss of engagement, unless you pay for sponsored posts (sponsored posts – which cost money – will help improve engagement and reach).
This concern might not be big for a big brand, but for individuals who focus on building their personal brand so that they are seen as influencers, engagement is a big deal. It’s a trade-off that you should consider carefully.
Leveraging influencers on Instagram
A business profile will help you gain exposure on Instagram, but if you want to drive even more engagement, you might want to consider working with influencers. That’s what SOMNOS, a startup that sells weighted comforters, decided to do. SOMNOS had a Kickstarter campaign with a target goal of £12,000 (~ US 17,000), and they wanted a way to drive awareness of their product and help meet their target funding goal.
When asked why SOMNOS choose an Instagram Influencer campaign, Kathrin Hamm, co-founder of SOMNOS said:
SOMNOS is the first weighted comforter on the market – outside of the medical community, very few people knew about the product and its benefits for better sleep and anxiety before the campaign. We hoped that working with influencers would give us the opportunity to engage with a whole new segment of consumers that would otherwise not have been aware of our product, and we were right. Influencer marketing helped us reach 455,847 people who did not previously know anything about us, and it drove funding for our launch.
Alongside this, we also wanted to see how people would actually use the product, so that we could feed this back into our R&D process. Through feedback from influencers, we have now developed a new line – the 2-in-1 King comforter – and it has since become our best seller on Kickstarter. Having the product in the hands of real people was invaluable.
Hamm also said they considered a Facebook advertising campaign, but wanted to drive more authentic interest and engagement:
It was important to us to have high quality imagery showing the product in use, and in the hands of real people, rather than a more generic targeted ad.
The influencer campaign involved working with 25 to 45 year olds, with a focus on young parents, fitness enthusiasts and young professionals – their target audience for their product:
68 per cent of adults suffer from mild to severe insomnia, and we wanted to raise awareness among a younger target group as to how important sleep is for your health and why a weighted comforter can be a solution to these problems.
The campaign put their product into the hands of influencers who would then try it out and showcase how it could be used. With the help of Takumi, a fully managed, end-to-end creator and influencer service, they worked with a group of influencers. Takumi managed the entire campaign, allowing SOMNOS to concentrate on their product and Kickstarter campaign.
Mats Stigzelius, CEO, and co-founder of Takumi, explained Takumi services:
[O]ur clients don’t need to have internal resource or expertise to do influencer marketing, and there’s no need to learn new tools. We offer brands a way to work with the best Instagram influencers easily and at scale, giving them access to high quality, authentic and engaging content.
Brands also then have full digital rights to use all of the images, meaning they can be used natively on their own social channels, website, online ads or newsletter. It offers them cost effective and authentic asset generation.
To be an influencer on the Takumi platform you need to have at least 1,000 followers, have posted over 50 photos and be a public account. Takumi only works with influencers in the US, UK, Germany, and Iceland. Influencers also go through a two-step vetting process that includes checking engagement rates and other metrics, as well as a manual review by the community team. Once accepted, an influencer is categorized based on their content and interests.
It’s a very thorough process. For us, quality is more important than quantity, and it has allowed us to curate a very active, tight pool of influencers rather than web-scraping 10 million accounts. This allows us to offer brands better image asset quality, stronger storytelling and the chance to build longer-lasting relationships with content creators. Better content also means higher engagement, and that is key for brands.
For SOMNOS, the results of the Instagram influencer campaign worked out much better than they expected. The campaign reached 455,847 people, received over 20,000 likes, 653 comments and an engagement rate of 4.52%. Their Instagram followers doubled during the first day of the campaign and grew a total of 430% over the next 20 days.
SOMNOS smashed their initial funding target within 12 hours with 42% of their backers coming directly from Instagram. The end result was 609 backers pledging over $170,000 US, the majority coming from the United States. Said Hamm:
The quality of the influencers and the images they produced added significant value, as they showcased the product in the hands of real people, in everyday scenarios. Where most Kickstarters are just an idea or a concept, this showed people that they could back something that already existed and was proven to work.
Another benefit of the Instagram campaign? They secured pledges from over 28 countries and gave them insights into other potential markets.
SOMNOS didn’t have experience with Instagram influencer campaigns, and they didn’t have the time to manage it. Takumi looked after everything, including selecting and working with the influencers and dealing with payments. But they did have a full view of the campaign. Stigzelius explained:
Clients can access full reports through our dashboard, which contains a full overview of the campaign, including the image asset, copy, when it was submitted, when it was paid for, and of course all of the results. For each individual post the client can see the likes, comments and engagement rate. The dashboard then shows the total reach, likes, comments, average engagement, CPE (Cost Per Engagement), use of emojis, hashtag and finally sentiment analysis for the campaign.
The Instagram Influencer campaign worked out very well for SOMNOS. Said Hamm:
This was our first influencer campaign, but we didn’t have any serious concerns. It was just important for us to stay authentic and get honest feedback on our product, which we achieved!
My take – could Instagram work in a B2B context?
Because I focus on B2B marketing primarily, I’ve never thought a lot about Instagram or influencer campaigns on Instagram. But for B2C brands it seems like a perfect way to have real engagement with customers and potential new customers.
Having a brand profile on Instagram is smart if you’re selling something highly visual. And you could build engagement and reach through sponsored posts and ads, but the best way to build an authentic engagement seems to be through influencers who truly love your product and what it does for them.
Could this work in a B2B setting? I’m not sure. If you’ve attempted it, or are currently doing it, let me know, I’d love to hear your story.
Image credit - SOMNOS Instagram samples provided by SOMNOS.Read more on: Content marketingDigital and content marketingUse cases 