
Last week, San Jose-based Fetch Robotics was selected from hundreds of hopefuls as one of the 61 most promising technology pioneers selected by the World Economic Forum (WEF) for their potential to “transform society and industry” and “shape the Fourth Industrial Revolution”, according to the WEF’s Fulvia Montresor.
Earlier in the week, at the PTC Thingworx event in Boston, Fetch Chief Operating Officer Carl Showalter was in attendance to explain how the company combines its own range of Autonomous Mobile Robots (AMRs) and its cloud-based robotics platform FetchCore to help organizations in the warehousing and intralogistic markets with materials handling and data collection, particularly those struggling to keep up with the pace of online orders.
A specific focus was how ‘on-demand automation’ – characterized by fast implementation times and pay-as-you-go usage – is opening up robotics to companies that may have never have had the cash or skills to explore this area in the past, by making robots more accessible and affordable. As Showalter explained:
There are some significant customer problems that we’re seeing. Number one, our customers in the warehousing, 3PL [third-party logistics] and manufacturing space are having a hard time hiring enough folks to staff their facilities. And number two, even when they can hire them, retaining is difficult. [We’re seeing] anywhere between 20% to 30% annual turnover is a real challenge. They can’t hire the folks they need, they can’t keep them, they’re looking for automation – and the fact is we in the AMR space are taking advantage of all the technologies advancements that are happening with self-driving cars to solve a bunch of problems, but indoors.
Go Fetch
So how does Fetch help? First, there’s the hardware: Fetch’s AMRs are comparatively low-cost, modular platforms – a circle with wheels – featuring an on-board intelligence systems that help them to navigate warehouses and avoid collisions with humans and other robots as they move ‘stuff’ around facilities. More recent additions to the product line, announced in April, bring a conveyor belt transfer system and an add-on for picking and moving shelves.
Then there’s the FetchCore system, a cloud-based control platform featuring a graphics-based interface that enables non-roboticists to deploy the system quickly. Showalter claimed that the system can be deployed in four to six hours, so that customers experience ‘same-day benefits’ from automation. Part of that speed comes down to the ability to deploy without upfront software integration, based on simple workflows with a simple web interface. Over time, however, many customers start integrating Fetch with their warehouse management systems.
Perhaps more importantly, however, is the Fetch business model, which gives companies more flexibility in terms of how they fund their robotics investments. In effect, what we’re talking about here is a ‘robot-as-a-service’ model. As Showalter explained:
We have two primary ways that customers purchase from us. The larger customers tend to want to buy the equipment upfront and then pay an annual cloud service fee – these are customers such as DHL, which have dozens or hundreds or even thousands of facilities. Our smaller customers maybe have a couple of facilities and are more aligned with the idea of Robot-as-a-Service, so they pay per robot, per month and they basically don’t pay anything upfront. It’s just a recurring theme over a fixed term of two or three years. And these customers really like this recurring OpEx model.
My take
It’s still early days for Fetch, which may be four years old, but which only started selling robots commercially two years ago. To date, the company has several dozen customers, according to Showalter, but investors clearly like what they see. The company closed off 2017 with a $25 million Series B funding round, bringing its total up to $48 million.
It’s also worth noting that Fetch is led by a woman – still pretty unusual in the robotics field. As reported on VentureBeat, Fetch co-founder and CEO Melonee Wise earlier this year spoke out at the SXSW event in Austin, Texas on how lack of diversity damages the engineering profession, saying:
Women tend to leave engineering because they don’t want to deal with assholes. Actually, at Fetch Robotics, we have a strong no-asshole policy because engineering douchebaggery is actually the biggest thing to hurt engineering since the dawn of time, and this isn’t just particular to women who leave the field. It’s actually particular to all people who have no tolerance for working with assholes and douchebags.
All this makes Fetch Robotics one to watch – on a number of fronts.
 
Image credit - Fetch Robotics Read more on: Cloud ERP financials and supply chainIoT robotics and AIRobotics 