
The Watch
A bright and shiny thing in the shape of a gold MacBook. Cheaper Apple TV. An interesting HBO deal. And a watch that completely overshadowed the other three.
So how come I watched the Apple event yesterday with a growing sense of ‘meh’?
OK, the Macbook looks lovely in gold. And its specifications are impressive. If I hadn’t bought a MacBook Air last year, I’d definitely take a look.
Apple TV boxes are now going to be cheaper. This was presented, of course, as a positive development by CEO Tim Cook, so hush that cynical thought at the back of mind that this just indicates lack of take-up at the existing price point.
HBO deal – looks good if you’re in the US. For the rest of the world, it’s not something that’s really going to be bothering us for a while yet.
And then there’s the Watch. Everything else was just the appetiser for a main course that had been hyped into the stratosphere of OTT anticipation.
You’ll know the basics by now of course unless you’ve avoided every news programme, web site or newspaper for the past 12 hours. Quickly the skinny is:

Two sizes – 38mm and 42mm
Three types – Apple Watch Sport, Apple Watch and Apple Watch Edition – aka how much?!?!?
Price points from $349, $549 and $10,000 respectively.
Customisable home screen
Phone calls answerable via the Watch
Direct Siri interface
A battery that lasts “all day” – which is apparently now 18 hours long. Yup, Apple is so powerful it’s now rewriting the time lines.
App integration like Shazam, Uber and something to open your garage doors remotely.
Pre-orders from 10 April, delivery in store 24 April, stock runs out…24 April?

Why not?
Now, I’m a dyed-in-the-wool Macolyte. Apple kit-only in my house. So why am I unlikely to be dipping into my bank balance at this point for an Apple Watch. (I’m leaving myself the get-out of ‘unlikely’ as everything might change once I actually lay hands on one as one of my colleagues has warned.)
Sporty or cheap?
First up, while the Apple Watch itself in stainless steel looks elegant in itself, the lurid straps of the Apple Watch Sport look cheap and nasty.
Given that my brain still functions, paying “from” $10,000 for a first generation product, that will be replaced within two years with something better, is not an option.
So I’m looking at the middle price point, beginning at $549, but ranging up over the $1000 mark depending on my choice of strap. I just can’t see that one happening.
Secondly I’m yet to understand what the Watch is going to add to my life that my iPhone doesn’t already provide. I can see that in future releases the fitness and health apps will be useful and if I get a garage, then being able to open my doors remotely might be helpful.
But do I really see myself using the Watch to answer phone calls? Not really I’m afraid, although I’m bracing myself for the sight of hundreds of commuters blocking the streets as they dawdle along talking to their wrists.
Thirdly, how long before it’s obsolete? Let’s face it, even a Mac-addict like me has to admit that Apple’s first generation efforts don’t have entirely spotless track record. Somewhere I still have the brick that is the first generation iPhone that shipped minus 3G while the first Apple TV box ended up in the bin.
That said, I’m still on an iPhone 6 Plus today and I have two of the vastly improved Apple TV boxes, so chances are I’ll be wearing an Apple Watch in a few years time.
Fourthly, the battery life. Whatever Cook says, 18 hours isn’t a day – and even if it did run to 24 hours, that’s still not enough at this point. Waking up one morning and realising I’ve forgotten to charge up my watch overnight is going to get my day off to a bad start.
And that 18 hours is obviously a best case scenario. Heavy use will drain that down a lot quicker.
Fifthly, I still need to be carrying my iPhone with me for the Watch to be of use. So why do I not just use my phone to do whatever I need to do? The screen’s bigger, for starters.
Enterprise angle?
So maybe not for me at this point from a consumer point of view. What about from an enterprise perspective? Well, Salesforce was first out of the gate yesterday with Salesforce Wave and Salesforce1 apps for Apple Watch along with a new SDK, Salesforce Wear, for partners to create their own apps.
Salesforce and the Watch
In a blog posting, Daniel Debow, Senior Vice President of Emerging Technologies at Salesforce. makes the pitch:
While many will consider how consumers will benefit from the new Apple Watch, we want to emphasise our excitement around how Salesforce for Apple Watch can help you connect to your customers like never before.
Maybe it will. But for now The Watch seems likely to be used for short activities, notifications and interactions before switching across to a smartphone or desktop.
There’s also an Evernote app that allows users to dictate, access and search notes, while BetterWorks last week jumped the gun and announced an app to help companies manage employees and track their goals. Another potentially useful app is Invoice2Go to help contractors track billable hours.
Clearly this is just the opening salvo. Over at Forrester, Robert Desisto notes that CRM vendors have been pitching Watch demos for the past few weeks. Desisto seems to share some of my misgivings:
Although the demos look cool, I question if there is any real compelling use cases for salespeople. I could see alerts being important but the idea of a salesperson reading email, checking the status of sales opportunities, or trying to navigate some report in a screen a little bigger than a quarter seems like a stretch. Especially when the Apple Watch still requires you to have an iPhone, and if salespeople have an iPhone on their possession why wouldn’t they just use it?
My take
It’s an important step on a long journey. But that journey’s going to have a lot of twists and turns before many of us can see a useful destination within reach.
It’s going to sell millions of units, of course it is. There will be a vibrant consumer apps industry within months. Enterprise apps providers will follow the lead of Salesforce and get skin in the game. All of this will come to pass.
But for me, the unreformed Apple junkie, what was sorely missing from yesterday’s presentation was an answer to the key question: why? Why would I invest a lot of money in this first generation product at this point in time? That’s not a question I asked of the iPad. That had my name on it from the minute it appeared.
The Watch is going to be a harder sell for me. I love the idea. And I know I will end up getting one at some point. But how far along the journey it will be before I commit remains to be seen. Certainly I won’t be in the inevitable daft lines around the block on 24 April.
But the Apple brand will win out and those lines will form. Accenture’s ‘Engaging the Digital Consumer in the New Connected World’ research report notes:
A positive feeling about a company’s brand is a key selection criterion when consumers purchase new devices—and the top criteria when they select a new smartphone. When asked to provide major reasons they are thinking of buying a particular smartphone, 49 percent said “I like this brand” and 32 percent indicated “I already own devices from the same brand” or “the design, look and feel of the device.”
I recognise the fundamental sense of that finding, which just makes my ‘meh!’ all the more vexing.
Disclosure: at time of writing, Salesforce is a premier partner of diginomica. 
Disclosure 2: Everyone has permission to throw all this back in my face if they find me wearing one on 25 April…
Read more on: CRM and customer experienceDigital and content marketinge-commerceSocial 