
Josh Valman
When he was 10 years old, Josh Valman had a passion for robots. Today, he’s founder and CEO of a UK company, RPD International, that works with them – along with a global network of designers, engineers, and manufacturers. Before that, the serial entrepreneur founded two startups and, seven years ago, kicked off a successful consultancy career, running multi-million-dollar supply chains remotely for blue-chip corporations.
Nothing unusual there – thousands of boys play with robots and grow up to be successful businessmen. But for one startling fact: Valman is just 22 years old. Read his CV again, do the maths, and the implications are mind-blowing.
It started with a 10-year-old’s love for British TV show Robot Wars, in which teams design and build bots to do battle. At 13, Valman finally decided to have a go himself, but found he was too young for the main competition. So he taught himself to use Google’s SketchUp design app and entered the engineering part of the tournament, designing a robot and using his school’s metalwork lab to machine the components. 
But he quickly discovered he needed to get them professionally made:

In the UK, factories didn’t want to talk to me: they didn’t think it was valid for a kid to come and use their machine shop, so they pointed me to China – as a joke. They were full of sarcasm and sent me on what they thought was a wild goose chase, but I found some Chinese factories and set up relationships there. We started making things, and everyone saw that what we were making – pneumatics, valves – was a step above what everyone else was doing. 
Pretty soon, all these UK heads of engineering started saying to me: ‘Can you fix this?’ or, ‘Can you make these?’ And that turned into a consultancy career: I did two and a half years consulting for public companies. Until I got fired.

Why was he fired? Simple, says Valman:

They found out how old I was. 
I started in consultancy when I was 15. I was fired when I was 17 and a half. By then, I’d been consulting on millions and millions of dollars of supply chain business. I had $20 million under my management – just me, on Skype. No one thought to ask my age. As a consultant, I’d be referred and referred and referred to the point when no one knew who I was.

When a 15-year-old boy is telling you how to run a $20 million global supply chain via Skype before he’s done his homework, something is surely wrong with large organisations’ ability to get things done themselves. 
Valman continues the story:

So I went and did what I should have done in the first place, which is go to university and study engineering. I went to a few lectures, but they were so… theoretical. Considering I’d spent the last few years doing this for real, every 30 seconds or so I’d put my hand up and say, ‘No! That’s not true!’

Results-focused
Fast-forward to today, and RPD (Rapid Product Development) International – founded at 19, after Valman walked out of college in frustration – applies the same results-focused thinking to helping enterprises get around the problems of developing products quickly, cheaply, and with minimal internal risk:

We support about 100 R&D departments: Unilever, Vodafone, Air New Zealand, lots of big brands you think of are doing something [with us]. We focus on research and product development. The core for us is going from concept through engineering and certification, then scaling up to manufacturing, all in one package.
It works because you’re selling to people who are frustrated by what they do, because  they’ve sat there and they’ve never seen the start and end of a project, even if they’re the Head of R&D at a big brand. Then we come along and say, ‘We’ll get you to market in the next 12 months’. They buy that straight away.

So where does Valman’s boyhood passion for robots, AI, and automation come in? After all, it’s not an obvious part of his company’s business (although a major brand does want a humanoid machine for a marketing campaign):

We build a lot of things that use the data in the business to help prove the business on its own terms. A lot of the systems we build ourselves, so every time we do a project it can then reconcile whether we quoted accurately, how we then quote next time, and lots of predictive stuff as well: which factories to use, how we rent those factories. I wouldn’t say it’s actually AI, but it’s intelligent to some extent. 
The other side is we do a lot of thinking about this stuff for clients. Our clients will say, ‘We want to do something with AI or with the Internet of Things. We don’t do software-only, algorithm stuff, we do products that have software in them. But because we’re so broad in what we do, people come to us because we know what the next ten years look like.

Analysts and futurologists all make the same claims. Why is Valman better positioned? He argues: 

When you run the next five years of rollouts for major companies, you get a good idea of what’s happening. Because we’re so broad, we can say, ‘Although X may be irrelevant to you as a product, how X works in the airline industry is really applicable to you in consumer goods’. That kind of cross-referencing has been very big for us.

His view of what the next ten years look like is as follows: 

It’s not going to be about customisation, but about really small market focuses. It will be about being able to run supply chains that are currently, say, at a critical mass of 100,000 units a year, down to about 5-10,000 units a year. 
What this means is that you’ll no longer have, say, the European market, or even the German market, but the Berlin market. And you’ll be able to say, ‘Here’s the type of product we sell in Berlin, but in Munich we sell a slightly different one.’ That diversity in the supply chain is what’s up and coming. It’s about being nimble.

As for where the market intelligence behind this comes from, Valman says:

A lot of the things we make have sensors in them. Even if they’re dumb products, we put sensors in, because understanding how people actually use products is so valuable. That data is how you get into niche markets. 
“Take a mop, for example. If you can see that in Singapore people use a mop in this way [makes forward sweeping motion], but in Thailand they use it like this [sweeps from side to side], that totally changes how you make the thing, how you design it, and how the grips work.

That raises the question of whether, when  you buy a product, you’re aware that there’s a sensor in it? And that you’re consenting to the data being used? Valman admits: 

There are privacy issues. But most of these things are only done on trial and you’ve signed up to be part of that trial, so you’re aware. It’s just in the first 10,000 units. And afterwards the sensors are either not produced [in the production run] or they’re switched off. I think that will become more and more commonplace, as we become used to being monitored, we’ll become more used to the fact that it’s part of how products evolve. 
Say if you bought this chair next year, it might be ‘London chair version 2.0’, on the basis that in some parts of the UK, people lean to one side, whereas in Wales they might sit upright, and so on. It might be a completely different chair depending on where you’re based. That’s the world we’re getting to, and if you can meet demand to that level of specifics, you can get much deeper into a market.

He concludes:

Taking over a market is about finding the most niche thing you can do and dominating it. Find a market with 10 people, get nine of them, and move on.

My take

Only a fool would bet against a man who, at the age of most new graduates, has built a multimillion-dollar business connecting enterprises with a global, results-based network of partners.
But his rapid success and ability to get things done should serve as a lesson for large enterprises, both today and in the future: many of these organisations’ own internal processes are broken, or clogged up and politicised. They can’t do it themselves. 
Valman helps them think and move like startups, by bypassing their internal bureaucracies, and linking real-world R&D, marketing, and more, in unusual combinations – or perhaps, more like the cross-pollinating combinations in which they exist in the digital realm. 
In this way, RPD points towards the future of organisational structures: smart, expert, distributed units coming together globally in whatever combinations are needed to move quickly and cost effectively.
That someone so young, driven, and talented saw the opportunity to step in and show 100 major brands how to get things done – quickly and cheaply – is an extraordinary achievement. That’s an agile business.
Image credit - YouTubeRead more on: Governing identity privacy and securityIoT robotics and AI 