
Salesforce made several announcements at the third annual Trailhead developers’ conference, aka TrailheaDX, including Salesforce Integration Cloud, Lightning Flow, and Einstein Analytics Developer Experience.
Most software firms find ways to teach prospective users and developers about their technologies though in many cases some experience is required in basic software development, system management or related fields.
While all of those things are important prerequisites they have a limiting effect on who can take advantage of such training. At a time when diffusing technical innovations in cloud computing is very important to the company, removing such barriers is a necessity. That was the impetus behind the development of Trailhead three years ago.
Today TrailheaDX is one of the company’s best-attended conferences with a vibe all its own. Dreamforce focuses on big ideas propelling business today, Connections (Salesforce’s other major event) is a conference for marketers, and TrailheaDX caters to developers and admins.
Salesforce’s breakthrough has been its design of Trailhead, a gamified online learning system that offers well-defined lessons and testing to certify new users. It was designed to bridge the gap between IT professionals and novices, offering training for each user type.
‘Programming’ via clicking options and dragging and dropping components on screens takes an equal place with traditional procedural coding techniques in the Trailhead metaphor. For example, Salesforce Integration Cloud is a new product based on the pending acquisition of the Mulesoft integration platform with Salesforce. Mulesoft delivers a strong capability for integrating conventional and cloud applications so that users can deploy information systems that span their organizations regardless of application type. According to the company’s press release (my emphasis added),

The new Salesforce Integration Cloud includes a set of services and tools that make it easy for customers to surface their data — regardless of where it resides — and deliver intelligent, connected customer experiences across all channels and touch points.

Integration Cloud will have three layers

Integration Platform will provide a platform for building application networks connecting Salesforce and non-Salesforce applications within the enterprise.
Integration Builder, enables administrators and nontechnical users to access and manage their Salesforce deployments and the rest of their application networks using non-procedural approaches in a single view of the customer using a unified admin console.
Integration Experiences provides a unified view of customer data so that admins can create personalized end-to-end customer experiences across sales, service, marketing, and commerce.

Also, the company introduced new process flow technology, Lightning Flow, which can be used by both developers and business users to design business processes using visual tools. Salesforce Lightning includes application development tools for both procedural (e.g. Heroku) and non-procedural (clicks) app development. The resulting process flows are expected to enhance the customer experience by accelerating processes with relevant data and process support to all business touchpoints.
Two years ago Salesforce introduced its AI tool, Einstein for its CRM applications. Today it opened up Einstein Analytics to the developer community, enabling them to embed Einstein Analytics and live updates within custom applications.
Finally, the company introduced a set of customizable apps for Quip, its office automation toolset. The apps are available on the AppExchange from partners including Altify, draw.io, and Vidyard.
My take
Diffusion has always been the make or break point for any disruptive innovation. Failure to get the disruption into the hands of users means that it could fail or that it will not have the impact it could. Roadblocks can include cost and time of deployment, and difficulty to conceptualize the innovation and its benefits.
Salesforce has so far managed to avoid the big blockages as it continues to innovate. As one of the earliest cloud computing vendors, it was able to ride a wave of economy and efficiency in enterprise IT but it also had to spend significantly to educate the market. Today the challenge is about making consumers, developing the talent pool that will boost demand for its products and services in a much more competitive world.
Trailhead was a logical approach to filling that need. By training users at multiple levels of consumption, from admins to developers, Trailhead develops the entry-level skills many users need to get their first jobs in Salesforce oriented companies. The company estimates there are over 300,000 job openings for people with Salesforce skill sets. By 2020 Salesforce projects its customers will employ 3.3 million users with an economic impact of more than $1 trillion. That’s why TrailheaDX is so important and why it is the fastest growing conference in Salesforce’s portfolio.
Image credit - via SalesforceDisclosure - Salesforce is a premier partner at the time of writingRead more on: CRM and customer experienceFrictionless enterpriseUX and application design 