
The Co-operative Group’s digital future will centre around an “unambiguously clear and transparent” data strategy, according to chief digital officer Mike Bracken who was speaking to members at his first Annual General Meeting for the organisation since taking up his position.
Bracken, who was previously the executive director of the British Government Digital Service and helped spearhead the digital resurgence in Whitehall, also took aim at some of the world’s biggest technology companies – stating that people are beginning to question how they hold and user their data.
The issue of data governance and data sharing in the private sector is a complex one. On the one hand consumers are grateful for a more seamless online experience, where personalization is increasingly becoming a competitive advantage.
On the other hand, consumers feel uncomfortable with the lack of insight into how their data is being used, where it is being held and increasingly don’t feel like a fair trade is being made. Or even worse, don’t understand the trade that is being made.
Bracken is almost a year into his position at the Co-Operative, where he also brought in some of his closest colleagues from the Government Digital Service, and took the AGM as an opportunity to tell 1,000 members about his team’s work to date.
He said that he wants to make the Co-Op “trusted with data”. Bracken explained:
Right now businesses like Google, Apple, Facebook and Amazon control our access to huge amounts of information, the news we read, the products we buy, the ways we communicate.
This has delivered tremendous convenience, but it’s not come without questions. People are beginning to wonder what companies have access to what data. They’re asking how it’s being used. They’re starting to question whether maybe they’ve shared too much.
And he said that, unlike the likes of Silicon Valley’s biggest and greatest, the Co-Operative Group cannot take for granted the relationship it has between a person’s digital identity and the services it provides. Bracken added:
If our members and customers trust us with their data then we can build enormously convenient and compelling services for them, we can use that data for good. But it’s increasingly clear that we have to win that trust, that we can’t take it for granted.
So we’re committing to a data relationship that’s unambiguously clear and transparent. We will always be clear and precise with you, our members about what we are going to do with your data. Frankly we shouldn’t have much choice – you’re our owners. You will be in control of the data we hold on you.
The discussion makes sense, given that the Co-Op is a co-owned consumer organisation, which owns a number of retail businesses and is made up of more than 8 million members. In other words, it’s not just driven by profits, but will also be interested in the priorities of its membership.
Turn-around strategy
 In many ways there are huge similarities between the Co-Operative Group and Whitehall. Both are organisations that represent the interests of a wider community, both are quite diverse in their make-up (in terms of providing a bunch of different services under different departments/companies) and both had fallen behind significantly in terms of digital development.
Bracken went into Whitehall and started with a small team focusing on just one key service (GOV.UK). This grew the Government Digital Service into one of the most influential organisations within government and it now plays a key role in cost-cutting and the transformation of services to citizens.
I wouldn’t be surprised if the same happens at the Co-Operative Group. And we can expect that Bracken and his team have spent the past few months picking a few key high-impact services to redesign and rebuild into digital services, focusing on user research and user need, building a network of stakeholders, as well as thinking about the broader strategy of how to link-up the disparate organisations under a more united ‘platform’.
This is all speculation on my part, but as we learn more about the Co-Op’s digital strategy, I expect we will see some strong similarities between government and Bracken’s new home.
Speaking to members at the AGM, Bracken said that if the Co-Op is returning to its “pioneering roots” and is focused on disrupting markets, it needs to be thinking about digital. However, he added that this doesn’t mean just changing the logo on the website or making some apps, it means fundamentally redesigning the services delivered. He said:
It means changing the way we work, very often this means we make things cheaper and more efficient – but that’s not the main point – the main point is that we create different, better, stronger relationships between our colleagues, you – our members, our partners and our customers.
Transparency
Bracken said that his team has been working with each of the businesses to build new services and
Mike Bracken
improve the ones it has already got. As to be expected, he said that they are “starting small, working iteratively” and making sure that the services are focused “relentlessly” on the needs of their users and members.
He added that the Co-Op’s plan is to extend the openness and transparency of the group’s pioneers “into the new worlds of digital” and that prototypes for funeral care and for wills had already begun. Bracken said:
This will be a feature of our work from now on – radical transparency. One of the things the internet is great at is sharing – allowing people to see inside your work, at their own convenience. We won’t be bombarding you with email, but we will invite you to follow our progress in as much detail as you’d like. That feels like a Co-op thing to do – right?
Finally, Bracken said that he wants digital to play a role in making the membership of the Co-Operative Group stronger and “more vibrant”. Again the similarities with government persist, as Bracken wants to ensure that the members have a “voice” and that as co-owners they have a say in the way the business is run and the decisions that are made.
You can think of it as a form of digital democracy. Bracken said:
And if we’re really serious about democratic participation we need to find far more ways to make this happen. Elections and Motions are important. But there’s so much else we can do using digital.
We want members to give us real time feedback on our products and services. We want members to help shape our ethical strategy not once a year but all through the year. We want to make it easier for members to connect with each other and share the stories coming from their own communities.
This is just the beginning. Make no mistake, the future of the Co-op is digital because the future of society is digital. It’s our job to make sure that there’s a digital world out there with Co-op values, not just the values of Silicon Valley and venture capital.
Come back next year and you’ll see how we’re making that promise a reality.
My take
Plenty more to come, I’m sure. For regular updates it’s worth following the Co-Op digital team’s blog here.
Image credit - Image's sourced via author.Read more on: Digital government and public servicesDigital transformation - frictionless enterpriseRetail e-commerce and the omni-channel

