

In a Robin Hood role-reversal, Britain’s fee-happy banks are robbing industrious, export-earning SMBs of an estimated £4 billion ($5.3bn) a year in unjustified currency exchange fees. And no sector is served worse than those in digital businesses.
The £4 billion figure comes from research commissioned for TransferWise, a UK-based fintech startup which provides international money transfers. Part of what diginomica has called the ‘gonzo bank’ movement that’s challenging incumbent banking giants, TransferWise took its Stop Hidden Fees campaign to the Houses of Parliament in London last week, calling on the UK government to outlaw what it calls misleading pricing in foreign exchange.
The total cost of “hidden” exchange rate margins and fees on foreign transactions for UK residents came to £5.588 billion last year ($7.5bn), according to the figures compiled last month by research consultancy Capital Economics. This includes fees charged to holidaymakers, expat workers and investors as well as SMEs and big businesses.
The most shocking finding of the research is that small and medium-sized businesses are by far the biggest losers, worse off in 2015 by an eye-watering £4.078 billion ($5.3bn), more than 70% of the total. This is almost ten times the £445 million ($580m) lost by big business.
TransferWise is highlighting these costs because its peer-to-peer exchange service avoids the currency exchange mark-ups charged by traditional banks and foreign currency specialists. It charges a fee of 1% or less, with a minimum charge of £2/€2 or $3, which it says is around one-eighth of the typical fees and mark-ups charged by banks. The venture-funded business made a loss of £17 million ($22m) on annual revenues of £28 million ($37m) in 2015, and grew its monthly transfer volumes 60% year-on-year. It has $117 million in funding from investors including Andreessen Horowitz, Sir Richard Branson, and PayPal co-founders Peter Thiel and Max Levchin.
Our experience as a digital business
The export-earning digital sector is most likely the hardest hit because online services, even when supplied by British businesses, are most often priced in US dollars. This means that digital businesses suffer a double whammy on exchange rates, losing out when they change their USD sales revenues into sterling and then again when purchasing digital services in USD from other providers.
Our own experience at diginomica is a powerful illustration of this. We earn our revenues from partners who pay an annual subcription to include their content in the diginomica partner zone. Since most of our partners are US companies, we set our prices and bill in US dollars. As a result, we have a healthy USD balance in our foreign currency account at HSBC. But look what happens when we try to spend those dollars.

HSBC charges a fee of £17 ($22) for electronic transfers out of the account via online banking
HSBC’s exchange markup to convert those dollars into pounds is around 2% (this morning it’s quoted me a rate of 1.333718 to convert $1000).
HSBC doesn’t issue a USD payment card and makes a surcharge of 2.99% on any foreign currency purchase made using its standard payment card — in addition to the mark-up that Visa charges on foreign exchange.

We’re doing our best to eliminate those charges by not using HSBC wherever possible. For example, to exchange dollars into pounds, we transfer funds out to CurrencyFair, a peer-to-peer currency exchange service based in Dublin, Ireland. By exchanging the money there, we often get slightly better than the market mid-rate. I did an exchange this morning at a rate of $1.304636, which is 2.3% better than the rate HSBC is offering.
That’s fine for paying our suppliers by electronic transfer, but many of the services we buy have to be paid for online using a payment card and are priced in USD. This has had us stumped, because there are no sensible options available to a UK small business like us that allows us to use the US dollars we’re holding in our bank account to pay for those services in USD — unless we first change it into pounds and have the card issuer change it back again into dollars.

HSBC is not alone — none of the UK banks offer USD payment cards to businesses.
Paypal isn’t an option because there’s no mechanism that allows us to deposit foreign currency into our UK Paypal account (plus Paypal’s mark-up on exchange is as bad as the banks’). And we don’t want to incur Paypal fees on our income, so we’re not going to ask our customers to pay us using Paypal.
American Express does offer US dollar and Euro payment cards to small businesses, for an annual fee. But you have to be an existing Amex cardholder of six months’ standing or more to apply (unless you can get your private bank to refer you!).
Our only option is to spend on personal cards from USD bank accounts and reclaim from the business, which isn’t ideal.

Fortunately, it looks like another gonzo bank service is about to come to our rescue. Revolut, a British fintech startup that closed its seed round in February, is preparing to offer its multi-currency payment card service to businesses later this year. Revolut, which is already available to individuals, allows you to top up in any of three currencies — British pounds, US dollars and euro — and spend in virtually any currency you like, converting at interbank rates without any fee. It makes its money by taking a slice of the Mastercard merchant fee. If this works as promised, it will save us significant hassle and costs.
My take
What’s galling about this situation is having to jump through so many hoops to be able to spend your own money without having to pay for the privilege! And then to find out we’re in the same £4-billion-pound-a-year boat as the rest of the UK’s smaller businesses while the banks’ big business pals get away almost scot-free, just rubs salt into an open wound.
As a director of one of the UK’s export-earning digital businesses — unlike the golf-playing business chums of international trade secretary Liam Fox — I’d like to see the government look into ways of helping small businesses avoid paying this massive and unjustified levy to the banking sector when those funds could be deployed much more usefully on investing in employment and growth.
The most productive action would be to find ways to ease up on banking sector regulations that are hindering innovative solutions from coming to market. At least alternatives are starting to appear, but it will take a good while to make a real dent in that £4 billion-a-year figure. With Brexit looming, British businesses are going to need all the help they can get to trade internationally. The incumbent banks’ fees and obstructiveness over foreign payments is a disgrace.
By the way, having signed up personally for Revolut’s multi-currency card at the weekend, I have to say this was like a breath of fresh air compared to the unnecessarily convoluted processes of the established financial services firms. One of the arguments against making foreign currency accounts more easily accessible is the need to regulate for money-laundering. But today’s technologies can put the necessary protections in place without having to inconvenience customers.
The old way is represented by the sign-up process for the American Express foreign currency card, which requires the customer to physically mail in certified copies of identity documents. Contrast that with the Revolut process, in which the app used the camera on my smartphone to capture my passport information, then captured my face and compared it using special facial recognition software against the image from my passport. My application was completed within minutes and my Revolut card was immediately ready to use. That’s what we mean when we talk about frictionless enterprise.
Image credit - Balloons protest outside Houses of ParliamentDisclosure - diginomica holds accounts with HSBC and CurrencyFair and has applied for a Revolut Business account. The author is a co-owner and director of diginomica. Read more on: CRM and customer experienceDigital transformation - frictionless enterpriseFinancial services and fintechRegulationUser experience 