
Michelle Baker, global procurement director drew this during my keynote
This time last week I was in Amsterdam to deliver an ‘inspirational keynote’ for European IT procurement directors. The brief was sparse and I had little clue what this audience might be interested in hearing. I was pretty sure it would not be ‘How to save 20% on your next SAP project.’ Of one thing I was certain: procurement needs to help business unlock value and at stake is an estimated $13 trillion to be found over the next 10-15 years.
With that backdrop, I took as my theme the notion of ‘software eating the world‘ to a different place, asking the question: ‘Who’s writing the menus?’
As I was preparing for the talk, I thought back to the early days of my involvement with the emerging world of enterprise software, remembering that in 2006, we saw Microsoft, IBM, SAP and Oracle (hence MISO) as the power houses driving the major software acquisitions of the day.
That has changed dramatically and as part of my narrative, I posited the idea that buyers today should be looking much more closely at FANG: Facebook, Amazon, Netflix and Google. As an aside, in 2007, we added Google and changed the MISO acronym to GISMO.
Why FANG?
Aggregation Theory
If you look at the commonalities between the FANG businesses it is apparent they all fit into Ben Thompson’s Aggregation Theory. For those that don’t know, Aggregation Theory says:
The best aggregators effectively connect supply with demand in the most effective way possible. They bring value to the suppliers by removing the overhead of direct internet distribution, making supply much more discoverable while also giving suppliers significant control over the manner in which goods, services or content is surfaced to end consumers. The value for the end consumer is a simplified UX, designed with a primary goal of reducing the net number of steps it takes a consumer to discover the specific goods, services or content that they seek on a platform.
This matters because vendors that solve for Thompson’s theory become powerhouses in winner takes all scenarios. The FANG businesses are but one set of examples but they serve our purpose well in the context of procurement. I argued that the same could be true of businesses that are transforming from makers of things to services businesses, citing the manner in which GE is building a massive software moat around its core businesses.
In the discussions prior to my time on stage, I listened to Danske Bank and Vodafone talking about the way they are changing and adopting some of the underlying principles that distinguish a FANG entity and what this means for solutions development.
Those principles can be summarized as global scale, open source, platforms and speed or GOPS. Under each of those heads I pointed out why these matter. Open source is an interesting one. Prior to my talking, some speakers were reticent about recommending the use of open source and yet there is no denying its influence.
Facebook for example has made much of its technology available as open source and, as Phil Wainewright pointed out recently ING Bank makes extensive use of Cassandra, a Facebook technology. The internet runs on the LAMP stack – all open source. The iPhone would be impossible without Apple co-opting a handful of government developed technologies that were given to the developer community. Need I go on?
Talent and change
Alongside that narrative, I opened up the debate about the people element, introducing my ideas around talent marketplaces. This might sound weird when thinking about IT procurement, but labor is often the largest chunk of change consumed by IT projects.
Then there is the Brexit/Trump phenomenon which brings with it, the specter of protectionist markets.  Add in a soupçon of talent shortages – or as I prefer to think about it, talent dislocation, and you open up the prospect of captive talent marketplaces of the kind Topcoder has developed as a pathway to building the kinds of fluid rather than static project teams that will be required by business looking for efficiencies in service delivery.
Finally, I suggested that since this audience was clearly interested in having a seat at the top table, then it needed to be mindful of the requirement to actively participate in change management projects.
I made the point that while some of us talk about ‘change’ as though it is an ancillary activity, the reality is that change management is one of the toughest parts of any IT project, the success of which often depends on the depth of pain being experienced by the business. I used the Sage and ING stories as evidence.
Looking forward
As is inevitable in these talks, I got asked the dreaded prediction question – what happens next?
I’m not a fan of predictions given that 97% of then are flat out wrong. But I suggested that other than having clearly articulated Plans A & B, it might be worth considering a Plan C that takes into account the way in which the geo-political economic landscape is shifting. The days of unfettered market driven economics are over. What replaces them has yet to be determined.
So right now we don’t know too much about the impact this shift will have and if you read the financial dailies you’d be forgiven for thinking that it is business as usual. Heck, our buddy Frank Scavo is quietly optimistic about IT spending in 2017.
But it worries me when I see stock prices hammered after an honest CEO acknowledges the Brexit impact on stalled sales. But then I’ve never had much time for short term ‘investors.’
And let’s not shy way from the fact that Global Trumpism as described by Dr Mark Blyth is a reality that must be weighed into any discussion about the future of IT investments and the building of global delivery capability, a topic with which a number of event participants are grappling.
Final words
One problem with preparing this kind of talk is that things are moving so quickly that what you say today is likely out of date tomorrow. In that context I thought afterwards that alongside FANG we also need MAGI – that’s Microsoft, Amazon, Google and IBM. Those are the four massive network and platform builders du jour. Pick your favorite.
Image credit - Michelle BakerRead more on: Cloud platforms - infrastructure and architectureProductivity 