

Dr Tsekleves
It’s quite a paradox. We spend all our lives working very hard, neglecting health to make money and then spend all that money on health.
So says Dr Emmanuel Tsekleves, senior lecturer in design interactions at Lancaster University, paraphrasing one of the sayings of the Dalai Lama. Tsekleves believes this phrase applies rather well to the situation today with wearable fitness tracker technology.
These health and fitness devices, such as Fitbit, Misfit and Jawbone, record data, such as heart rate, number of steps taken and sleep patterns. Armed with such knowledge, people can set themselves goals – such as the number of steps they’ll walk that week – which will help them improve their fitness.
While smartwatches and fitness bands are by no means the only wearable technology on the market, it is the area receiving the most attention by consumers and increasingly by businesses too.
Research from GfK found 13.5 million health and fitness trackers were sold last year, together with 4.1 million smartwatches. This year it anticipates that together the combined market will reach 51.2 million sales.
Tsekleves points out that BT is piloting Fitbit activity tracker. By signing up to use Fitbit, employees agree to the company using the data on activity or sleep patterns. BT aims to link this data to its firm’s health insurance schemes.
Similarly, BP workers in North America are issued with Fitbit and offered rewards if they hit their activity targets.
The activity is gaining pace – but is it time for HR to write the business plan for wearables? Although 2013 was characterized – or hyped – as the year of wearables, (and, in fact, similar claims have been made for 2014 and 2015), Tsekleves believes that despite some very interesting things coming out from vendors, there’s a long way to go before that claim is fully realised.
For example, while the devices are good at providing data, this data doesn’t yet go far enough: it gives you the numbers, but not the explanation behind the numbers. According to Tsekleves:
The way they are promoted and marketed, if you get one of these you’ll get healthy, but they need to provide people with actionable insight. They will tell you sleep patterns, which is great, but they don’t tell you why.
And the technology itself needs to be more sophisticated. A 10-mile trek pushing a buggy/stroller won’t necessarily register all your steps, if it’s strapped to your wrist, because your arm wasn’t swinging. Equally, you could lie on the sofa watching telly, scoffing chocolates and wave your arm around and clock up multiple steps.
Another aspect that needs improvement is that currently there is often a lack of integration between different sensors: they all monitor separate things, but what’s required is a consolidated view.
Opting in
Despite these teething troubles, both consumers and corporates can clearly see the benefits. It’s great for employees: helping them improve fitness and their posture and keep stress at bay. It can also be good for employers: having a healthy staff in mind and spirit will improve their productivity and commitment to the job and reduce absence levels.
But while there may be a broad aim to improve wellbeing, Tsekleves observes:
The ultimate message is not having healthier and happier staff, but how can we reduce our health premiums.
Optional
Currently, such schemes are done on an opt-in basis, but it’s all too easy to see how big companies may make it compulsory. Says Tsekleves:
Companies are starting to realise that if they want to have more productive staff, then they need happier and healthier employees. If done within that concept and helps colleagues in distress, but if it’s done on a more mandatory basis targeting who hasn’t done their exercise then that’s not so positive.
Not surprisingly, a May survey by Accenture found that nearly two-thirds of insurers expected wearable technologies to have a significant impact on their industry.
There’s a whole murky mess of privacy, ethical and moral issues that need attention if the whole wearables in the workplace is going to flourish.
To illustrate the possible intrusiveness into personal privacy, Tsekleves jokes that technology gathering sleeping patterns, might also “show how active you’ve been in the bedroom”.
Equally tongue in cheek, Tsekleves suggests this could sound the death knell for “pulling a sickie”. If your device measures how much activity you’re taking, it might be suspicious is you’re clocking up a lot of activity on a day you’re supposed to be in bed.
Behind these flippant examples, Tsekleves is making a serious point about the lack of guidelines and boundaries in place about what is acceptable for employers and what is intrusive. And according to December 2014 European survey by Ipswitch, over three quarters of businesses do not have a policy in place for managing the impact wearable technology on the workplace.
Data is a precious commodity. But “who holds your wearable data and who grants access to third parties?” asks Tsekleves.
Until these issues have been ironed out, Tsekleves believes for most corporate HR people “it’s still time to watch and wait”.
From a consumer perspective, he sees sales will be helped (which will in turn impact corporate uptake) if the aesthetics of the devices are improved. He says:
If we see companies promote them as a fashion accessory I expect the price will really come down.
Lower prices will be good for consumers and business alike.
My take
There’s a hell of a lot of activity going on in the wearables space.
Employee wellbeing and health are increasingly on the HR agenda and using these devices may be a fantastic way of helping employees improve their general fitness and employers gaining a healthier workforce (and perhaps reduce health premiums). Sounds great. And it is, as long as this is all that’s all that’s going on.
The problem lies not so much in the technology itself but the privacy and ethical issues surrounding its use.
What happens to the data, who owns it, who has access to it and what is going to be done with it, is an issue that has to be resolved.
Read more on: Analytics planning and data analysisData privacyFuture of workIdentityInternet of ThingsMobileSocial 