
Editor’s note: This story is prescient on multiple levels. First, I had something similar but snarkier in mind. Second, all around good gal Stacey Torman shared this story about PR rock star Margit Wennmachers. Read and learn. Onwards and enjoy – Den.
Colleague and fellow diginomica analyst Jon Reed, frequently skewers public relations (PR) firms for their poorly written missives and off-target pitches. Even with his stinging, tongue-in-cheek rebukes, apparently more newbies have entered the PR profession and need a refresher course. Some of the oldies might want to think about this as well.
While I asked Santa (yes, Virginia, there is a Santa) this recent holiday season to bring me only quality pitches from PR firms, my wish must not have been fulfilled. My inbox is overflowing with pure-D junk. That was until I turned hitting the delete key into a rap tune. So, if you want to pitch me, here is my sage counsel:

Know your client’s biases as some are deadly. While a good PR firm can try to make lemons out of lemonade, know that it’s a minefield. If your tech client insists on preaching the benefits of on-premises computing, fax machines, pagers, brick phones and/or punch cards, they’re not going to want the press they’ll attract for propagating these out-of-date positions. Seriously, who will want to write a story on ‘the resurgence of 8-track tapes’? What editor would print it?
Avoid the nonexistent connections to my prior published pieces. Recently, one PR wrote to the effect that I had used the word ‘ameliorate’ in an article. As a result, wouldn’t I love to get an interview with someone who is ameliorating a disk-caching problem?  BTW – I’ve also used words like junk, trash, garbage, etc. but I don’t want to get pitched on these either.
Just because someone got a job at your client, doesn’t mean they have anything meaningful to say. It’s great that your client has hired an executive assistant to the Mid-Atlantic Sales team for the vending machine sub-vertical. But, what makes you think this is newsworthy?  If it’s such a big story, why don’t you bother to put at least one headline item in the body of the press release or pitch?
Just because someone is a NEW tech executive, doesn’t mean they have anything meaningful to say either. G-d, spare me from these interviews. I’ll ask 20-30 great questions in a row but the new executive can’t answer any of them. Worse, it’s clear that I know more about the company, its history, its products, his/her predecessor, the competition etc. than he/she does. Do you really want me to write a piece titled “The executive who knows nothing”?
Your client’s customers are more interesting than your client – Clients put a real-world spin on things that few software developers can do. They speak in terms of value actually delivered and the difficulties in getting the new solution installed. These stories are gold. diginomica has more than 15% of its content devoted to such stories. Trawl those and see how we roll.
If a client executive wants to talk to me about some amazing new market phenomena, idea or innovation, see if they were the first to come up with it. This week, a senior executive with a major hardware firm wanted to discuss his opinions on IoT. I guess they thought I didn’t know that firms were wiring up big data generating devices within their plants and for products that they sell to customers. Imagine how surprised I was to learn that different devices create different kinds of data and can trigger different kinds of value. Wow! Maybe I should see if anyone else thought of that! If your client hasn’t applied for a patent on something, it’s probably not an innovation – your client just wants ink without doing anything original. More to the point, do your research in me and what I do.
Rarely does a sales executive have anything interesting to say. I know that sounds harsh but the typical sales executive thinks that the products they pimp are the greatest things ever created. These people rarely have objectivity or perspective because those traits would be counterproductive in a sales role. No sales executive will ever admit any issues exist in their product line or company but they will stream a torrent of negative (and sometimes erroneous) trash talk about competitors’ solutions. I don’t have time to fact check these although Snopes might be a useful addition to YOUR arsenal.
Never let a client lie. If your client wants to claim that now, in 2018, they have discovered the cloud, be assured I and others will crucify him/her. Yes, I get 1-2 of these clueless executives every year who really think they invented something that’s been out a decade or more. The best thing you can tell a client is that what they’re spinning isn’t true.
Think that ‘touting’ and ‘lying’ aren’t the same. I’ve caught some big executives stretching the truth to its maximum elasticity. If you think I won’t call them on this, you’re very wrong. If you think I won’t catch the lie, there’s a very high chance I will. And, the more outrageous the claim, the easier it is to debunk. Remember, you can fool some of the tech media some of the time, but some of us really do know our stuff. I have files that go back decades. I have photos of old analyst briefing slides, your client’s debt reports and SEC filings. If your client tries to pull a revisionist history attempt, they’ll get caught.
Honesty is a great policy but even it has its limits. A recent post-merger interview with the new firm’s CEO was frustrating as he couldn’t answer the vast majority of my questions. While he, correctly, said he didn’t know the answer yet, it didn’t make much of a story. I actually debated killing the piece as it lacked so many specifics re: go-to-market plans, workforce integration matters, product roadmap plans, financial terms of the deal, etc. Ask yourself, is there much of a story here now or should we wait until we can actually speak with some level of detail? Hint: newly minted CEOs need to get their feet under the table. The good ones take 90-100 days to come up with plans that are worth communicating. Advise accordingly.
How can it be an exclusive if you’re pitching this to every person on earth? When a PR firm I’ve never heard of is pushing a story/interview with a firm or executive I’ve never covered, then why should I think I was your first choice for this ‘exclusive’? Too many exclusives are anything but. More likely, if you’re talking to me on the second or third day of exclusive interviews, don’t bother calling me because I and everyone else have already read the story elsewhere.
An interview is not a story. An interview is often a conversation between two people. A story could be the result of an interview if, AND ONLY IF, one-party brings something to the interview (Clue: that someone should be your client or customer.) It’s inexcusable to request an interview when the PR client doesn’t even know what their top 2-3 messages for the interview will be. If I have to ask what they are, the interview is a failure.
Not all ‘messages’ are viable. You know it’s going to be an unproductive interview when the ‘messages’ are just rehashes of bullet points in the client’s generic sales deck. For example; “We are the industry leader in … Our products are state-of-the-art… We provide a competitive solution” are cookie-cutter expressions we’ve heard a million times before. Those aren’t messages – they’re table stakes. They don’t make for a compelling story. Messages should be unique to the story at hand not to the products your client has been pushing the last eight years.
Don’t stick with me a broken record – There’s a MAJOR software CEO whose PR firm pitches 1-on-1 interviews to me yet I decline them all. Why? This joker is a 33 1/3rd rpm LP that’s perpetually stuck in a repeating loop. I’ll ask something as benign as to the weather outside and the Pavlov’s Dog response is “Our products were engineered for high-performance cloud workloads”. This executive says the same things to every industry analyst, influencer, reporter, etc. out there. No one gets anything new or worthy of their time. The PR company knows this but lacks the courage to tell the client that slavish adherence to and never changing repetition of the same, tired messages is counter-productive. Hint: sometimes it is good to say ‘No.’
Can the client ever go off message? Sometimes a great interview will go in new directions/avenues. A great PR firm will identify interviewees with enough knowledge and depth to color a bit outside the lines. Yes, the PR firm should keep the conversation focused on the original angle; however, there may be bigger, better stories sub-rosa that might be dynamite. Hint: prep your client for these situations. They’re nothing to be afraod of because they ADD VALUE.
 Finally, tell your client to dial down the acronyms. If I need to get out my Justice League secret message decoder ring to make out what the press release is really all about, then the press release failed. It’s in the trashcan before I get to the second sentence.

Now that I’ve gotten that angst off my chest tech PR firms, go ahead and submit your new and improved press releases to me. I want to be amazed at how your clients’:

Have replaced most of their senior executives but customers shouldn’t be concerned
Won’t have multi-tenant solutions ready until the year 2025 or later
Have been in business over a decade and are finally going to break the $1 million annual sales barrier for the first time
Installed a newbie CEO who’s so young he/she never had an AOL install disk, a cell phone prior to the iPhone 7, or used a fax machine.

I’m waiting…
PS – if you’ve got this far scroll back to the top and click through to Stacey Torman’s link.
Image credit - Angry teacher © olly - Fotolia.comRead more on: Use cases 