
Jan Hills
There’s a long-standing statistic that 70% of change management programs fail. This worryingly high figure has endured, despite the best attempts of various change management approaches to break its hold.
But perhaps the reason that 70% hasn’t budged is because the focus has been too much on the process of change management and not enough on the effect it has on employees.
Some companies are beginning to tackle this by applying lessons from neuroscience to change management, as well as other business issues.
Put simply, neuroscience investigates how the brain works and what happens in your brain in different situations. It helps us better understand things such as the effect of stress and lack of sleep, how people are likely to feel and react to an overbearing boss or what kinds of learning and development approaches work better.
For HR professionals, in particular, neuroscience provides them with evidence to push through their ideas, says Jan Hills, founder of Head Heart + Brain, which aims to apply the learnings from neuroscience to leadership:
What it does, is provides you with some evidence of some of things leaders and people in organizations should do. Often in HR, we say: ‘you should connect more with your employees’, and everyone says ‘that’s nice’, but neuroscience can tell you why you should do that.
Neuroscience provides the hard biological evidence to psychological theories and common sense, but sometimes it goes against perceived wisdom. Hills gives the example of the whole idea of ‘command and control’ style of leadership, where an authoritative figure tells you what to do:
We know that telling people what to do means they have to process it twice rather than only once, if they come up with it themselves. We also often teach people how to cram to learn something, but while that fires up synapses quicker, at some point it actually has the opposite effect.
When it comes to change management, we know instinctively, that people don’t like change. Neuroscience explains what happens to people when they are faced with change, how they are likely to react and the best way to help them navigate that change.
Our brains want to be able to predict what’s going to happen which is difficult during periods of intense change. If our brains can’t predict what’s going to happen, then it prompts a ‘fight or flight’ reaction, which science has shown to be actually painful.
Living in a state of threat and uncertainty will dry up employees’ creative juices and ability to solve problems – the very things organizations need during change programs when they are looking for new ways to work.
As a result, people will either stick their heads in the sand and hope the problem goes away, or more damagingly, they may try to sabotage the change, says Hills:
So we need to give them their control back.
There are still relatively few examples of companies using neuroscience extensively which have the hard evidence to show a direct link between applying neuroscience and improvements in areas such as profits or productivity. But interest is ramping up fast, particularly over the 18 months, believes Hills.
The HR department is the “gatekeeper” to the rest of the company when it comes to applying neuroscience in business, but actually, notes Hills:
What we find is that the business managers and leaders are much more open than some of the HR people.
Hills has already published a book on neuroscience for HR and is following it up later this month with a second publication aimed more generally at business professionals  (see here). This new book seeks to look beyond the theory and give examples and practical advice on how to apply the principles of neuroscience in the workplace.
She acknowledges that neuroscience is very much flavour of the month at the moment, and a backlash is likely as people struggle to distinguish between the hype and reality:
My view is it can go one of two ways. Every man and his dog says will say what we’re doing is based on neuroscience. But most of them have read a blog and are spouting it back at you.
Besides change management, learning and development is an obvious area where the findings of neuroscience are gaining traction. Hills notes that neuroscience ideas are mostly applied to the content of training programs.
If you’re running a leadership program, it will explain to attendees what’s going on in their brain when they shout at an employee, and what’s happening in the employee’s brain.
What’s less common, but a huge opportunity, is to look more widely the whole design of learning programs. Hills says:
What I find amazing is that there’s relatively little about how you design a program…70% of everything we do is habit and if you put people in a face-to-face workshop for a day and they will generate new ideas and then go back and do them – that’s not going to happen.
Our brains love habit, because it means they can do things without having to use up precious cognitive capacity. We drive, get dressed, make cups of tea, without really thinking about what we’re doing.
That all changes when people are asked to alter their work habits. Change will make them anxious, and that leaves them less cognitive capacity to make sound decisions. They will fight making any changes, unless they are supported in doing so and helped to make new habits.
Value
Companies can spend millions on leadership programs, and they want to know they are getting value for money. Applying some of the ideas from neuroscience to learning will both expose methods that aren’t working and reveal ways to help people retain and use the knowledge they’ve gained. As Hills says, learning is not a one-off event, but a process:
Going on a course is only a catalyst – you’ve got to work out how to change behavior.
Neuroscience also provides weight to the argument that traditional performance management approaches and their obsession with ratings systems can have unforeseen effects. Hills observes:
What we know, is that if someone says to you I want to give you some feedback, your immediate reaction is defence – a threat response.
Ratings systems only compound the problem. Even if you’re in the top 2%, staff still feel threatened, because they are not in control of the situation – the power is all with the manager. According to Hills:
The brain had to be able to predict what’s going to happen. And if you’re waiting to hear, you’re not in control. And this is exacerbated with rating systems.
However, notes Hills:
If you ask for that feedback yourself, that doesn’t seem to happen.
By making performance management a more equal process and give people back control, then the threat response is greatly diminished.
So, if something goes wrong, rather than tell someone what they did was rubbish, a manager could ask them how they feel about the way it went, and what they could do differently the next time.
This encourages a “growth” mindset – the idea that people learn continually and can be open to doing things in new ways, provided they work hard. The opposite is having a “closed” mindset, where people believe that they are born with a fixed level of intelligence or talent and it is this fixed level of talent that will bring them success.
My take
There’s a long way to go before neuroscience becomes widely accepted in the workplace, but I think it will gain traction. Partly that’s because it often seems to make sense intuitively – it is providing the proof to things that we already instinctively know. So, while it’s no stretch of the imagination to find out that autocratic bosses don’t get the best out of their employees, now we have the proof.
But it also challenges assumptions. Take for example the idea that some people are better at change than others, when in actual case we’re all bad at dealing with change. Similarly, neuroscience shows that multitasking simply isn’t an efficient use of cognitive capacity.
It’s up to HR and learning professionals to adopt a growth rather than fixed mindset and to begin to see how it could change the way their organizations approach learning, talent management and change management.
 
Read more on: Analytics planning and data analysisCRM and customer experienceHCM and the digital future of workInternet of Things 