
With horrendous timing as the terrorist threat increases, UK government auditors have revealed that part of the nation’s anti-terror border controls systems “breaks down twice a week”, despite a £1 billion-plus price tag to put new IT in place.
Since 2003, the e-borders programme has burned its way through £830 million of taxpayers money with the expectation that it will cost at least a further £275 million to get it to work properly by its new deadline for completion of 2019.
Or more accurately, it will cost at least a further £275 million. The final cost can’t be accurately assessed, says the National Audit Office (NAO),  as accounts information from the Home Office, the government department responsible, aren’t available.
The e-borders system is currently only gathering data of 86% of the estimated 118 million visitors entering the UK. One original goal was to have 95% coverage by the end of 2010.
The Home Office has spent £89 million over four years patching up an old system that e-borders was supposed to have replaced. Those legacy systems should have been switched off in 2011.
From 2010 the Home Office commissioned a series of successor programmes, including the Border Systems Programme and Digital Services at the Border programmes. Now moving at a slower pace, the legacy switch will not be completed until 2018.
The original contractor to build e-borders was Raytheon. The US defence firm was ousted from the contract in 2010 and took legal action against the UK government. The Home Office ended up settling the dispute out of court with Raytheon last year for £150 million damages and a further £35 million legal costs.
Sir Amyas Morse, head of the NAO, says:
The e-borders programme … was due to have been completed in 2011. Since we are now in 2015, with the Home Office still not having delivered the original vision after expenditure of £830 million, I cannot view e-borders as having delivered value for money. Some valuable capabilities have been added to our border defences during the life of this project, though their efficiency is impaired by a failure to replace old IT systems.
Lessons
So the inevitable lessons learned mantra. These include:
The delivery plans for e-borders were too ambitious to be achievable. Following the London bombing and the then forthcoming 2010 London Olympics, the Home Office became focused on:
A too demanding timescale for designing and implementing the programme, taking confidence from a technical pilot which had not however tested the full e-borders requirement. The Department underestimated the scale of business transformation required within government agencies and multiple external stakeholders, which each had diverse information systems.
No clear forward vision. Following the cancellation of e-borders, the Department struggled to decide how to take the vision forward. Problems included several organisational changes for border operations and a number of changes of leadership between 2010 and 2013; deferring upgrades of 6 months in order to ensure stability of systems during the Olympics; and the ousting of Raytheon and the search for new contractors.
Throughout the 12-year period there have been some significant changes in the functionality of the proposed border control and security system. This has in large part been driven by strategic focus being placed on the need for counter-terrorism capabilities, but there have also been tactical shifts that have had a negative impact:
For example, when the e-borders programme encountered difficulties, the Department reduced its expectations for data requirements without properly evaluating and reporting the impact this might have on outcomes from the programme.
The Home Office made unrealistic assumptions about programme delivery without recognising the importance of managing a diverse range of stakeholders, including 600 air, ferry and rail carriers which supply data on people they are bringing in and out of the country and around 30 government agencies which supply data on persons of interest.
There was an inability to make decisions due to gaps in capability and resourcing. During the e-borders period there were five programme directors, including three interim postings, while between 2010 and October 2014 there were a further two programme directors.
Managers made a series of ill-conceived decisions, such as transferring too much risk onto Raytheon. This, notes the NAO, was in fact consistent with wider government practice in those days, which is not to say that it was a good idea, but at least the Home Office was consistent. The NAO notes:
Raytheon proved ill-placed to manage these risks. The Department had incorporated Raytheon’s proposed design within the contract with the company. But the proposals had been based on too high-level requirements, leading to disputes after contract award over whether proposals would meet actual needs.
There was a culture in place that didn’t demand or use high-quality data. Data collection and manipulation is at the heart of the entire programme, but the Home Office didn’t put measures of data quality in place until 2014 – and these are very limited in scope. The NAO observes that there are gaps in the management information used by the Home Office, including poor information on the number of people checked against the list of persons of interest and poor information on the effectiveness of processes.
So where to now? The NAO offers a series of recommendations specific to the Home Office:

Place much greater priority on understanding and improving the way the Home Office uses data given its critical importance for effective border operations and systems.
Tailor ambitions in the short term so as to build capability and confidence.
Work out how best to integrate the systems that have been developed, and are being developed, within existing and future business processes.
Retain key staff and reduce the general level of turnover within the programme Avoid complacency about how stakeholder relations are managed.

Of greater importance perhaps are the learnings for government in general. In this respect, the main recommendations are:

Departments must procure complex programmes in ways that allocate risks and responsibilities to the parties best able to manage them.
Departments undertaking IT-enabled change programmes should ensure they do sufficient work before awarding contracts to understand how achievable the complete vision is.
Departments should carefully match commercial arrangements to the nature of the programme.

My take
A shocking catalogue of how not to run a public sector IT programme – and one that on this occasion has serious implications for national security over a period of heightened tensions. As usual, we’re all going to be learning lessons from the mistakes made here. One way of making sure some attention is paid to those lessons would be to sack a lot of the officials responsible for this fiasco. How about it?
Read more on: Data privacyDigital government and public servicesRegulationSecurity

