
Artificial intelligence will come to the forefront this year in marketing departments across the world. But do marketers really understand what AI is in marketing and how to best implement it in their marketing strategies?
A Demandbase and Wakefield Research AI survey asked just these kinds of questions of marketers and found some very interesting results. To understand the results of this survey at a deeper level, I spoke with Aman Naimat, SVP of Technology at Demandbase. Naimat has a very extensive background in data science. He came to Demandbase from the acquisition of his company Spiderbook, a company that developed advanced machine learning and linguistic capabilities.
Marketers want AI to provide better insights
In this study, 80% of marketers believe that AI will revolutionize marketing in the next five years. But right now, only 10% of them are using it. It’s more concerning to see that only 26% confidently understand how AI is used in marketing. Naimat said that 80% was very surprising to him.
What was even more surprising to Naimat was the top benefit marketers noted from the use of AI. The top benefit was to get more insights on accounts. Understanding what actions the marketer could take was very important, they want more than just a score. This information enables them to take action at a personalized level, Naimat said.
Why is this important? Naimat said that marketers are frustrated at passing leads over to sales and having them drop. They want the ability to provide insights in accounts that will tell salespeople what to do next. The demand for better insights makes sense when you think about the demands marketers face today to drive top-line revenue. Naimat said marketers are pushing for technology to give them this ability to drive ROI.
Training employees to use and trust AI
The biggest challenge listed was integration with existing systems. As Naimat pointed out, you can’t go into a company with new technology and refuse to work with other marketing systems. Many vendors are producing niche solutions that are useful, but if you aren’t integrating them and harvesting the data, you won’t get the best value out of that system.
Naimat is working with McKinsey on understanding the next evolution of AI across the board and what they are finding out is that a lot of data isn’t making it out the systems where it’s created.  It’s clear integration is the key, but not just connecting the data. Integration, Naimat said, should also involve having the system not just recommend, but do something. If it works, keep doing it. If it doesn’t, learn from it and try something else.
Another key challenge is training employees. Remember I mentioned above that only 26% are confident they know what they are doing, and only 10% are using AI? Naimat thinks that 10% is lower. He said there is a big gap between “it’s here” and training employees to use it. Even more critical is having employees trust AI.
Marketers are eager to try new technologies, but they don’t necessarily trust the system’s recommendations. You see this distrust in cases where the results are black-boxed or use a score. Marketers want more detail; they want to know why the recommendations are what they are. This evidence-based view can help alleviate the difficulty some marketers have interpreting results. Naimat said that a better job needs to be done training people how to deal with AI technology.
Naimat and I also talked about the 40% that said they plan to use AI in the next 3-5 years. To me, that seemed too far out, that it’s important to start working with this technology today to get a leg up. Naimat said that what was most shocking to him is how aggressive marketers are in adopting this technology – he found that the more senior the marketer, the more aggressive they are (even more aggressive than him). He was quick to point out that his perspective may be somewhat biased because he lives and works in Silicon Valley and deals with very forward thinking companies. What he’s also noticed is that as you move down the levels in marketing, there is more skepticism.
There is confusion in the AI market, but there’s also high demand. That demand comes from the pressure that marketing is now under to differentiate and generate revenue. That pressure is felt at the highest levels in marketing. AI takes low-level action, it’s doing what a marketing analyst does, but it’s doing it at a higher scale, and that’s something senior marketers are looking for.
It’s not the algorithms that are critical; it’s the data
It’s hard to talk to Naimat and not talk about account-based marketing. After all, Demandbase is one of the leaders in the market, offering a complete end to end platform.
The biggest divide is between marketing and sales, Naimat said, and his company’s customers aren’t looking for piecemeal solutions. They are looking to shift from leads and MQLs to accounts and revenues, and he believes you need an end-to-end platform to do that, one that provides a unified experience for their customer’s buyers. AI plays a critical role.
Any level of AI can’t exist without the right data and plenty of it. Once you have that information, you need to take action. But marketing doesn’t have unlimited resources, and with thousands or more people on their website and other channels, there’s no way humans can ensure a targeted, personalized experience. AI can ingest all types of data, structured and unstructured, analyze and triangulate it and provide actionable insights.
The next generation of AI and account-based marketing is the ability for the machine to generate the content for salespeople or the website. He provided the example of copy for an ad that is hyper-personalized to a buyer based on millions of AB tests performed by a machine.
We talked about how AI is evolving. Today, some algorithms are commoditized, particularly the ones that analyze web pages and similar content. But going forward, Naimat believes that the differences in the math will go away as it gets further commoditized by open source. As a result, companies are not going to be able to differentiate on the data science. Things are still challenging today, but this will change quickly.
He said what matters going forward is the data – do you have the data the machine can analyze to understand and drive insights and recommendations? This data is proprietary; it’s expensive to acquire, or you have to make deals to get it, and it’s your website and marketing data. Whoever can get the most and right data is going to win.
In the account-based marketing category, this data spans from identifying customers, to running personalized ads, to engagement to forms to sales pipeline and acquisition. The company that captures all this data (which is what he says Demandbase does) is going to understand the quickest and the best how to close a deal.
My take
Account-based marketing is only one marketing technology where AI plays a key role. AI is also used in marketing automation, digital advertising, content management and digital experience management, e-commerce recommendation engines, analytics solutions and more. Its value is clear. But it was interesting to hear Naimat talk about trusting AI. So many solutions do provide “scores” or black-box solutions that don’t give you the details you need to ensure the results are the right results.
Marketing may not want or be able to do at scale, the dirty work required to derive these critical insights, but they do need to be able to understand why an action is recommended, or why the system took a particular action. That ability to understand and drill down isn’t going away, and the marketing technologies that provide both will be the successful ones.
I also liked Naimat’s view on integration being more than just passing data along. A solution that analyzes its data and can automatically tell another system to do something based on that analysis will ensure the niche solutions can stay alive amid bigger end-to-end platforms. Of course it requires the systems to trust each other, and that may be a little longer away than marketer’s would like.
Image credit - Cartoon robot sitting in line with applicants for a job in front of a human resources office, EPS 8 vector illustration © aleutie - Fotolia.comRead more on: Analytics planning and data analysisDigital and content marketingIoT robotics and AIMachine intelligence and AI 