
Head of E-Commerce Technology Services at House of Fraser, Simon Toon is no stranger to stressful Cyber Weeks – which, as he jokes, are what we call what used to be dubbed just regular old trading ‘peaks’ before the Brits decided to import this peculiar ‘Black Friday’ thing.
That’s because, prior to going in-house last October, he acquired numerous battle scars from trying to get online retail strategies up and running at numerous High St brands – and ready for what can be a very busy but also very stressful trading weekend at such companies while working for a number of retail tech consultancies over the past 13 years.
As such he can ask:
Do you know what you were doing at 11pm last Cyber Monday? Because I do!
The reason he knows? That was when House of Fraser’s peak operational support war room was at full speed, crammed with website experts on laptops around a long table flanked by huge digital screens pouring out traffic and performance data.
What made last year so memorable was not any particular crisis on the weekend, he says – but that at the end of it, with him being the last man left on ‘deck’, a burglar alarm went off as he left the office which would have meant calling out a probably rather testy CFO and the local constabulary – if he hadn’t remembered in time he had the alarm code stored on his phone for just such an eventuality.
The memory hasn’t left him – and makes him urge fellow e-commerce practitioners to adopt a similar belt-and-braces approach:
It’s just a good idea to be ready for any eventuality – both before, during and after peak trading.
A good check-list, he states, should always start with a clear and solid communications strategy between the business and IT:
IT should always know from the business what its plans are so that they can align resources to ensure those traffic peaks – which are what you want, remember! – can be accommodated. IT should also be asking the business what the key metric are of success that they will be looking for this year, and at what frequency they want to receive them.
Next up, a canny Black Friday campaign should include well-briefed commercial and hosting partners. Many SLAs have limits and checks on your capacity that could kick in and derail your dreams of cyber fortune-making, which you should ensure in good time will be relaxed and not be an issue over your Peak.
A less obvious good idea: implement automated archiving:
One year we got a concerned called from our database administrator at our hosting company that our database tables were getting very big just prior to Black Friday, and we should think about deleting data we no longer needed. We didn’t have an automated way of doing that at the time, which meant a manual approach that meant we accidentally deleted some things we didn’t want, though there was a back-up. The lesson I took from that is to make sure it’s never an issue again.
Next up: do you have a good horizontal scaling model? Well,ok; are you making sure it’s really up to date?
At House of Fraser we are very good at planning for perceived levels of traffic, but we are also constantly calibrating our models. I would say that every if you are lucky enough to have auto scaling that it can’t hurt to keep examining your assumptions there.
You probably won’t be surprised that his next must-do is performance testing – but you may be surprised at how deep he thinks this needs to go: web server performance for sure, but for Toon that’s at the bottom of a hierarchy that goes upwards via making sure your messaging queues and batch jobs can all cope; that your fulfilment and back-end systems are up to scratch; that your customer service and operational systems have been prepped for the deluge;  that your third party SaaS component suppliers have been informed of what delivery will be expected over the critical trading period;  and that browser performance must never be neglected either:
We had a report last year that browsers were running really slowly, and it was taking 10 seconds for a new page to load. That didn’t make sense to us, so we had to dive in to see what the problem was, and it turned out a partner had made a last minute technical change to a plug-in that we didn’t know about.
We were able to solve the problem immediately by asking them to reverse the change for the time being. And while you might ask why someone would make a change that late in the day, the point is that if you have great content, your transactions are humming along and everything should be great, if you have a sluggish browser on the top of all this great, fine-tuned technology, all the customer sees is a ‘slow website’ – which is the very last thing you want them to see anyway, but even more so over a Black Friday sale.
Another thing to think about is the end of your sales IT that sits in the stores, he cautions:
At one client, we were getting real problems with a buy and collect server on the Monday lunchtime. This was because people were coming in to pick up stuff over a very heavy three day sales period, peaks that the system hadn’t anticipated – and nor had we, of course. That was a bit of a triple whammy that did affect us, but which we should have thought about in advance.
So if you follow at least some of these tips, will you be fully ready for Black Friday? Only time will tell… but you do have two months left to get it right.
 
 
Image credit - House of FraserDisclosure - Toon was speaking at ad:tech London.Read more on: Cloud platforms - infrastructure and architecturee-commerceRetail e-commerce and the omni-channel 