
The Savoy is paradoxically both one of London’s oldest and its newest hotels. For, although the hotel first opened in 1889, it went through a huge £220m restoration project that saw its doors close for three years, before opening once again in 2010.
Old or new, The Savoy has a reputation for being among the grandest hotels in the capital. Its guests and diners runs like a Who’s Who of Hollywood and artistic legends from Judy Garland to Claude Monet, and Oscar Wilde to Bob Dylan.
Behind the scenes, it takes an army of support staff to keep the hotel running smoothly and the cocktails flowing in the art deco American Bar. So when it re-opened, the hotel had needed to recruit more than 500 largely new employees, but as Emma Jayne, HR director at The Savoy, explains:
When the hotel had been open just a year, we started to experience quite rapidly declining retention levels.
Jayne identified falling engagement levels as the chief reason behind the rapid staff churn. Employees may all have been under one roof, but it was hard for people to stay in touch with each other and to really feel part of a team. Jayne notes:
Really good people are hard to find in a luxury hotel environment in London. So, we had to make a lot of changes – engagement being the biggest one. And we looked at the marketplace to try and find a product and there was literally nothing out there.
Nothing at least until Jayne came across LifeWorks’s employee engagement platform, which combines a recognition program and staff reward program, which offers staff discounts at local bars and restaurants, for example.
When an employee wants to recognize a fellow worker for being helpful or going the extra mile, LifeWorks gives them a way of instantly responding using their mobile device. All they have to do is simply select that person’s name in LifeWorks and choose from a list of behaviors, such as teamwork, passion, creativity or helpfulness, that their colleague demonstrated. Each of these behaviors represents the kind of company values that The Savoy wants to encourage.
Mobile generation
Emma Jayne, HR director at The Savoy
A mobile and digital solution is ideal for The Savoy, according to Jayne, because 70% of the workers are millennials or Gen Y, used to updating their social media status every hour (if not more):
It was really a no-brainer. I don’t know why all hotels don’t have something like this. The results in such a short space of time were phenomenal. Every day there’s on average 10 recommendations going peer-to-peer – they take the time to thank each other.
Jayne is in no doubt that “the returns far outweigh the investment”:
Two months after implementing it, we did our annual engagement survey. Scores had started climbing since that first disastrous result, but they really took a big step forward and we achieved a result of 93% of our colleagues who are highly engaged at work.
While LifeWorks was just one out of a number of initiatives to improve engagement, Jayne is convinced that it has played an important role in changing engagement at the hotel.
Turnover has dropped to 31% and has remained steady at that level for a year. And the effect of happier staff has been felt by customers. The Savoy has improved its rating on TripAdvisor and the guest scores given to the hotel have floated around 90% mark.
Using LifeWorks is voluntary, but there’s been an impressive 80% sign up so far and Jayne is striving for a perfect 100%. User numbers ramped up quickly, egged on by a series of initiatives to educate staff, says Jayne:
We had a quite targeted campaign for signing up – we put posters up in heavy traffic areas in the hotel and worked on managers to get them signed up.
Digital awards
Alongside the recognition and discounts, there are also bespoke Savoy discounts for staff on LiveWorks and last month the hotel introduced ‘spot awards’. When the hotel wants to reward a member of staff, Jayne simply has to type in the name into LifeWorks and money drops into their online wallet for them to spend on discounted offers.
This kind of spot reward was previously paper based and it could take some time before the person was rewarded for their act ions. The advantage of this system, says Jayne, is that it enables instant recognition.
Currently these awards are handled by HR, but LifeWorks is working with the hotel to enable department heads themselves to bestow these spot awards from an allocated budget. Jayne believes that:
It just means so much more if it comes from your own manager and that your own manager has recognized that you stayed an hour later or went the extra mile.
Using LifeWorks has spurred on the hotel to look at making other changes in the way it communicates with staff. Gone are the formal quarterly meeting in the ballroom, and in their place are quick monthly updates in a function room. It’s also made it look more closely at its whole wellness agenda; there’s gym discounts, a running club and the hotel is just about to start working with a nutritionist. Jayne explains:
Hotel work is very physical, so people are working on their feet all day, so we try to ‘bespoke’ our benefits so they will be really appealing to employees, such gym membership and ensuring the staff restaurant has a healthy menu selection.
It’s coming up to the first anniversary of LifeWorks at The Savoy, but says Jayne:
It feels like so much longer because it’s become such a big part of our life.
Image credit - Images sourced via the Savoy or the author Read more on: Talent managementUse cases 