
One of my favorite headlines this year when considering retail e-commerce strategies was that of the Internet of Pizza, stemming from hearing about Domino’s digital transformation efforts. Those efforts are paying off with digital sales now accounting for around 60% of the total.
While other fast food firms are only now getting to grips with online delivery mechanisms, pizza firms should be at something of an advantage here, having worked with remote ordering/delivery business models for decades. That said, CEO Patrick Doyle does see the shift from telephone ordering to digital channels as a big change, but one which Domino’s is well-placed to embrace:
With our strong unmatched lineup of anywhere ordering platforms, we now look to the future of digital with near-endless opportunities in store and within the delivery experience itself to examine and consider, as well as applying data learnings to further enrich an online ordering experience that continually sets the pace for our competitors and peers.
But the competition is ramping up, he concedes, as the likes of McDonald’s looks into getting its wares delivered to customers rather than bringing the customer to the store or the drive-thru. It’s not that simple though, cautions Doyle:
There are certainly a lot of people who are experimenting with delivery now. And with only a couple of exceptions, most of them are using third-party delivery services. It’s got to work for the driver, the restaurant, the customer, and the people providing that delivery service. Getting all of that right, getting that balanced is a challenge. I think there are a lot of folks who are kind of understanding how much that’s a challenge.
But look, we are watching it very carefully. We understand this marketplace very well. We are looking at all of these different players and understanding where people may be doing things well, and where they’re not doing it well, and we will take good ideas anywhere we can find them. But 57 years of doing delivery ourselves has given us an awful lot of know-how, and remains a real competitive advantage.
The big challenge for Domino’s as an international brand is to take its domestic US success on the digital front and apply it to other markets. This has enjoyed mixed fortunes to date, admits Doyle:
In terms of technology, internationally and where we stand, our penetration of digital orders internationally is a little bit lower on average than it is domestically. I would say that the sophistication of our markets around how technology is getting used today ranges from markets doing a terrific job on this, to where there are still markets that don’t have digital ordering today, smaller ones. We’ve now got our offering with our global online ordering and are bringing markets onto that.
But I think that there remains still on average a little more opportunity in international to do some of the things we’ve been doing domestically. When you look at our international performance and areas where we think we can improve, one of them is in the digital space. And as part of what gives us confidence about longer-term growth in the international business is there are still things in the toolkit that have not been applied in all of our international markets that we know work, and it just takes some time to roll those all out.
Bi-lateral learning
That said, it’s not all about the US showing the rest of the world how to do digital. There are bi-lateral learnings that are being taken on board, says Doyle, including some transatlantic ideas:
The UK is very developed on digital, and as their digital penetration is very high in the UK, they’ve done a good job there overall. There are always opportunities, and there are things that in our conversations with them that we share with them, but frankly they share with us too. They rolled out digital ordering in the UK nationally before we did in the US So learning can go in both directions.
The one thing that I would say in the UK that’s interesting, we don’t know that it’s had any material effect, but you do see increasing amounts of advertising from the Deliveroos and Just Eats and some of the other players in that market. So if you look at share of voice on a broad basis, and include kind of all of the delivery options, there is more advertising there.
That means increased competition, but it doesn’t mean that hungry diners are choosing to change their mind and go for a burger rather than a pizza. Once you’ve set your heart on a Pepperoni, that’s what you’re going to stick with, says Doyle. The only question then becomes which provider you’re going with:
They actually decide they want delivered pizza, and then they decide the brand on average. That’s part of where we’ve been making gains. We make it so easy for somebody who says they want to get pizzas delivered to make us the choice. We’ve got everything set up in the Pizza Profile and make it possible for them to order from anywhere, with any technology they’re interacting with. That’s part of what’s been driving the growth that we’ve had.
My take
The rise of the JustEats and the Deliveroos in the UK market is an interesting point made by Doyle. There isn’t the same impact from such third parties in the US market to date, although the emergence of UberEats and whatever Amazon inevitably has tucked up its corporate sleeve may change that over time. Nonetheless, the early starter advantage that the pizza industry business model has provided remains a digital competitive advantage not to be overlooked.
Image credit - Domino's Read more on: Digital enterprise in the real worldRetail e-commerce and the omni-channel 