
When I was at Mobile World Congress this year, I made it my mission to spend time talking to experts about the Internet-of-Things (IoT) and attempt to understand how it is going to disrupt businesses in the near-future. You can see the diginomica story on Internet-of-Things here, but the gist of it is that I came to a conclusion that there is a difference between Machine to Machine (M2M) analytics and new IoT business models.
Whilst M2M has been around for a while and largely focuses on using sensors to collect data and drive efficiencies through making supply chains and processes work better together (a lot of which can be done on local networks), IoT takes advantage of scale by collecting data and using analytics in the cloud to create new revenue streams.
Whilst M2M may lead to IoT, the point of this article is to insist that it isn’t necessary that the former precedes the latter. Businesses can leap-frog M2M and jump straight to IoT. In fact, I will argue that this is what they should be doing if they don’t want to be at the tail end of disruption.
Before we carry on, I also strongly recommend you take a read of my colleague Phil Wainewright’s piece on Internet-of-Things on making sense of the Internet-of-Things. Phil thoroughly takes you through the evolution of IoT technology and how businesses should understand the building blocks of this new phase of the internet. It’s Phil’s last paragraph that takes us to the crux of the problem. He notes:
But at this early stage in the evolution of the Internet of Things, we have no idea where all of these emerging technologies and connective capabilities will lead us. We need to accelerate evolution, not hold it back, and the only way to do that is to promote a simple, open architecture that allows for rapid, iterative experimentation. Let the applications flourish, and we will ultimately discover what we can achieve in the Internet of Things.
The vendors aren’t clued up either
It’s impossible to ignore the marketing hype around IoT. I had a conversation with a vendor executive recently, who told me that his marketing department won’t let him give a presentation at a public event if the PowerPoint slides don’t at least mention his company’s role or position in the Internet-of-Things.
We are quickly scaling that hype curve as an industry and vendors are throwing huge amounts of money at positioning themselves as ‘The Internet-of-Things’ company.
But let me make one thing clear: the vendors are still figuring this out themselves.
Yes, some will have a more obvious stake in IoT than others. And yes the consultancy firms are bound to be making money from helping companies figure this out. And yes there are companies out there doing a good job of helping companies create new IoT business models – such as the likes of Jasper.
But by and large, from the discussions I’ve had, most of the investments and most of the money being made are in traditional M2M deployments. I mean, some of the technology itself still isn’t there yet.
I like to make the comparison with the 1990s when the Internet as we know it now was gaining traction and companies and vendors knew it was going to be big, but weren’t sure exactly how to take advantage of it. A lot of traditional businesses thought the answer was to just get a website and stick all their information on there and continue to run their company as they had been for the previous ten years.
We now of course know that those companies have had to play catch up – particularly retailers and financial services – because new companies emerged and figured out that the ability to digitally deliver transactions meant a whole new way to do business.
This again happened with the emergence of mobile. Companies thought mobile meant putting all their services onto a mobile app, instead of thinking about how mobile actually meant new business models.
The same goes for IoT. Companies are currently thinking about how a network of ‘things’ currently helps them better run their current business. When instead they should be thinking about how the Internet-of-Things impacts the industry that they currently operate in and how this new architecture creates completely new opportunities.
It’s about new revenue streams, not driving down costs.
Don’t let this be a ‘thing’ that happens to you
At MWC, SAP’s Dinesh Sharma said something that stuck with me. Whilst his comment was somewhat made in jest, I think it very much accurately depicts the near-future for a lot of businesses. He said:
You’ve got to be very careful when having those conversations [about IoT] not to say, oh you do know you’re going to be out of business in two years? It’s not like EIM or data services, you are talking about things that you kind of know are going on, but you don’t want to scare the crap out of people.
And whilst I appreciate that from a vendor standpoint that that’s completely reasonable, my job is to give buyers a reality check and try and help them understand what could happen and what they could be doing to avoid falling behind.
My main message to buyers: don’t let this be something that happens to you, which then you have to spend the next ten years playing catch up.
There is absolutely no reason that traditional companies operating in retail, finance, manufacturing, travel, and other verticals, can’t be the leaders in this area. They don’t have to wait for some start-ups in Silicon Valley to come out of nowhere and overtake them in five years time. There is nothing holding them back, except for their existing culture and processes.
In fact, these companies often hold some advantages: they’ve got human capital, they’ve got assets, they’ve got access to finance and they’ve got an existing customer base, they’ve got a brand name.
The only reason the likes of Uber and AirBnb are growing so quickly is because they recognised they could do things differently with mobile, web based infrastructure and peer-to-peer networks. If you don’t want the same to happen with IoT, you need to start thinking about what it could mean for your company and industry now.
Product to service
Most of the vendors and companies at the moment are thinking about how they can use IoT to shift from being a product-based company to being a services-based company. That’s where a lot of the focus for the Internet-of-Things is going. And that makes a lot of sense, it fits with the growing popularity of the ‘subscription economy’, it creates a new level of ‘stickiness’ with customers and it creates new revenue streams.
For example, a printing company may no longer want to design, build and sell printers, with a product lifecycle of every two years. It may want to use sensors, the cloud and analytics to offer ‘printing as a service’. Where it used to ship a new class of printer, then move on to designing, building and shipping a new range – it now engages with customers once a sale has been made, by charging per page printed, by alerting customers to problems with their printers and by offering a servicing option as part of a package.
This in itself is something that companies need to be thinking about now. If this is the direction that your business is going to go with IoT, your company needs to be prepared for the shift. Moving from selling a product and forgetting about it, to servicing a customer for years on end involves changing the fundamentals of your business.
Everything will need to adjust; from your approach to CRM, to your accounting practices, to the types of staff you need to employ. Get these things wrong, particularly on the CRM front, and it won’t matter that you got there early, a company that has a services culture in its blood will beat you.
However, this shift from product to service isn’t necessarily just what companies should be considering. Even this could be a bit too limited in scope.
For example, taxi companies had already created mobile apps for their customers to book rides before Uber came along. So why did Uber succeed? Because it went one step further and tapped into a growing freelance labour market, made use of geo-location on mobile, recognised that people like peer-to-peer ratings and introduced frictionless payments.
Enterprises need to be thinking about how the IoT creates entire new service opportunities in their industry when combined with other digital services on mobile and the web – rather than just applying IoT services to their existing offering.
I’d argue that the Internet-of-Things could potentially be treated as a new business division.
What will those businesses will be? I don’t know. There are likely to be many examples within each sector. Nest is probably the best-known example at present, but there will be others. But why didn’t an energy company come up with Nest?
It assumed it couldn’t and let the entrepreneurs take the lead. And now Google owns that brand.
Instead of putting sensors on everything and building a business case from the ground up (which is often the approach argued for by the vendors), companies, I think, should be taking a top-down, sideways-in approach.
CEOs and the board should be recognising the opportunities presented by IoT, building a team that’s sole purpose is to figure out what it could mean to their industry and giving them the resources to run with their ideas alongside the current business. Try and create an IoT start-up within your existing business, with support from the top, that can later be integrated alongside…if successful.
Most importantly, your company’s existing culture and processes can’t work against this investment. It needs to be given the freedom and support to go in a completely different direction to where you feel comfortable going. There’s no reason the biggest companies out there can’t create the next big thing.
My take
Take action now, don’t let this Internet-of-Things ‘thing’ happen to you. It may be uncomfortable, but if you don’t want to be playing catch up at a later date, you can’t sit around and wait for other companies to figure out what it means.
Read more on: Internet of Things 