
The Cabinet Office’s digital and commercial operations are seeing a number of senior staffers leave their posts, change positions, and there are a number of job adverts for roles that have yet to be filled.
This follows a year of disruption to the department, where the Government Digital Service’s senior team has been refreshed and there is mounting concern that the traditional powers that be want to limit the amount of disruption being pursued by the team there.
In the summer last year we pointed the finger (again) at Civil Service chief John Manzoni as one of the primary people resisting the necessary change required to transform the civil service into a modern, digital organisation.
At the time a number of digital chiefs were either being ousted or leaving their posts – including previous GDS executive director Stephen Foreshew-Cain – and it was described by a previous employee of the organisation as a “day of the long digital knives”.
Since then a new team has been brought in, headed up by Kevin Cunnington, who was previously a director general at the Department for Work and Pensions.
However, things have been far from plain sailing since Cunnington’s appointment. Rumours have continued to circulate that GDS and the digital plans for the wider public sector are in chaos – which was amplified by the last minute decision to not publish the new Digital/Transformation Strategy just before Christmas.
The Cabinet Office has been promising the strategy for well over a year now and has roundly been criticised by MPs for its delay. According to our sources it was put on hold by Number 10 and the Prime Minister’s office, with no clear view of when it will be updated and/or released.
We have been told that one of the main reasons for the cancelled publication was due to a lack of funding for Cunnington’s plans to scale up the DWP’s digital academy across the public sector, to further boost the skills capability required by the civil service.
Lots of change
Kevin Cunnington, Director General, GDS
We have been pointed to a number of changes amongst senior staffers both at the Government Digital Service and the Crown Commercial Service (CCS), which looks after the broader commercial agenda as it relates to procurement (G-Cloud etc).
It has been confirmed that to us that Rob Nixon, commercial director of technology at CCS, who replaced Sarah Hurrell in January last year, has now left his position. The Cabinet Office has said that he has taken up another role in the department and has been replaced by somebody new – although we are yet to confirm where that person has come from.
Equally, Paul Maltby, the previous director of data for the government, an incredibly important role in establishing the Government-as-a-Platform agenda, left his position in October last year. The official line is that Maltby’s contract came to an end, but we are being told that he was sidelined so that Manzoni could find someone more aligned to his commercial interests.
There is now a job advert up for a Director Capability for the Digital, Data and Technology Function, with a salary circa £125,000. The closing date for applicants is 6th February, so I wouldn’t be surprised if it was a few more months until someone new is appointed.
Janet Hughes, who was heading up the government’s Verify project, also left her post in August last year. And Chief Technology Officer Andy Beale said goodbye to the GDS team just last week.
In addition to this, Chris Ferguson, director of digital at the Cabinet Office, is leaving for a new position that gets him out of GDS. And the more technical leads, such as James Stewart (director of technical architecture), are also on their way out I am told – leaving a gap in capability that is just as important as the strategic leads.
Finally, CCS is advertising for a Cloud and Digital commercial specialist – although it’s not clear as to whether this is a new role, or whether or not somebody is being replaced. The position is advertised with a salary of £109,000 and the chosen candidate will be “responsible for delivering the category strategy and commercial outcomes for infrastructure hosting, cloud based services and digital services”.
My take
First of all, it’s important to state that there are still PLENTY of great people at GDS and across the public sector that are dedicated to transforming government into a modern, digital, citizen-first organisation.
That being said, when there is this much disruption at the top, it makes it difficult for those lower down the chain to understand the future direction and stay motivated to a cause that’s really, really hard to achieve in the first instance.
After what has been two years of significant disruption to the digital agenda, the government needs some stability. We also need the Digital/Transformation Strategy. At the moment we’ve got people leaving, positions not filled and no clear indication about how we are going to pursue the transformation required.
This may be what the likes of Manzoni want, but it isn’t what citizens need. Throw Brexit into the mix, which will likely take up a significant amount of time and resources, and there’s potential for this whole agenda to be derailed. Maybe not quickly, but slowly and purposefully.
Let’s get some stability. Let’s get an agenda. And let’s get on with what was started.
Image credit - Images free for commercial use Read more on: CentralDigital government and public services

