
Advisory from Ceridian
Lois Martin, CFO of Ceridian, gave an interesting presentation at the recent Ceridian Insights user conference around the subject of what a CFO wants and needs from HR. Her audience was, understandably, full of HR professionals.
You could tell that attendees often struggle with providing CFOs with the data, ideas, business cases, etc. that these executives want and need. This audience was both frustrated and mystified.
I’m guessing to a degree, but I suspect that frustration is all too common among HR professionals.
Think like a CFO
Lois led off her guidance by asking HR professionals to first think like a CFO. Her guidance paralleled that of Stephen Covey in The 7 Habits of Highly Effective People : “Seek first to understand and then to be understood “.  She outlined several benefits to doing this. They included:

Increased organizational influence and credibility
Improve relationships with C-suite partners and shareholders
Improve employee engagement and retention
Build expertise and career flexibility
Reshape HR role

CFOs are a diverse lot. HR executives would be wise to understand the demographics and psychographics of these executives and tailor their interactions accordingly. For example, some CFOs aspire to sit in the big chair (i.e., the CEO’s spot).
These CFOs want HR to bring to them great strategic ideas that will help the company grow, scale, complete more acquisitions, etc. Some CFOs were previously Controllers and still love debits & credits. For this kind of CFO, timely delivery of very accurate data is what they thirst for. Some CFOs are getting up in years and thinking of retiring.
These CFOs don’t want to go out having left the company in the same (or worse) shape than what they found it in. These CFOs care about their legacy. They want HR to bring them new ideas, new processes and new technologies that can help make the company significantly better for the long-term.
Ms. Martin introduced five best practices for HR professionals. Normally, best practices are thought of as rear-view mirror facing activities. In this case, I see Ms Martin’s opus as more a roadmap to get you from here to there.

Understand the business
Connect HR programs to business needs
Harness the power of people data
Think big picture
Share perspective beyond HR

Re: understanding the business, I rarely encounter the HR executive with a command of the competitive landscape. While many HR leaders can tell you, generally, how tight the labor market is and how tough it is to recruit people into the firm, it’s only the HR leaders with strong marketing backgrounds that really get their hands around what others are doing to scoop up the best and brightest candidates.
These marketing oriented HR leaders use every contact with job seekers, college students, campus recruiters, job fairs, etc. to discover things like:

How does our recruiting process compare to competitors? Why do we need 37-45 days to make a hiring decision when some competitors can do everything in a day? Where are jobseekers finding out about opportunities with competitors?
What is our recruiting brand? Does anyone check our Glassdoor ranking vs. those of competitors? What are jobseekers saying about our firm on social media?
How do we create recruiting experiences that best those of our competitors?

Subscribing to salary data about one’s competitors is not enough. CFOs and other executives need and want to know about where the firm stands with current and future employees.
Great HR leaders collect this intelligence and share it (along with recommendations for change) with the executive team.
Connect
Regarding Lois’ second point, connecting HR programs to business needs, I expect there are a lot frustrated HR leaders out there. My experience suggests that a lot of HR professionals are just drowning in day-to-day firefighting and lack time to plan and execute major change initiatives. Even if they can plan them, the budget for such change can be non-existent.
But there may be a bigger issue here and I believe it’s the one Lois was driving at: what HR thinks is important may not be important to the CFO or the business. This is why the articulation of company goals (e.g., to drive more organic and inorganic growth, to become a more efficient and competitive business, etc.) must be the first (not last) step in analyzing HR’s own plans.
When the connection to company goals is unclear, unstated or contrary, then the initiative HR desires will doubtlessly die.
Showing how HR can help quickly assimilate acquired entities, reduce fraud, retain people longer, improve customer satisfaction, etc. are the kinds of initiatives that the Executive Committee can get behind.
People data
The next best practice area Ms. Martin focused on involved people data. There are a number of crawl-before-you-walk issues in this area. Some firms have terrible people data. HR’s headcount and organization structure may not match that of Finance. HR may not know how many contingent, seasonal, temporary or contracted workers are being used by Operations.
If your firm does lots of mergers, divestitures, etc., the difficulty in getting any of this information compounds.
Clarity, quality and ownership of ALL key people-based metrics must be HR’s responsibility. Once data quality issues are eliminated, then better metrics and analytics can be created and used. Doing any kind of analytics on incomplete or low quality data could be a waste of time of money: garbage in/garbage out. Analytics are only as good as the data feeding them.
Predictive analytics are especially sensitive to the completeness and accuracy of the datasets that propel their underlying algorithms. But, that said, even with clean and complete data, algorithms will often perpetuate the biases found in the source data. HR can harness this information but it must do so carefully to avoid placing their employer in jeopardy.
I’m of two minds with regard to HR analytics.
On one hand, I believe that placing these tools in the wrong hands is like giving the village idiot a tank. There’s no end to the damage they could do. On the other hand, if HR doesn’t use these tools, then the company could be at a competitive disadvantage. Care is the operative word here.
Think big picture
Think big picture was Lois’ fourth best practice. Unlike CFOs, most HR executives aren’t interested in the latest revenue recognition guidelines and most CFOs probably aren’t all that keen to learn about a tweak to the firm’s EAP program. These kinds of issues, regulatory/compliance changes, etc. are important to the department responsible for them and few others.
Where executives do come together is around the directional matters that will shape the future of the company for years to come. Couching potential HR initiatives in the context of these goals helps every part of the firm get and stay aligned.
On this point, the audience seemed to care a lot about how specific projects can and should be pitched to the Executive Committee and CFOs. Ms. Martin offered up several ROI guidance points.
I also heard other speakers at the conference (i.e., Ceridian customers) provide great ROI examples and methods for explaining the value of new systems and processes. One of the more noteworthy ones involved a firm that mapped their current and to-be processes and identified the time it took to complete each process.
In a recruiting example, an HR leader showed how new systems and processes reduced the on-boarding time requirement for new hires by 2.5 hours and HR’s time expenditure by 2+ hours as well. The speaker went to show how a recent start letter/employment offer enhancement reduced HR’s onboarding commitment by an additional 45 minutes per hire. The effect of these savings meant that the company could continue its organic growth without adding HR personnel.
Share, share and share
Finally, Lois encouraged the audience to share more with other firm leaders. I agree. The status of some CHROs could use some elevation within the Executive Committee. These HR executives might want to develop an ‘editorial calendar’ of topics, insights and issues they will bring to the company’s leadership. These matters might include:

How HR will use big data to better identify future hires
How robotic process automation and mobile technology will permit HR to scale and be markedly more efficient
What Operations and HR can do to improve engagement, reduce attrition and improve profitability
How HR will adopt best practices from Marketing to improve its ability to attract ever scarcer talent

The strategic and shared nature of these topics would be of mutual interest to all executives. And that’s how the conversation with the CFO and others gets rolling.
Image credit - Image contents: Lois Martin, Ceridian - Photos from TechVentive, Inc.Disclosure - Ceridian covered most of the author's travel and expense for attending the eventRead more on: Analytics planning and data analysisHCM and the digital future of workTalent management 