
Packing a trunk
In pursuit of the retail Holy Grail of greater personalization of services to customers, Nordstrom cut a cheque in 2014 for an e-commerce start-up called Trunk Club. Last week it took a hit on that business, writing-down $197 million on it, now valuing the service at half of the $350 million it paid for it. 
Trunk Club ships customers clothing and accessories selected by personal stylists. Customers can try the merchandise on at home or at Trunk Club’s “clubhouses,” pay for what they keep and send the rest back. 
There were signs of trouble with the service last month when the fee-free home try-on suddenly involved a $25 charge for each trunk shipped to a customer, a fee credited toward any purchases made, but which stepped away from the original business model. 
Despite the write-down, the retailer insists that it still regards Trunk Club as a core element of its omni-channel thinking. According to Nordstrom co-President Blake Nordstrom: 

We acquired this start-up as a new channel to serve customers in a personalized and relevant way. Unfortunately, the business has not performed to the expectations we had when we acquired it, and as a result, we have reduced the value of that asset. Trunk Club continues to be well in line with our customer service commitment and value proposition. We remain committed to this business and view it as a part of our customer strategy. 

His fellow co-President Erik Nordstrom tries pitching the ‘lessons learned’ glass-half-full spin: 

While we’re taking the write-down as needed, we’re actually very encouraged with what we’ve learned, the team’s learned, and how to make the model better. The model we’re focused on is really making it better for customers. When we make the model better for our customers, the economic model improves as well. 
We think we have an opportunity. We’ve seen some early results in just better connecting with our customers on a more consistent basis that gets them sticky with the brand, and the other is that we could be more accurate in what we put in the trunks and what we’re sending out to customers that makes for a much better customer experience and it helps the model significantly.

Clearly shipping out what the customer has ordered is going to improve the buyer experience, but this emphasis on creating traction and loyalty is something that stretches beyond the Trunk Club experiment into Nordstrom’s wider corporate omni-channel strategy, a strategy playing out against declining footfall in the malls of America, traditional home to Nordstrom outlets. 
As President of the Nordstrom Stores business, James Nordstrom sees mall traffic continuing to decline: 

I don’t think it’s any secret out there that there’s been some declines and depending on a lot of reports that you look at, mall traffic is down anywhere 4% to 5%. That’s pretty consistent with how our trends have been. What are we doing about that? Well, we are investing a lot in our e-commerce experience and see the results there. We’re pretty happy with the growth we’re starting to see there and it’s the paying off of some investments we’ve been making over the last couple years.

He adds that Nordstrom’s e-commerce experience isn’t just about online purchasing, but about bringing e-capabilities into the physical stores: 

Within the stores, there’s also some encouraging signs and results around some new experiences the we’re trying to drive using technology, using mobile to not only make the customers’ experience in the store more convenient, more compelling, but also drive more trips.

It’s all about giving customers control, he adds, arguing that mobile is a good medium for that: 

A lot of deployment of technology that we’ve been investing in and building over the last couple years into the customers’ hands is to make shopping our stores way more convenient and compelling.

Nordstrom cites the example of a new pilot program in Seattle stores called Reserve Online & Try Out in Store, a variant of Buy Online, Pick-up In Store. He explains: 

It allows customers to pick merchandise out on their phone through our mobile app, and they can have that merchandise placed in a dressing room. We know when the customer shows up. We have it ready for them. They can walk in, try it on, what they want to buy, we can check them out real fast. The results from that over the last month or so have been really, really encouraging and we’re looking forward to rolling that out nationally in 2017.

This is the sort of combination of online and offline that Nordstrom will be pursuing more of, according to Eric Nordstrom: 

We really run the business agnostic to channels, and that’s because it’s how our customers shop. So while we do accounting-wise break things out, full-line stores and e-commerce, there’s so much overlap between those businesses, and that is increasing. The store reserve…we’re excited about because it’s a very explicit, seamless experience that connects a shopping journey that starts online and ends up in a store. 
We know that’s how lots of our customers have been shopping, but they start online and when they go in the store and want to actually see it, touch it, feel it, try it on, they have to start over. This allows them not to start over. So a lot of our initiatives are around continuing to take out friction between the channels and really deliver experience that is consistent with how customers want to shop.

That said, there are pure online initiatives underway as well, including a much-needed overhaul of the website. Nordstrom says: 

We have a redesigned homepage experience that is performing well. We have a store mode in search and browse that is both on our full website and in our app, and that again would be an example of really connecting the online and offline shopping experience. 
We’ve improved our navigation, had some personalization, small steps that we’re excited about, and a redesign of our order confirmation, order history. A lot of these are some subtle changes that don’t pop off the page, but have had positive results as we’ve done AB testing on them.
On the app, in addition to the store mode, we launched visual search. We had a separate catalog app that we’ve integrated into our main Nordstrom app. We also launched search and messaging within iMessage. 
All these are looking to make the shopping experience more friction-free and then the customer returns.

My take
Trunk Club seems to me to be an updated version of the old paper-based shopping catalogs that my parents used to make purchases from, with the same ‘try it on at home and return it if you don’t like it’ operating model. Trunk Club set out to solve the problem – or what we’re told is problem – that men don’t like to shop for clothes. I’m not entirely convinced that that’s a valid thesis to begin with and certainly the devaluation of the business would appear to suggest that it’s not an economically viable one. 
On visits to the US, I’ve don’t think I’ve ever made a significant purchase from a Nordstrom store, so I probably need to categorise myself as not the target customer for their outreach. The firm is talking the right talk about the balance between online and offline, but when management is only now talking about ‘reserve online, buy in-store’ being something to be rolled out in 2017, I can’t help but feel that we’re not talking about a retailer who’s ahead of the fashion trend at all. 
Image credit - Nordstrom/YouTubeRead more on: Customer service managementDigital and content marketingDigital enterprise in the real worldRetail e-commerce and the omni-channelSocial 