
It is hardly news that Infosys clients, along with those of our competitors, demand value driven engagements. Those same clients need much more than a cost effective outsourcer. Recasting the relationship between ourselves and clients requires that we find new ways to problem solve. Design thinking helps significantly in that endeavour. Here’s how it works with apologies to those already deeply immersed in the topic.
Design Thinking is the simultaneous consideration of customer desirability, technical feasibility, and economical viability. Who wants this product or service? Will it work? Is there enough value? The elements for successful, design thinking innovation are knowledge, imagination and conviction.
As you can see in the video below, I like to think about design thinking in terms of problem solving ‘unknown-unknowns.’ We have recently discovered the same ideas that define design thinking can be applied in many situations. For example, the answer to a known problem may appear obvious. When considered from a different perspective, provide opportunities to give the client a fresh answer. Design thinking makes the critical difference. Here is one example from a recent client engagement that I think provides a good context.
A large bank had a fragmented landscape of service provision where there were three providers including ourselves. Business processes and IT were outsourced but to different providers.
The outcomes were okay but there was considerable overlap among the units. There was a competitive atmosphere but it led to situations where no-one was sure who owned what at critical points in time.
The bank knew it needed to do something and thought they were looking at an optimization project. That would have been the obvious answer. Instead of streamlining existing processes, we rethought the entire operation model with a focus on what the end user needs.
We could have proposed a re-engineering solution using an asset based approach but that didn’t look useful. Instead, we worked out what the business needs as an outcome and then drilled into the solution. This was entirely new for us and the client. In the old model, the client was taking all the risks. In the new model, we were taking risks but more to the point, we were able to dramatically simplify delivery.
Results were seen early in the project which, in turn, gave everyone confidence that our ‘bottoms up’ approach to improvement works. Why did it work when we were proposing such a seemingly crazy and untested idea?
The long term nature of the ‘old’ model created the conditions for us to build and foster deep and meaningful relationships with the people we serve. We were already a trusted provider. This was our opportunity to show how trust serves the client in new ways.
In today’s world, you can’t successfully execute against an SLA without a significant degree of collaboration between client and the provider’s staff. We made certain that there is transparency behind those SLAs. That way, everyone is clear about their responsibilities and the steps needed to achieve the desired outcome.
We broke down the old structures and walls between IT and business process. That allowed us to assign the correct resources to each part of the project, regardless of whether we are talking IT, business process or both. Most important of all, we started from the end user’s point of view, working with them to understand what they needed and then working needs back into the new solution. In that sense, it was a classic design thinking approach that centered on finding the right outcome before making any suggestion to the client.
As I said at the beginning, design thinking is one of those terms that has become popular for solving ‘unknown unknowns’ — where there is a vague problem and a vague solution. We find that the same principles behind design thinking can help redefine services and IT provisioning that in turn release value back to the client.
Is it easy to apply design thinking? Yes and no. There is an element of fun in the workshops but it almost always takes people out of their comfort zone. That’s never easy for anyone, including ourselves at times!
We like to think that as we deepen our understanding of what happens in these workshops that it leads to a release of valuable creativity. Provided we can harness that creativity in positive ways then everyone benefits, and that can only be a net good.

Image credits: Design thinking process via Dschool, featured image via Your Story
Read more on: InfosysPartner Zone 