
Noting that the top four global companies measured by market capitalization – Apple, Alphabet (Google), Microsoft and Amazon – are all digital economy powerhouses, a new report from the United Nations warns that a ‘winner-takes-all’ mindset will widen the income gap around the world.
In its Information Economy Report 2017: Digitization, Trade and Development, UNCTAD – the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development – says that while digital tech and companies are helping small businesses and entrepreneurs in developing countries to connect with global markets and open up new ways of generating income, there’s a high risk that the benefits are not being spread universally:
Such development gains are far from automatic, and there are certain development challenges associated with the evolution of digitalization. Many developing countries, especially the least developed countries (LDCs), are inadequately prepared to capture the many opportunities emerging as a result of digitalization.
Moreover, there is a risk that digitalization will lead to increased polarization and widening income inequalities, as productivity gains may accrue mainly to a few, already wealthy and skilled individuals. Winner-takes-all dynamics are typical in platform-based economies, where network effects benefits movers and standard setters.
The report notes that more than half of the world’s population remains offline, while the pace of growth in access and use is slowing, meaning that in the world’s least developed countries only one in six people used the internet in 2016. This has some serious entrepreneurial implications:
Most micro, small and medium-sized enterprises (MSMEs) in developing countries are ill-prepared to take advantage of the digital economy, and may thereby miss opportunities to boost their productivity and competitiveness. Small firms generally use the Internet much less than large ones for selling online..As the digital economy evolves further, there is a greater need to ensure that as many people and businesses in developing countries as possible are able to engage in and benefit from it.
Many small firms in developing countries remain limited in their digital involvement in relevant value chains, re ecting inadequate connectivity, limited awareness of the bene ts of digitalization, skills gaps and other barriers. It will be important for digital systems to be designed in ways that facilitate the effective integration of smaller firms in value chains.
UNCTAD Secretary-General Mukhisa Kituyi said there’s, quite rightly, a lot of excitement around the transformational potential of digital, but adds:
We must recognize that the Internet is not a panacea. Effective national and international policies are needed to make sure the gains are spread evenly across as well as within countries.
Not that simple
But that’s easier said than done. The report notes:
Countries also vary in their capacity to formulate, implement and monitor policies related to the digital economy. Ensuring that no one is left behind in the digital economy therefore necessitates a much expanded global effort to provide adequate support to these countries in particular. The policy challenge is multi-faceted.
UNCTAD identifies three main policy-making challenges:

A wide spectrum of policy areas that needs to be addressed in a holistic manner. These include issues such as infrastructure, education and skills development, the labour market, competition, science, technology and innovation and fiscal issues, as well as trade and industrial policies.
The need to help developing countries. This involves supporting efforts to build their capacity for collecting more and better data on relevant aspects of the digital economy.
Lack of cultural acceptance. The report notes that digital economy policies tend to be most needed in countries that currently are at “a relatively low level of readiness to engage in it”.

A major inhibitor to progress is likely to be resistance to cross-border data flows, warns the UN, idenitifying this an urgent issue for policy makers to tackle:
The digital economy relies increasingly on the generation, storage, processing and transfer of data, both within and across national boundaries. Access to data and its analysis are becoming strategically important to enhance the competitiveness of companies across sectors.
Policymakers need to balance the need for companies to collect and analyse data for innovation and efficiency gains, on the one hand, and the concerns of various stakeholders with respect to security, privacy, and movement and ownership of data, on the other. In this context, they should work nationally, together with industry and consumer groups, as well as internationally.
The current system for data protection is fragmented, with varying global, regional and national regulatory approaches. In addition, many developing countries still lack legislation in this area altogether. Instead of pursuing multiple initiatives, it would be preferable for global and regional organizations to concentrate on one unifying initiative or a smaller number of initiatives that are internationally compatible.
But to address this challange, it’s going to be necessary for a re-think on how policy-makers tackle their discussions in order to make the process more applicable to the digital age:
The way in which trade policies are developed differs greatly from the manner in which Internet policies are governed. While the former involves State-to-State negotiations in closed rooms, Internet governance is characterized by multi-stakeholder dialogues in open settings.
My take
It’s a wide-ranging report that provides a pragmatic overview of both the transformative potential of the digital economy and also of the many pitfalls associated with it, not least the threat of widening the divide between the haves and have-nots. Well worth a read by policy-makers everywhere. There are massive challenges ahead if we are to create a global digital economy to benefit everyone.
 
Image credit - Dollars flying into digital globe © fgnopporn - Fotolia.comRead more on: Digital government and public servicesDigital skills and trainingIoT robotics and AIRegulation

