
In the final part of this series, I’m looking at the topic of empathy in airline analytics. It’s not the mushy, slushy thing that people might assume.
Empathy is a psychological quality that enables one person to figuratively stand in another’s shoes. It’s what lets us understand a situation from the perspective of another. Some people have it in spades and others are woefully lacking. I’ll put it this way:
A colleague recently asked what level I was at in a major carrier’s frequent flyer program. I jokingly said “Cubic Zirconia – it sounds rich but it’s only worth about five bucks”.  Yep, I feel like my old loyalty, like some infatuations, is unrequited. An empathic carrier would pick up on that.
Put another way, the airlines have bought into their own myth that once on board, every passenger in each class of travel is pretty much equal. I think I’ve conclusively shown that’s not the case But convincing the carriers takes some work. It takes an understanding of the person at a granular level.
Analytics could help air carriers understand their flyers and how those same flyers feel when they use the carrier. Of course, analytics can’t replace good ol’ conversation with customers but I’ll stipulate that the sheer number of flyers makes personal contact with all of them tough. But it is do-able.
How will analytics help?
The first thing carriers must do is do a better job of understanding their different customer segments and the impact each has on the bottom line.
Currently, many carriers believe that the way to bigger top line revenue and bottom line profits is to spend lots of scarce capital and marketing dollars on the super top elite flyers and to spend tons more marketing to the sporadic, cost-conscious flyer with little or no loyalty.
The steady, bankable, reliable business traveler is sadly absent from this picture.
What’s really sad is that it takes almost no marketing money or extravagant expenditure to keep the customers you have (i.e., the loyal, highly repeatable business traveler) if you just delivered a modicum of service and positive customer experience to them. Carriers don’t do this. They do the opposite.
They penalize their bread and butter customers which, as I have demonstrated, means that over time, those otherwise valuable customers drift away or seek alternatives.
I suspect large numbers of business travelers are like me. We might be able to steer clear of certain ultra-low-cost carriers but our employers or clients will not reimburse us for in-flight snacks, seat upgrades, drinks, excess baggage fees, etc.  When we have to spend money on this, it is our money.
These road warriors can’t get complimentary upgrades either because the carrier prefers to auction these off in the days before the flight to the passengers who work for (the ever disappearing) well-healed employers who let them charge in these extra costs. Or worse, the airline gives these seats to non-flyers who open a lot of credit card accounts.
What do most business passengers want?

A fair opportunity to upgrade
A return on loyalty
An opportunity to do some productive work on planes
Seating that does not trigger a trip to a chiropractor upon landing
An airline that honors the spirit and letter of the expectations of the frequent traveler program

Do airlines have metrics and analytics to measure these factors? I doubt it. Do they care about these factors? I doubt that, too.
The Wrong Stuff
Airlines don’t get that there is a quid pro quo. Business travelers will come back again and again if the carrier rewards them for their loyalty.  Recently, I read in the Chicago Tribune that United may introduce a number of changes soon:


Passengers also should expect to see more narrow, “slimline” seats on domestic flights as United squeezes more seats onto its aircraft.
Winning back premium customers is a priority for United, which is trying to woo more lucrative business-class fliers with an overhaul of its international business class that also will see the airline gradually phase out first class on international flights.


This is progress? Spending on international flights/planes when the domestic service continues to suffer is not a viable strategy.
The Right Stuff
The best analytics have to compare three things:

What does the traveler need (e.g., comfort, productive work space, power, etc.)
What did the traveler expect (e.g., a productive space, a reasonable chance of an upgrade)
What did the traveler get (e.g., a cramped middle seat by the rear restrooms)

World class analytics also assess, in real-time, how many business frequent flyers are sitting in plain economy seats and not in economy plus prior to take off. If a carrier is stranding a lot of them in the back, this WILL have a negative impact on continued carrier loyalty.
Then, the analytics must shed some light on:

Why did/didn’t the traveler upgrade out of this experience (e.g., they can’t expense the added cost, there were not enough upgradeable seats available)
How long has it been since the traveler got a better travel (and work) experience

And, finally, the analytics must assess the following:

How likely is this traveler likely to defect to another carrier and their loyalty program
What can be done to retain this customer and their (sometimes decades-long loyalty)

So, here’s an analytic I’d love a carrier to calculate: what would it cost a carrier to earn back my loyalty?  I’ll give a couple of hints:

A fortune
Honor the expectations you previously set but reneged on
Respect
A markedly improved and consistent level of service in coach
An end to the nickel and dime grab for my wallet at every turn of the booking and flying experience

The last part is really challenging for some carriers as they don’t understand much about their travelers and their split loyalties.
Airlines need to understand they aren’t the center of the universe. They aren’t the only carrier out there. Flyers have options, although mergers and bankruptcies have limited those a lot of late. Flyers range from highly loyal to infrequent and lacking any loyalty.
In my own case, I have flown tons of miles with Southwest. I don’t think American or United know this. Southwest doesn’t know that I’ve dramatically slowed down my flying with them because of the really bad TSA lines I’ve encountered at Midway. I also think they’ve gotten quite expensive, especially on late bookings. If I’m paying the same or more than I would with American, I’ll fly with American and get a guaranteed seat assignment.
Standing in my shoes
I tell you this as air carriers haven’t stood in my shoes. They don’t know me or why I chose one carrier over another.  I’m not blindly loyal and the erosion of benefits has made me less loyal than ever. Do any of the carriers know that I’m a Gold Elevate with Virgin America? I doubt it. When I had the chance to get that status with VA, I jumped at it. It’s great, by the way!
What airline analytics need is a lot of externally sourced data if they are to get a more complete picture of their frequent flyers. Data about people is needed, not just more data on individual flights. Sure, it’s important to focus on timely departures and arrivals but those aren’t the top stats business travelers focus on. For me, I want to escape the hell that is the back of the plane. If only a carrier understood that….  That’s one aspect of the missing empathy I’m talking about.
There are other empathy matters though. Do the carriers have analytics and predictors to help them understand:

Why has a frequent flyer dramatically reduced the frequency of flights with them (Was it a job change, relocation or service dissatisfaction?)?
Why does a frequent flyer NOT respond to the ceaseless survey requests anymore (Have they gotten tired of providing feedback that no one acknowledges or does anything about?)?
Why is this flyer switching allegiance to another carrier?
The true probability that a frequent flyer will actually be able to utilize specific awards or perks and how a business flyer will react when they can’t use these or access these

I suspect the best empathy indicators and sources for empathy analytics are in social sentiment data. When I’m disenchanted with a carrier, I tweet about it.

Got my seat assignment for tomorrow’s @SouthwestAir flight: B51 – guess it’s another middle seat – ugh!
— Brian Sommer (@BrianSSommer) July 22, 2016

Is Southwest listening? I doubt it – but heck, some airlines can reach me through their social channels, so why not everyone else?
I get offers to spend more money with carriers who don’t really return the love. For example, one carrier offered to let me always book economy plus seats that year if I only forked over an additional $500+. I demurred. Why? Those seats should automatically go to frequent flyers. Paying twice for the same perk seems mindless.
Personal data speaks volumes
If a carrier searched both social sentiment data (big data) and their internal customer service databases (the dark data) over time, they’d see patterns appear re: a specific passenger. For example, if you plotted how many times I tweeted (positively and negatively) about a carrier and added to that timeline all of the emails, letters, etc. that I have sent to them, you might get something like this:

Even more telling would be to overlay this activity with the most material item surfaced each year. Now that analysis might look like this:

In one simple display, a carrier could see what’s been happening between their firm and this individual business traveler. This display helps shed light on why the flyer feels the way they do about the carrier. It provides an insight that starts the process for the carrier to repair the relationship that has gone off the rails.
Priorities
And that brings us to the last group of analytic priorities air carriers must address. These empathetic tools must address:

The combination of multiple types of internal and external data: emails, letters, surveys, tweets, etc.
Time series assessments of what’s been happening with the totality of this flyer’s experiences on this (and other carriers)
Ways of identifying flyers that the carrier should actively ‘intervene’ with to prevent long-term losses of revenue
Mechanisms to highlight the experiential issues that are impacting specific flyers in a way that airline personnel can use to reverse bad trends

But a cautionary note is warranted. Companies can ‘want’ to be more empathetic but most have no clue how to become so. It’s a complex problem that transcends the given workforce, processes, culture, decision making styles and more.
Final words
Would airlines function any differently if they possessed such analytics? I’m not sure. All the tools and technology in the world won’t make people or organizations change unless they truly want to change in the first place. But, without the insights, they will make mistakes and act blindly. Ignorance of the law isn’t an acceptable defense in a courtroom and ignorance of customers shouldn’t be an acceptable defense in the boardroom either.
I guess we’ll have to see how this turns out in the marketplace.
Image credit - via Sabre, graphics via the author. Read more on: Analytics planning and data analysis 