
Tim O’Reilly’s Next: Economy conference kicks off next Monday and I’ve got a front row seat.
While our tech media may have its eyes currently focused on the latest gargantuan vendor led event, I am much more concerned about what comes next; not just from an economic standpoint but for the future of work (whatever that means) and the future of the societies in which we live.
Whether you watched with growing alarm at the Brexit vote outcome or are looking at the forthcoming US presidential election with a sense of foreboding, it is clear that something has changed. Blame it on globalization, advanced technology or any of many other societal issues, the emergence of nationalistic and protectionist posturing is serious. Countries risk a retreat to a form of navel gazing that cannot serve in the best interests of ‘we’ as a global society. At risk is the future of work as we currently know it. And that will be the main topic of discussion at Next: Economy.
My view is that we need to tread carefully but will attend with an open mind to hear fresh thinking.
On the one hand we have the prospect of accelerating job displacement, on the other hand, we have entire workforces who are poorly equipped for the new jobs that will be needed to not only augment the ability of machines to take on repetitive, mundane tasks but also be prepared for the new classes of job that will emerge.
HfS for example predicts ‘modest falls’ in the number of people needed to undertake business processes currently offshored to take advantage of labor arbitrage. At the same time, HfS says that:
Automation is not the threat to outsourcing, it’s Digital Disruption. The real threat comes in the form of disruptive competitors using digital platforms and cognitive computing, that can wipe out your enterprise overnight…Remember, it’s recessions that destroy jobs, not robots
I take issue with HfS second statement on the basis that the current climate suggests business leaders are not only concerned about growth at a time when global economic growth is stagnating, but they remain focused upon reducing costs, and guess what? Labor is in the front line of that pursuit. At the same time though, forecasters are worried that the recent modest growth seen in economies is, at best, fragile, and that another recession may be just around the corner.

AEven so, there is no doubting that alternative 1-2-1 services like taxi driving and alternative forms of food delivery can both expand and collapse markets that have been under served. And then there is the as yet unknown impact of new technologies on the industries of the future.
I am, for instance, looking forward to hearing Jeff Huber, ex-Google and CEO of Grail, a company focused on the early detection of cancers and what this means for a healthcare system that, in the US at least, seems more concerned with keeping people sick and addicted to meds than it is in prolonging life through preventative measures.
I want to hear what Penny Pritzker, secretary of the US Department of Commerce has to say about the future of work from the government perspective. Then there is Accenture who will be talking about the ‘liquid workforce,’ one that is skewed to workforces that can be assembled from contractors and then just as quickly dis-assembled. That is a model I believe holds considerable promise for creating agile, tactical teams of problem solvers that can be deployed globally. Again, I want to hear how far along the track we are to that particular vision.
Despite taking an entrepreneurial view, the debate about a universal basic income (UBI) promises fireworks. There are many who associate the notion of UBI with encouraging laziness and a burden on society. Switzerland most recently voted against UBI. Others see some form of UBI as a pathway to reducing income inequality or, at the very least, ameliorating the impact of poverty. I see both arguments but have yet to see a model for UBI that persuades me it is a net good thing for society as a whole. Maybe that will change in the coming days.
There are many other sessions I could call out but those mentioned above are enough to get the juices flowing and should form the foundation for useful conversations about the intersection between technology and the world of work.
In the background, we will be hearing much talk about the way economies are being run (or not) and the deeply worrying problem of a seemingly ever expanding income inequality gap. I know for example that O’Reilly is a passionate believer in alternative economics of the kind espoused over at Evonomics.
For my part, I find some of the radical arguments around a progressive approach to redistribution compelling although I equally know there are powerful influences that will resist any such changes. At the same time, I believe we are looking at a generational shift in the way global economies are organized. This is important at multiple levels because in a world where inequality has been substantially reduced, everyone benefits. The question then comes, what kind of economics will be needed to satisfy that ideal? I don’t have a good answer but am hoping the event conversations will open up those avenues of exploration.
In short, the excellent speaker line up for Next: Economy promises to provide plenty of thought provoking insights into a range of problems I find fascinating and which will have growing importance in the years ahead.
Image credit - Top story image via Next: Economy website, graphic via HfS, featured image via fotoliaDisclosure - Next: Economy is providing me with a complimentary ticket to the event. diginomica is picking up all other related costs. Read more on: Collaboration sharing and digital productivityHCM and the digital future of work 