
New York Times
Can you make up for losses in print by focusing on digital? That’s a question that every traditional media outlet has had to face up to in recent years. 
Some have made great inroads into their digital presence, with the global success of Mail Online being a somewhat depressing case-in-point (although Mail Online remains a loss-making venture). Others, such as The Guardian, have struggled to get the mix right. 
In the UK, The Independent newspaper is gone in print form, the last editions appearing in March. That looks like a good move. According to recent data points, the paper’s app now has twice as many paid subscribers as the print edition did. (A year long sub costs £149.99.)
Over in the Murdoch empire, attitudes to digital have varied. The Sun, the UK’s widest read newspaper, abandoned News Corp’s paywall experiment with the return to power of Rebecca Brooks as Chief Executive. The Sun’s digital content was pulling in around 1.1 million unique visits a day when the paywall was dropped, against 13.4 million a day for Mail Online. 
But other publishing giants are sticking to their guns with the paywall and digital thinking, most notably The New York Times, where CEO Mark Thompson argues that digital growth will overtake print losses, even if he’s not sure when that will come to pass. 
The company just posted a loss of $13.4 million for its first quarter on revenues down 1.2% to $380 million, a decline driven by a 9% drop in print advertising revenues. Digital ad revenues declined one percent to $42 million, roughly one third of overall ad revenues. There was a bright spot in mobile advertising, which was up 80% year-on-year to account for 21% of overall digital advertising revenue. 
Transition
But Thompson has to admit that the digital ad market remains an uneven story with Q2 digital revenue on course to be flat at best. Chief Revenue Officer Meredith Levien tries to pitch an upbeat interpretation, arguing: 

I think we’re operating in a digital ad business that is broadly in transition, and I think we’re pretty well positioned with our strategy and we’re confident about it and we’re growing mobile, particularly smartphones, very quickly.
We are very focused on scaling the branded content business and we have good visibility into the year-long pipeline for that and we’re optimistic about it. We’re scaling the programmatic business, which I think we’ll continue to improve and we’re rounding out our marketing services. And we are absolutely expecting growth in the back half of the year. 
So, we’ve got pretty good visibility now into four things that represent meaningful change to the business. One is that pipeline for branded content and big branded content deals. The second is our pipeline for projects around virtual reality; the third is our pipeline around sort of broader sponsorships and video; and the fourth is programmatic, which is now, I think it’s 18% of the business in Q2 and growing.

 Expanding on the transition theme, Levien points to changing buying behaviors: 

In some categories, print and digital tend to be bought separately. In other categories, they tend to be brought together and around big program. I do think the shift in the market is [that] marketers are thinking much more holistically about their buy with a particular place. And so over time, there will be fewer sort of separate budgets and more what’s my overall spend and how much of it is with The New York Times versus someone else.
The Times has a very strong offering anywhere a marketer might have a budget to spend with us. If they philosophically are choosing to leave print or for practical reasons choosing to leave print, one of the great things about The Times is we have a very scaled offering in digital, we have a scaled offering in mobile. We’re building a scaled offering in video, and we have a very strong offering in marketing services. So we have an opportunity, unlike lots of other legacy media companies, we have a very strong opportunity to make up those dollars.
I do think there is a big strategic question around can you make up the print dollars in digital? And I would say broadly, we have the scale and we are building out the products to do that. 

Under fire
But the current ‘transitional decline’ is still not great news when you’re a controversial CEO under fire on other fronts, who insists that the strategic direction for The New York Times Company is digital. Thompson says:


The plan calls for the doubling of our digital revenue. To achieve that, we need to more than double our audience to deepen their engagement and to innovate and develop our digital advertising and subscription models while running our cash-generative print platforms effectively and managing cost tightly across the whole company.
Our big themes are innovation and creativity in storytelling and user experience backed by continued investment in great journalism, audience and digital subscription growth, driven by better use of data and clearer offers and customer journeys. Innovation in digital advertising, where we’re seeing great success with branded content and smartphone. 

Thompson points to some data points from the first quarter to validate this strategy: 

According to comScore, we had 31 million US Millennials consuming Times’ journalism on digital in March, 11 million more than the March in the year previous. Audience engagement is growing steadily as well.
It’s not surprising, then, that this was a very strong quarter for our digital subscription business. We added 67,000 net new digital subscriptions to our news products, the highest number of quarterly adds, since Q4 2012, and a real achievement is our pay model reaches its fifth anniversary. The rate at which we’re adding subscriptions is continuing to accelerate. 

There are currently two main digital revenue streams for The New York Times – the news service, where subscriptions have risen 13% year-on-year, and the Crossword, which had 59% revenue growth year-on-year and now boasts north-of-200,000 digital subscriptions. 
Combining the two streams gives The New York Times a digital-only subs total of 1,357,000 users, with the goal of topping the 1.5 million mark by the end of this year. Thompson argues that with 200,000 of its own digital subscribers, the Crossword is a template to build on: 

Forget the main news thing. [The Crossword] is one of the most successful subscription models on its own. But in addition, we certainly think that there are other opportunities. We’ve talked about and announced that we’re launching some more interesting products, in the broader sense in the lifestyle and features area. We have a television-related product and a wellness and fitness product based on our well blog, arriving this year. 
Cooking is delivering now real scale in terms of total unique users, but also some really striking numbers for engagement. We will be testing and exploring ways of beginning to use these to drive subscription. We’re going to test different models to see what’s the best way of doing it, but we absolutely believe that there are bundles of IP that The Times can produce, other brands which The Times already controls, which it can exploit, which potentially can broaden the subscription base.

My take
Thompson says that digital transformation at The New York Times Company is working well. I’d describe it more as a work-in-progress. 
The paywall on The Sun tabloid in the UK was an experiment doomed to fail given its target readership and driven by Rupert Murdoch’s personal loathing for the likes of Google. Brooks’ pragmatic decision to pull it down was sensible at that end of the market, whereas the likes of The New York Times can argue a mantra of ‘quality content costs’. 
How easily this will sit alongside the new pivot towards sponsored content rather than traditional digital advertising remains to be seen. If that sponsored content option is essentially a free-for-all, chuck-it-over-the-fence-and-see model, then the quality argument is undermined. 
Image credit - The New York Times CompanyRead more on: Digital and content marketingDigital enterprise in the real world 