
Gavin Patterson
BT boss Gavin Patterson is usually seen in public trotting out the firm’s ‘alternative facts’ around its contribution to the UK digital economy, but this week he’s got a far tougher spin to try to pimp. 
Yesterday saw £8 billion wiped off the value of the telco as an Italian accounting scandal deepened, while the firm also had to warn that it’s taking a hit from a slowdown in big public sector deals for the its services arm. 
All told, Patterson must be casting a nostalgic glance over his shoulder to last week when he was glad-handing around with business tycoons, politicians and celebrities at the World Economic Forum in Davos. 
All that awaits this week is a rough ride from investors on Friday when BT’s quarterly numbers come out – and profit comes in at around £300 million less than expected – and the prospect of scrutiny from regulators and financial authorities in Europe and beyond. 
For now, the normally pugnacious Patterson has issued a holding statement: 

We are deeply disappointed with the improper practices which we have found in our Italian business. We have undertaken extensive investigations into that business and are committed to ensuring the highest standards across the whole of BT for the benefit of our customers, shareholders, employees and all other stakeholders.

BT had announced last October that it had uncovered what it called“inappropriate management behaviour” in its Italian division. This, it estimated at the time, would cost it £145 million. By yesterday, that figure had shot up to £530 million, following an investigation by auditors KPMG that found:


The extent and complexity of inappropriate behaviour in the Italian business were far greater than previously identified.

Italian regulators have begun their own investigation, while the The Financial Reporting Council (FRC), the UK’s accountancy watchdog, is considering its position: 

We are aware of BT’s statement about its review of accounting issues in its Italian business and we will consider if these matters require the FRC to investigate whether the auditors and accountants at BT fulfilled their duties. 

Shaking the arrogance?
The scandal comes at a bad time for BT which faces increased pressure from regulator Ofcom to break off its Openreach business in the UK in order to open up the broadband market to greater competition. BT has fiercely resisted any such moves, with Patterson threatening to take the matter to the European Commission if necessary. 
Away from the growing problems around Italy, BT’s also pre-warned that a slowdown in government business in the UK will hit its numbers with double-digit decline for Business and Public Sector in Q4: 

Looking ahead, however, the outlook for UK public sector and international corporate markets has deteriorated.

Patterson reached for the ‘Brexit to blame’ excuse when he told analysts: 

We are seeing some slowdown, potentially down to the economy and potentially down to Brexit…In the business market we’re going to see I believe a tightening in the public sector. Budgets are going to be squeezed and we’re going to feel that as much as anyone else.

There are two components to this, he explained:

We’ve had these very big central contracts that have come to a natural end and have just been winding down. I think it’s fair to say they’ve wound down faster than we expected. We’re also seeing a tightening of public sector budgets. If you look historically there has been some Q4 benefit in public sector budget as budget-holders have used up unused budget and complete projects before the end of the financial year. As we sit here in January, we see no sign of that.

He added:

We flagged that we anticipated some headwinds at our capital markets day last year. Those have probably been more extreme than we expected. What we normally see in Q4 is some pick-up in the public sector as public sector customers use up some budget. There’s no sign of it this year. So it’s a combination of big contracts completing, but at the same time we’re not seeing these replaced with the same scale of contracts going forward.

This is going to be an interesting situation to observe. Prime Minister Theresa May has just published her Modern Industrial Strategy and one of the underpinnings of that is going to be top-notch digital infrastructure. But the government’s own industrial experts have criticised the existing roll-out – poorer infrastructure than Albania? 
BT’s going to do its damnedest to cling onto its gifted pseudo-monopoly and to maximising its shareholders dividends when it’s more and more likely that the May government is going to come round to the realisation that BT’s broadband investment plans just aren’t enough to meet the goals of the Industrial Strategy. 
If that’s the case, then perhaps we’ll start to see fewer BT press releases being retweeted by Digital Minister Matt Hancock and bit more encouragement in the direction of Ofcom to do its duty and break up BT once and for all for the national good. 
BT was worried enough about its predicament to issue its profit warning yesterday, only days before the official earnings release. That in turn rattled the City and will have left investors wondering what else might emerge if this warning couldn’t wait a few more days. 
My take
BT just won worst customer service award from Money Mail with 27% of the voters, higher than the hated Southern Rail! (This is worth a read, particularly the bit about the reporter being asked to hide the Wooden Spoon award up his sleeve in case he upsets the BT staffers!) 
Despite its dreadful standing among customers, BT’s just announced that it’s putting up its prices to those consumers. All those of us who are forced to use its appalling service can look forward to paying more money for the privilege. So forgive me for finding its headaches this week satisfying. (You probably can’t if you’re a shareholder, of course).
The Italian problem is hugely embarrassing for BT and for Patterson as the ultimate ‘buck stops here’ man in charge. But at the end of the day, Italy only accounts for one percent of overall revenues. It’s a PR nightmare and will attract unwelcome regulatory attention, but it’s a situation that can ultimately be fixed. 
It’s the public sector slowdown that’s far more alarming longer term.  Post-Brexit, the May government needs the Industrial Strategy to work and that means investment from BT, as the status quo stands, or it means that we finally get round to taking a sledgehammer to the toxic symbiosis between BT and Openreach. 
Onwards to Friday and whatever spin Patterson tries to put on all this. This could be the beginning of a long-awaited shift in the fortunes of BT. Yesterday was the firm’s worst day since privatisation. If that didn’t at least shake the corporate arrogance, nothing will. But I strongly suspect that the worst is yet to come for BT – and long-overdue it is too. 
Image credit - WEFRead more on: CRM and customer experienceDigital government and public services

