
We’ve been warned for years about the disruption of “Shadow IT.” Well, now we can put a name on Shadow IT: Kevin Hamilton of Berkeley Research Group (BRG). Granted, Hamilton doesn’t quite fit the Shadow IT stereotype: He gets along really well with the BRG IT team, for one thing. But when Hamilton sees a need that can help his applied analytics group, he goes for it.
The latest example? Hamilton realized his team was hamstrung by inefficient collaboration tools. For Hamilton, that was an unacceptable situation. Given the global opportunities Hamilton sees for BRG in health care advisory, he can’t afford to have a chaotic situation with poor document management and bloated email threads.
Recently, I talked with Hamilton about changes in the health care industry and how Berkeley Research Group is pursing analytics as health care data opens up. We also looked at the potential of predictive. Hamilton shared how they solved collaboration problems along the way, using Huddle to address some serious productivity issues.
Berkeley Research Group may not be a household name yet, but they’re working on it. Founded in 2009, BRG is now up to 700 consultants, split between litigation services and advisory. Since joining BRG fours years ago, Hamilton has been part of the advisory group, heading up the applied analytics team. “We’re the group that takes all the nasty raw data and turns it into actionable information for our consultants and clients,” says Hamilton. 
That fits in with BRG’s corporate goal: assemble global experts in key industries, and help their clients solve complex problems. As Hamilton puts it, “These are the hard problems that clients can’t figure out how to handle themselves.” In some cases, existing service providers lack the domain expertise. That’s where BRG sees a sweet spot.
Health care – from insufficient data to an onslaught
There’s plenty of thorny problems to contend with in the health care industry. In December 2014, Hamilton started BRG’s expansion to global health care advisory, expanding from the US into the UK, and now, the Middle East.
Hamilton has seen huge changes in his twenty-plus years in health care. But when it comes to utilizing data, Hamilton says health care is lagging:
I think healthcare was a little behind the curve as far as utilizing data – both to manage the hospital as a business, but also in patient care. A lot of it was just lack of digital data. To this day, I find hospitals that still have paper records.
But now there’s a new problem. We’ve gone from insufficient digital data to an onslaught:
Our clients are at the point where they’re now inundated with data. They’ve got these  rushing rivers of data coming at them. They don’t have any idea what to do with this data, let alone how to convert it into something that’s actionable.
So what’s to be done? For Hamilton’s team, it’s about turning vast data warehouses into actionable info:
We’re trying to thread the needle between the enterprise data warehouse and the users, before they give up on making sense of it all. We pull these key pieces of data together, then utilize it to find truly actionable things that the client can do.
Fine, but what does actionable mean in a health care context?
It might be that a hospital has a really long length of stay. Maybe patients were staying in the in-patient setting much longer than we would expect for, say, a cardiology procedure. Well, what can we learn from the data that identifies where those process breakdowns might be? And then, once we identify those, where can we look from our experiences with clients around the world to examine how it’s being done a little bit differently or better?
Thus BRG’s need for global collaboration:
BRG now has experts all over the world. These are people that have really narrow expertise; they’re the world’s best at something. What if we need to get those people onto a health care project,- or at least have them weighing in on documents? Our old way of collaborating was email, and it was painful, as anybody who’s tried to collaborate on a document over email knows.
“Our old way of collaborating was painful”
And that’s where “Mr. Shadow IT” Kevin Hamilton comes in. He realized BRG’s email-based collaboration was unsustainable:
We’d suffer from version control. People couldn’t find the pieces that they needed. We’d constantly have to ask, “Has anybody seen this document?” We’re moving quicker and quicker, and it was just killing us. I think professional services in our industry is moving rapidly into globalization, trying to take the best of what’s being done around the world and applying it to the different markets. We’ve always needed better collaboration tools, but we need it even more so now that we’re global.
In 2012, Hamilton took action. He researched the collaboration market, looking for a solution that would enable collaboration on a range of project documents, from proposals to deliverables. He also wanted a viable content management solution. Laptop-based storage wasn’t cutting it: “If you couldn’t get a hold of the person, you couldn’t get the content from them.”
Hamilton had one more key criteria. He needed a solution that would NOT require the involvement of his IT team:
A couple limitations that I had: the solution obviously needed to be robust and secure, which everybody would probably say. But I actually needed to not have IT involved in it. The reason was that IT was swamped by our rapid growth. I couldn’t really, with good conscience, put one more thing on their plate. I couldn’t say, “You guys – my group needs this. You have to figure it out.” I needed something I could figure out how to do myself. I’m certainly not an IT person, so I needed to be able to stand this thing up on my own.
Hamilton looked at SharePoint, but it required too much IT involvement. Online research led him to Huddle, and it matched up well with his needs. By June of 2013, his division was live on Huddle.
After go-live: assessing the benefits
One serious issue with collaboration is lack of adoption. That wasn’t the case here. Two weeks after go-live, all 70 people in his division were using it:
I figured the younger staff would probably start using Huddle, and that I would have to pigeonhole the more seasoned people to use it. As it turned out, some of the biggest champions ended up being the more senior partner,s and some of the people who had actually been in the industry a long time.
Results from collaboration projects aren’t always easy to justify, so I asked Hamilton about the benefits. Hamilton’s team has organized into client-specific Huddle work spaces, which includes everything from client documents to travel logistics (e.g. the hotels near the client site). Reduced email headaches is a clear project benefit:
The email volume is dramatically reduced now. For example: no more proposal email chains. We don’t have any more emails of, “Hey, do you have that document?” I used to get those emails daily. We don’t have nearly the same version control issues.
Hamilton was happy that the solution “wasn’t too social.” His team isn’t distracted by chaotic activity streams. He sees a deeper value than a clean inbox. It’s about getting more deliverables out the door:
The amount we paid for Huddle has been offset by not having to hire additional people because of our inefficiency. Now, we’ve been hiring up a lot because we’re growing, but that’s a different story. On the one hand, we have less email traffic, but we also have a greater speed to production.
We can turn a proposal around faster than we would’ve been able to do it pre-Huddle. because we have the content that exists, and we can all take our turns working on it. We can work across time zones more efficiently now, instead of having to wait for somebody to wake up to work on something, I can start working on it and not have to email them about it.
The wrap – what’s next?
Hamilton’s got big plans ahead. Next up with Huddle: he hopes to get external clients involved in some of the project workgroups, collaborating during project engagements. And: he’s officially turned the management of Huddle over to his IT team. The BRG IT group is now expanding Huddle to other teams inside Berkeley Research Group: “It’s actually really taking hold in the whole firm.”
Hamilton’s team is working hard to expand their services with more predictive capabilities:
There’s some really cool things we can do with predictive analytics in the healthcare space. We can look at scenarios like: “Before we discharge a patient to the home setting, can we look at the attributes of that patient and what’s going on while they were in our hospital, and predict whether they may actually re-admit?” If we could do that, we’ll save the hospitals money because they’re not getting penalties for re-admissions, and: we’re going to provide a better patient experience.
It’s a worthy challenge; one with real human consequences. When Hamilton brought this up, I couldn’t help but think of the tragic Ebola case in Texas of a patient that was dismissed before the right data flags were raised.
Hamilton added:
If we lower quality, which we never want to do, we’ve eroded healthcare values. Predictive analytics is going to play a big role in changing that. We’re starting to understand what can we identify about our patients up front that are going to help us to create value for them?
And that, folks, is a much better use of time than scrambling for email documents.
Image credits: Big News © sharpshutter22 – Fotolia.com. Headshot provided by Huddle.
Disclosure: diginomica has no financial ties to Berkeley Research Group or Huddle. Huddle PR contacted me about this story, and I pursued it.
Read more on: Collaboration sharing and digital productivityFuture of workUse cases 