
via United Airlines
In part one, I set out a number of areas where I believe the airline industry fails to see the customer. In this second part I explore what airlines might wish to consider as it relates to expectation management and is one area where carriers really need analytic help.
The backdrop makes for grizzly reading.
Carriers create advertising campaigns that feature certain aspects of their in-flight experiences that few travelers enjoy/earn. They also suggest certain perks can be available to their most frequent flyers but don’t often deliver.
For example, if carriers ever compared the perks they might make available to their frequent flyers vs. what they actually delivered, they might suspect they have a credibility problem. For example, in 2014 I was a United Silver Premier. United makes certain perks available to these flyers today (see chart right)
In 2015, when I tried to take advantage of these perks, I was almost always disappointed.
For example, I never got any of those ‘complimentary premier upgrades’ and I never heard a whisper about a ‘companion complimentary upgrade’. My seating track record with United that year looked something like this:

I rarely got to the forward part of the coach section (i.e., Economy Plus).
The only time I got to first was due to the last minute booking of a ticket by a client (not a complimentary upgrade).
A couple of weeks ago, I flew in the last row of a United A319. Everyone that went to the restroom (it was across from me) bumped into me. Now that’s status!
The misery of wait lists
This just doesn’t apply to lowly Silver people. I chatted with more than a couple of Premier Gold folks last year. They didn’t know what an upgrade was either.
Just to make their most frequent flyers even more frustrated, carriers display upgrade standby lists at the gate.
My flight last weekend had 28 people on the first class standby list for a 2-row first class section that was already checked in. Hmmm – that means 28 people who were mathematically prohibited from an upgrade, still got to see how far down they rank in the program and how little of a chance they have of getting an upgrade.
The only value for these displays is to take pictures of them and tweet them to the carrier so that maybe they’ll realize how asinine their upgrade programs really are and how miserable coach must be for so many people to want out of it.
Carriers need to create analytics around every single perk they purportedly make available to each class of frequent flyer.
They need to show what they offered, how often the frequent flyer was able to take advantage of the perk and how many times the flyer was unsuccessful in getting this perk.
If a perk is only available less than 10% of the time, it’s not a perk – it’s a maddening reminder to the flyer that they have no real status. It’s a tease. It’s also damaging to the brand.
If the carriers looked at the success rate of flyers to get these perks over time, the picture gets even more dire.
Upgrades or free ticket awards that used to be common and easy to get a decade ago are as a rare as hens’ teeth these days.
This means that the perk itself has been diminished by factors such as the explosion in non-flight mileage earning opportunities. Diminishing the value of perks has an adverse impact on carrier loyalty. It has had a powerful effect on me and is why I fly Virgin America or Jet Blue every chance I can.
Airlines need an algorithm to use with their mileage program participants.
A new scoring algorithm?
I suggest they calculate a score for each member after each flight they take and compare how this score is moving over the last few flights, over the last year and year over year. I’d score it like this:

Seat: +50 points if upgraded to First, 0 points if seated in Economy Plus, -50 points in regular Economy seats (low score due to the inability to be productive in cramped rows with reclining seats in front of business traveler) and -150 points if seated anywhere in last 4 rows of plane (the smells and bumping are horrible back there).
Missing extras: if the passenger was on a plane without wi-fi, then -30 points. If it lacked electric power at the seat, then -30 points.
Involuntary Bag Separation: If the passenger had to gate check their bag (e.g., the overhead bins were full), then -50 points
Acknowledgement: If the frequent flyer was personally acknowledged and thanked by the flight crew then +20 points. If not acknowledged then -50 points. If given something special (e.g., a snack, food, meal, drink), then +30 points.
Timeliness: If flight arrives more than 20 minutes late, then -40 points. If flight is cancelled, then -200 points.
First Class Experience: Nothing is more maddening that burning through upgrade certificates or paying extra for first class and finding out the plane has no power, no entertainment and no food. I hit this epic combo a couple of months ago on a transcon from Charlotte to San Francisco. Six plus hours with nothing to do, see or eat. I even asked a special services agent to describe for me what the first class experience was supposed to be on that flight. If I have to ask, it’s not getting delivered. If first class lacks any of these three items (food, power and entertainment), it’s -50. If it misses two, then -100. If it misses all three, then -300.

An algorithm like that would help airlines understand that business travelers value in-flight productivity, timeliness and a modest bit of recognition for their continued loyalty. Since this isn’t part of the current airline DNA of airlines, it needs to be (re-) programmed in again.
If this algorithm was in place years ago, my score would have been very high with American as I used to get lots of upgrades, flew in the front, was frequently acknowledged, got fed often, etc.
Today, I don’t think any major carrier would score in positive territory for most business travelers. Yes, they still dote on the super-elite flyers (those sub 1% who pay top dollar, pay to upgrade and fly 100,000+ miles annually.) Most business travelers aren’t these flyers.
This is an industry that consciously mistreats all but a percent or two of its customers. Who can be loyal to an entity that is so disinterested in its customers? It’s illogical to do so.
The recognition point in the algorithm (above) warrants an additional comment. In a recent conversation with a flight attendant with one of the major carriers, the attendant stated that even though they know who their most frequent flyers are on a given flight, they are instructed not to acknowledge any of them in coach unless they flew over 100,000 miles the prior year.
In other words, someone who flies 50,000 or miles/year consistently year-after-year is not worth acknowledging. Fire the idiot who came up with that policy.
Why should there be a focus again on business travelers?
I suspect they are lot more numerous and profitable than carriers realize. In the 29 years I’ve be been flying American, I’ve averaged between 50-100 annually. Let’s say that each flight, conservatively, produced $300 revenue, then that makes for annual customer revenue of $15-30,000 per traveler or a LTCV (lifetime customer value) of around $435-870,000.
The cost to ‘sell’ these steady-eddy travelers for future trips is almost nil. So, why do airlines go out of their way to ignore or irritate such a large and financially important group of flyers? Carrier logic is something mere mortals weren’t to understand.
Carriers also need to understand which city pairs create the lowest scores. I have flown the Chicago to San Francisco run over 400 round trips. This route is heavily traversed by business travelers. I don’t even bother to request an upgrade on these runs as I know I will not get one. When a plane is more than half full of premium status flyers, a good number of them are going to get a substandard experience. A lot of frequent flyers have had hundreds of these.
The Chicago to Boston run is another of these routes. Even though my status would suggest I will get to be in one of the first groups to board, I often find that I will be separated from my rollerboard due to the sheer volume of other higher status flyers and how many bins they’ve already filled.
I still find it comical that my priority boarding status means I still won’t board this flight until more than half of the seats are already filled with even more, higher status flyers. Chicago to New York can be a doozy, too for much the same reasons.
Carriers set impossibly high expectations for their frequent flyer programs due to perceived competitive threats.
However, their inability to meet expectations is a marketing disaster. When I crossed my last million-mile threshold with American, I tried for 2 years to use the system-wide upgrades they sent me. I couldn’t.
Did that statistic show up in any analytic report? I doubt it. If I had customers spending that much with me and unable to use a valuable coupon, I’d want to know why.
Apparently, airlines may have a “don’t ask, don’t care” attitude to such things.
The expectations in airline marketing are almost surreally absurd.
I get tons of copy from airlines touting their new lounges, lie-flat seats and other perks that aren’t on the planes they send to Chicago. If United or American looked at how many times I had been in one of their lay-flat seats, the analytic graph would look like this:
Brian’s seat chart
I can’t get these seats because they aren’t part of the livery the carriers use here for domestic flights.
In an age when carriers keep switching to smaller regional jets on more and more routes, when will any domestic passengers find lie-flat seats on their flights?
The carriers also like to tout the improvements they are making to their international business class lounges. Again, do you think I’m getting into one of these with any frequency? No. Will any of my relatives get in one? Probably never.
Understand customer expectations requires a fresh approach to airline analytics. Yet, it’s these things that get promoted and hyped. What a waste of marketing monies.
Analytics around customer expectations are desperately needed in the airline industry. But even if someone creates them, would airlines change?
The next generation airline measures
So the next group of analytic priorities air carriers must address are:

Comparisons of what their frequent flyer programs offer and what actually got delivered to the different classes of frequent flyers
Comparisons of what specific flyers tried to utilize vs. their actual success rate in accessing promoted perks
Comparisons of advertised experiences vs. the reality of frequent flyers to get them in their home airport
Comparisons of advertised experiences vs. the reality of frequent flyers to get them on domestic routes
Understanding of how many premier flyers are stranded in the cheap seats, middle seats or last four rows of planes (by the bathroom) on popular business routes
Analysis as to why any class of frequent flyer is not utilizing their awards (not just the major anniversary or threshold ones).

In part 3, I touch upon the topic of empathy – a sadly neglected part of the airline experience.
Image credit - Images via the author and United Airlines. Read more on: Analytics planning and data analysis 