
Consulting, as an industry, changed sometime in the 1990s. It was predominately filled with strategy, business advisory and some IT folks. In the 1990s, the allure of massive ERP implementation projects triggered the hiring of scores of people, many with little or no business backgrounds, to do a lot of technical work. It also prompted the hiring of process designers, change managers, project and program managers and more.
To put the growth in perspective, when I joined a major consultancy in January 1981, they only had around 3,400 consultants globally. When I left the company 18 years later, they had 65,000 employees. In a recent annual report, they stated they had hired 65,000 people in that last year alone.
And, that firm isn’t the only consulting growing at this kind of rate. Where are all of these new hires coming from?
Apparently, the challenge of keeping the talent pump primed is getting harder and harder.
Walker Sands recently completed a great study on this issue entitle Where They’re Going, They Don’t Want Roadmaps –  Gauging College Students’ Perceptions of Consulting Careers.  Some of the findings didn’t entirely shock me. For example, only 4 in 10 students claimed to know what consultants do and, sadly, many of them get their market intelligence from watching television shows featuring consultants.
That’s like getting romantic advice from some soap opera character named Lance Cutlass IV. My own children didn’t know what I did for a living (hint: I still do a lot of big software consulting and strategy consulting gigs) until they were getting close to leaving college.
The study should be a must read for any consultancy, integrator or accountancy. There’s a palpable employment/recruiting brand issue out there and it needs addressing. Other firms, particularly those hiring lots of service professionals might want to read the report, too, as it might presage issues in your firm’s recruiting efforts.
To get more color on the study, I exchanged thoughts with Will Kruisbrink, vice president of professional services and partner at Walker Sands Communications. It was an interesting Q&A. Here are the results of that interchange:
Qu: What specific steps do consultancies need to address re: their recruiting/employment brand that are needed now and maybe aren’t obvious from the study?
A: Some of the problems consulting firms are facing are ‘champagne’ problems, to an extent. Consulting is viewed as an elite, exclusive profession reserved for the tip top performers by many students. Unfortunately, with that comes some baggage. It’s also viewed as a homogenous club, reserved for only certain majors at certain schools, and yes, even certain races and genders.
Consulting firms should keep looking at non-traditional applicants and expand their searches for interns beyond the business school careers fairs. They should try to reach out directly to the parents and families of students. 80% of students without a parent with a college degree find out everything they know from career fairs, that seems out of whack. Your families’ encouragement can have a great deal of influence on where you go to college.
Also, counterintuitively, travel can be an interesting way to attract new employees. Student loan debt can leave young people with not a lot of options for seeing the world. While it’s easy to make fun of business travel, highlighting some fun destinations consultants get to go to might attract more than repel students.
Also, the hierarchical structure of these firms is harming their standing among the Millennial worker group who wants faster advancement.
Qu: Why aren’t more consultancies tapping into older workers/alumni to fill some of these holes? Is it because their business models are built on the use of large numbers of low cost young people? Does the business model need fixing?
A: Like any professional services organization, you start with a large class of younger entry level employees and you promote the top performers into client facing or higher positions. This process weeds out certain employees while raising up others. Also, training and cultural indoctrination seems to be important to consulting firms. That leads them to hire large classes to find those most suited to the organizations’ strictures.
Qu: Are airlines also part of the problem? When I was with Accenture, upgrades were free and plentiful, planes weren’t always overbooked and cramped, seats weren’t on top of one another, you could get work done on a plane, there was no TSA, etc. Travel today is far from fun or glamorous. No wonder no one wants a travel intensive job.
It’s true that business travel isn’t what it used to be, but actually, we think travel isn’t the problem here.
A certain amount of travel could be appealing to young workers.  Just 9% of respondents in our survey cited that as a reason for not wanting a consulting industry job. Is that an outright endorsement of business travel? No, not really, but 91% didn’t think it was a problem at all, and I suspect, based on anecdotal experience, travel to certain cities is exciting for new consultants.
The real problem is the perception that the industry is hierarchical and tough to advance in. Startups might be so much more popular (60% would prefer a job there) because while you might work the same long hours, you’ll advance more quickly to a position of real authority (as long as the startup is a success).
Qu: Have consultancies gotten so big and impersonal that they lost their ‘specialness’? Who wants to be a consultant in a firm that has 100,000+ other consultants? The cachet of being a consultant used to be something. Now, it’s a just a job like so many other jobs.
Not only that, in some cases many of those 100,000 people are actually outsourced tech labor sitting in India or China. That gives the firm a global footprint, but a less intimate workplace feel.  The firm is a mile wide and an inch deep.
Ad agencies have dealt with this image problem by starting smaller boutique firms within larger holding companies. Energy BBDO within the BBDO brand for example. Perhaps consulting firms could learn from this and create more innovative groups within the larger multi-national corporation. This could create tighter knit working groups and form relationships that inspire creativity at work.
My take

While there appears to be a lot of misinformation or ignorance about the consulting profession among students generally, I suspect very few students could actually tell you what differentiates an Accenture from a Deloitte from a Cognizant or a Bain. The lack of awareness may be a much deeper problem than these firms recognize. I famously put up on a slide the taglines of eight consultancies with their logos scrambled on the other side of the slide. I asked the audience (all consultants from the same firm) to pick out their marketing tagline. Almost no one could. If employees can’t recognize attributes about their own firm’s brand, how are recruits supposed to understand even the basic differentiating characteristics? And please consulting firms, quit using phrases like “We only hire the best people”. Everyone says this and it isn’t true.
The elitism comments in the study were certainly real during my Big 4/5/8 career. Strategy consultants only recruited from a few MBA programs. You could graduate top of your class at a great B-School but if it wasn’t Harvard, Wharton or Stanford, you weren’t worthy of a look-see. A great student from many colleges couldn’t even get someone to read their resume as the firm only took people from a cherished list of universities. And this is still happening today.
Many consultancies, still, don’t know how to incorporate workers who are not fresh college grads. Experienced hires are not pursued and, the few that get hired are often shunted to non-front-line roles or outsourcing roles. This happens because the firms can’t adjust their business models or develop relevant on-boarding mechanisms for experienced hires.

The numbers, in this case, don’t lie. Consultancies have some work to do.
Image credit - Consultant Concept © duncanandison via fotoliaRead more on: Future of workTalent management 