
We’ve returned to the theme of e-commerce at the high-end, luxury brand of the retail sector on a number of occasions, highlighting the dilemma faced by many companies about how to develop an effective strategy.
Do you lock your 5th Avenue stores and ferociously guard your exclusivity from the online marketplaces or do you find some way to embrace an omni-channel world?
Against that backdrop, yesterday’s announcement that Michael Kors Holdings plans to acquire Italian fashion house Gianni Versace for about $2.4 billion is an interesting play, particularly as Versace’s lack of any significant e-commerce presence is on the new owner’s ‘to do’ list to fix.
The aspiration on the part of Michael Kors Holdings to is push up-market, right down to adopting a new name once the Versace deal closes. From that point, the new identity will be Capri Holdings, named after the luxury vacation destination for the rich, the famous and the achingly glamorous.
CEO John Idol makes no secret of his pursuit of a slice of the high end retail market:
The House of Versace is one of the most storied luxury brands in the world, rooted in Italian glamour and style. The Versace brand has a heritage spanning over 40 years. Fashion has always been at the core of the Versace DNA. This brand fits perfectly into our group’s strategy to focus on international fashion luxury brands that are leaders in style and track…With the acquisition of Versace, we now have created one of the world’s leading fashion luxury groups.
But while some of the luxury might rub off, Idol has some pragmatic plans for Versace’s online expansion, a part of that business that is essentially “non-existent” at present. If Idol has his way, online sales will reach $100 million, although he’s making no promises as to when that will be.
While Versace’s online business might be nearly “non-existent,” Kors has already invested about $100 million in building an e-commerce platform that can be used by third party brands. The combined company will integrate Versace into the system, says Idol:
One of the first things that we’re going to do is that by getting the e-commerce capabilities up to speed much more quickly for the company and then marketing through that channel, we’ll be able to generate increased revenues, not only online, but in stores. As you know, in many companies, consumers make 80% of the purchase decision online, but quite frankly they’ve made 80% of the purchases in store. Our merchandise stores are not robust enough online today and we need to be able to offer the full array of products to consumers we have, that we are able to offer very, very fast service to that consumer.
The CEO said he hopes online sales will eventually total more than $100 million, though he did not give a time frame:
We will accelerate e-commerce development to create a full omni-channel experience…we [have] spent over $100 million at Michael Kors developing a global e-commerce platform that we think is very robust. That platform has the capability of having other brands on it along with Michael Kors. So we are going to work very rapidly to develop with the Versace company to come on to our platform. We have also got very, very good omni-channel capabilities…today also Jimmy Choo has very robust both e-commerce and omni-channel capabilities. So we think that that’s something that the company will benefit from.
He added:
So from a systems standpoint, we will get Versace up to a much better position than they have today. Between e-commerce and omni-channel, we believe that this will represent over time at least $100 million business for Versace online. It’ll take us some time to develop that.
Omni-thinking
Offline stores will also play their part of course. There are over 1,000 Michael Kors Holdings owned stores worldwide, including 847 Michael Kors retail stores, 153 stores operated through licensing partners and 191 Jimmy Cho brand retail stores. Meanwhile Versace has around 200 boutiques around the world. Store expansion will continue as part of the omni-channel push, says Idol:
We will increase Versace’s global retail footprint of approximately 200 to 300 stores. Our plan is to open stores at a faster rate to take advantage of expansion opportunities in untapped markets where we believe there will be strong demand for the Versace brand, particularly in Europe and Asia.
There’s also going to be more investment in digital and social marketing, he added:
Versace is one of the most famous luxury brands in the world. For over 40 years Versace has continued to build this unique, innovative and powerful communication message to consumers worldwide. In many of its major markets, Versace has greater than 80% brand awareness. The brand also commands a leading social media presence with 13.5 million followers for Versace, and 3.5 million followers for Donatella [Versace].
I believe Versace is actually reaching its broader customer today than the revenues would indicate and we can only see that through some of this social media metrics. So, clearly there is a larger interest in the brand than the revenues are generating. We have obviously to convert those metrics.
Interestingly Idol belives that other luxury brands have been doing a better job here than Versace, despite the power of Donatella’s personal social reach:
Our luxury competitors are doing a very good job with that today. They’re spending a lot of money on marketing directly to their consumers. And they have a very sophisticated database. That’s going to be a big opportunity for us to work on with as a Versace team, and again we think we can bring that up to speed that to pretty quickly.
My take
The reaction from the Versace customer faithful to the news of the takoever wasn’t kind in the main:


Hissy-fits aside, this is going to be a fascinating retail story to follow and one that is likely to throw up some significant learnings for luxury brands…for better or worse.
Image credit - Versace Read more on: e-commerceRetail e-commerce and the omni-channel 