
Earlier in the week I saw that Anhsu Sharma posted an incendiary story on TechCrunch entitled Why Big Companies Keep Failing: The Stack Fallacy. It should be no surprise that with a clickbait title like that that it drew more than 9,000 social shares, not the 6,300 I see at time of writing. I know this because unlike TechCrunch, I have access to to the full social graph data for stories. The fact the article is utter nonsense is worrying in the extreme because the graph data suggests that at least 9,000 people are buying it, including folk like Marc Andreessen, widely regarded as something of a sage in Silicon Valley if almost completely unknown in the rest of the world and among technology buyers.
In order to understand the problem with Sharma’s thesis you have to understand that the two companies he names; Oracle and Salesforce are former employers, something that is not explicit on TechCrunch but which you can learn from his LinkedIn profile. In the interests of disclosure I knew Sharma when he was at both companies although we have not met for some time. So what’s the problem and why am I attacking the thesis? Let’s start with the top of story:
Stack fallacy is the mistaken belief that it is trivial to build the layer above yours.
Well yes, plenty of vendors have made spectacular errors but let’s hold that thought for a moment and assume it makes sense. The story follows:
In the business world, we have a similar illusion. Database companies believe that SaaS apps are “just a database app” — this gives them false confidence that they can easily build, compete and win in this new market.
As history has shown, Amazon is dominating the cloud IaaS market, even as the technology vendors that build ingredient, lower-layer technologies struggle to compete  — VMware is nowhere close to winning against AWS, even though all of AWS runs on virtual machine technology, a core competency of VMware; Oracle has been unable to beat Salesforce in CRM SaaS, despite the fact that Oracle perceives Salesforce to be just a hosted database app. It even runs on their database!
OK. So now we get to the Oracle and Salesforce thing. The fact is that Sharma left Oracle in 2008 so his thesis that what he saw in that time period equates to today is incomplete at best. A search would have told him (and anyone else) that Oracle started out with a misunderstanding of what Fusion Apps should be about and then spent the post 2008 period engineering for an entirely new ‘stack’ of cloud solutions that are doing remarkably well in the market today. In what I can only describe as a moment of karma, Larry Dignan reports:
Oracle is moving closer to what some analysts predict will be a cloud moment of truth for its big transition to a subscription-based business model and the company is starting to have enough reference customers to make its case.
Whether I would go that far, based as it is on effusive analyst reports (check their allegiances) is another matter but what I know from personal briefings and access to inside data is that Oracle has done a good job of convincing a fast growing list of customers that it has a credible SaaS applications offering. Fail? I don’t think so and even if you mentally note the skepticism with which Phil Wainewright discusses Oracle’s cloud earnings, you still have to ask whether Oracles published results amount to a ‘fail.’ As I said in a conversation with Jon Reed, customers could care less whether revenue comes from cloud or any other place. They care about getting stuff done at the best possible price.
Sharma goes on:
In the 1990s, Larry Ellison saw SAP make gargantuan sums of money selling process automation software (ERP) —  to him, ERP was nothing more than a bunch of tables and workflows —  so he spent hundreds of millions of dollars trying to own that market, with mixed results. Eventually, Oracle bought its way into the apps market by acquiring PeopleSoft and Siebel.
Sharma has some credibility in this statement because in the period 2003-08, he was Founder & Group Product Manager, Oracle SaaS Platform. That was an especially troubling time for Oracle as it relates to SaaS, the history of which is littered with the bodies of those who tried to make Fusion work and failed.
His next stint was with Salesforce and it is understandable therefore that he would write the history from both the Oracle and Salesforce perspective but even that writing of history is a fallacy.(sic)
Plenty of people will opine about how Salesforce has become the dominant CRM player by market share and trading volumes but the simple answer has nothing to do with Oracle’s (or any other vendors’ troubles) in this segment. This has everything to do with the fact that Oracle was on a different path at the crucial time and that both Oracle and SAP, which were the dominant players at the time, had their eyes on a different set of balls. Salesforce has been fortunate to have Marc Benioff as CEO. As we have said repeatedly, Benioff is a master marketer, the Pied Piper and PT Barnum of enterprise Silicon Valley. You only have to look at the way he spins seemingly magical stories to understand how he has bamboozled apparently unassailable foes.
Sharma argues that:
The bottleneck for success often is not knowledge of the tools, but lack of understanding of the customer needs. Database engineers know almost nothing about what supply chain software customers want or need. They can hire for that, but it is not a core competency.
While I know that was very much the case during the time Sharma was at Oracle, that thesis does not hold up in the post 2008 era. Oracle may well have made plenty of mistakes – as has Salesforce to which I will allude shortly – but it is a fast learner and today can hold its head high on CRM product to the point where Oracle can rightly preen itself, based upon the assessment of Paul Greenberg, arguably the world’s leading CRM expert.
Internally at SAP, I have been told on multiple occasions that SAP did not believe that Salesforce could wrest its CRM customers away. Paradoxically, and at the critical time, SAP had a much better technical and functional ‘stack’ than Salesforce. Unfortunately, it had shockingly bad product management coupled with an appalling UI. Nothing to do with stack fallacy but then you can argue SAP was already in the space so that argument doesn’t apply anyway.
Let’s get back to Sharma’s somewhat incomplete thesis about Salesforce.
In the most recent times. Salesforce has focused on marketing Wave Analytics. The fact is to date, that has been a massive failure. When it first emerged upon the scene, I was highly skeptical on two fronts: first, the company was unwilling to talk technical details. Second pricing was in nose bleed territory. More fundamental, Salesforce was trying to retrofit analytics to a solution that was never designed with that purpose. Like almost all pre-2005 app development vendors, Salesforce concentrated upon the transactional element of their software and not the full functional ‘stack.’
Under Sharma’s watch, Salesforce failed to grasp the multi-tenant, column store database need for real time analytics. How do I know this? Parker Harris, co-founder Salesforce, told me that Sharma was tasked with this topic back on the 2010-11 timeframe (I think but will stand corrected.) But when I subsequently spoke with Sharma, he was never direct in saying that Salesforce would either develop or acquire for that technology. As we now know and as Salesforce ISV partners will tell you, Salesforce dragged its heels and messed up with Wave to the point where Salesforce most recently put on a dog and pony for the analyst community during which it repositioned Wave. How well that goes down has yet to be determined by the people who really matter: customers.
In short, Sharna’s argument about the stack fallacy is based upon an entirely false premise and should be treated accordingly. The fact so many people appear to be buying it with almost no critique to the contrary is truly worrying. But it sheds light on a singular truth that has played out in Silicon Valley and the wider world: great marketing wins and an incendiary headline always gets attention.
In a final irony, Sharma says:
Product management is the art of knowing what to build.
So what was he doing at Oracle in the period 2003-08 given that product management was in his job title? I know that at the time he moved to Salesforce, Sharma was frustrated but that still doesn’t get you past the historical assessment of what was achieved at that time.
As always in discussions of this kind, it is inevitable that people write history based upon their knowledge gained at the time they were with this or that company and in fairness, it takes a brutal dose of self awareness to step back and ask the hard questions about what happened over time. Sharma has the benefit of unique inside knowledge and talks to the topic under discussion with the benefit of those insights. Unfortunately, that same knowledge is woefully out of date and as history students know only too well, history is never frozen in time.
Disclosure: Oracle, SAP and Salesforce are premier partners at time of writing. 
Read more on: Cloud platforms - infrastructure and architecture 