
Social networking theory inspired social media, which changed how we interact in the marketplace and with each other. Now, in the wake of scandals and a tone-deaf adherence to a one-dimensional mostly ad-driven business model, it is possible that social media has jumped the shark.
If you don’t know the expression, jumping the shark refers to an episode in the highly successful television comedy about American life in the 1950’s, “Happy Days” in which the main character, Fonzie, water skis and jumps over a shark. It was a desperate attempt to retain viewers after the writers couldn’t think of anything else for the characters to do. It was the highest point the show ever reached. Social media is beginning to feel like that.
As the Urban Dictionary succinctly puts it:
The precise moment when you know a program, band, actor, politician, or other public figure has taken a turn for the worse, gone downhill, become irreversibly bad, is unredeemable, etc.; the moment you realize decay has set in.
Our ability to produce not just data but information has created excessive competition for attention. The 20th century social scientist Herbert A. Simon coined the phrase “attention economy” around 1971 and although he died in 2001, according to Wikipedia, as of 2016, Simon was the most cited person in Artificial Intelligence and Cognitive Psychology on Google Scholar. He understood attention and what it takes to acquire and retain it. He was well ahead of his time.
With almost a thousand highly cited publications Simon was a pioneer in several fields that are top of mind today including artificial intelligence, information processing, decision-making, problem-solving, organization theory, complex systems, and computer simulation. He worked largely theoretically before there was sufficient computing power to extend his ideas and we are his natural descendants.
Current trends suggest that social media platforms like Facebook and Twitter may have been so successful at garnering attention from users and customers that a backlash is forming. At least one company, Onward, an organization started by Gabe Zichermann of TED Talk and gamification fame, thinks we’re addicted to our devices and the apps they support and thinks there’s money to be made in curing us. Onward’s pitch is that,
Using a sophisticated set of data science and artificial intelligence interventions, Onward takes a scientific approach to understanding screen time overuse and the benefits of AI as an effective method of treatment.
Onward focuses on digital addictions including screen time, porn, gambling, and shopping. They’ve been around in other forms almost forever but our web-attached devices amplify them. Some supporting information, from Onward.org’s website:

Nearly half of people in the US say they couldn’t live without their phones.
70 percent of women and 61 percent of men are afraid of being separated from their smartphone.
Human attention span has dropped from 12 to 8 seconds, less than a goldfish.
Humans collectively spend 39,757 years on Facebook per day.
Netflix users stream more than 125 million hours of content per day.

Others recognize the problem too. Tristan Harris spent 3 years as the Product Philosopher, a.k.a. design ethicist, at Google before co-founding the non-profit Time Well Spent. The Atlantic described him as “the closest thing Silicon Valley has to a conscience” (ouch!). Harris has also given a widely acclaimed Ted Talk.
In a Tech Crunch article from mid-2017, Harris blasts Google, Facebook, and Apple, for “exploiting our lower-level vulnerabilities” or our “lizard brains” that seek stimulation from any new bright and shiny object. Harris blows through Simon’s attention economy into Zichmann’s addiction economy.
We should be extremely worried. These are some of the symptoms of addiction and you needn’t go far to find other examples. Recent and even contemporary discourse is full of stories about tobacco or opioid addiction. For a more interesting parallel of a whole addicted culture, look to history, specifically the Opium Wars of the 19th century, which are terribly misnamed for modern ears.
Numerous fortunes were made in trade during the 19th century between China and the rest of the world, notably Britain and the US but other European nations as well. Initially, British traders longed to open up China to international trade but were rebuffed by the Middle Kingdom, a self-sufficient society whose goods were coveted by the west. Unfortunately, the west had nothing to trade other than their bullion, which couldn’t sustain long-term commerce without severe hard currency imbalances for the British. Their wares were either inferior or the Chinese had no use for them. That made conventional trade a problem.
Undeterred, the British came up with a can’t-miss business model. They’d grow opium in India and trade it with the Chinese, eliminating the balance of trade problem and opening the market. There’s nothing quite like an addicted customer. But China was, understandably, not enthusiastic about the arrangement and The Opium Wars were fought to protect the Empire’s right to free trade regardless of the products involved, the disposition of the “customer” and the harm done. The era also brought into use the colorful oxymoronic phrase, “gunboat diplomacy.”
The business model was wildly successful. China, then a nation of about 400 million people, became a vassal of Britain, a situation that parts of the first half of the 20th century would be dedicated to straightening out. Imperfectly.
My take
Today’s addiction economy demonstrates once again that the best way to gain the attention of a target audience is to engage addict them. Then you don’t have to mess around with outliers dabbling in free will and other democratic jetsam and flotsam. There’s already a branch of knowledge called Attention Economics that, as you might expect from reading this, deals with managing information that treats human attention as a scarce commodity and applies economics to the problems of information management. You can now wonder if Addiction Economics is just around the corner or, if discretion takes hold, it would be treated merely as a branch of attention economics.
If you think of all this as a case for regulatory intervention, you might want to think again. In today’s climate, it’s not for vendors to voluntarily forego their strategies, especially in an area as cutting edge as psychological addiction. But it may be a free market issue. VRM or vendor relationship management, championed by Doc Searls and others was an early attempt to control vendor overreach but its success has been limited. Now Gabe Zichmann is trying a different tactic using technology to break the psychological dependency. It may work since the first step in many 12-step programs is to admit the problem and Onward’s existence, as well as that of Time Well Spent, are dawning proof of that admission.
The big corporations that grew out of the social media movement of the last decade are now at a crossroads. They’ve provided useful and beneficial services but at the same time, the services can be abused in crippling ways for society. We’re a long way from where social media began and our ultimate success may stem from our ability to talk about the problem rationally and to recalibrate. The long-term alternative might well see the destruction of those same social media that addicted us in the first place. And where will that leave us…?
Image credit - © Sergey Nivens - Fotolia.comRead more on: CRM and customer experience 