
We’ve written a lot about the realisation across the retail sector that store real estate isn’t the automatic burden that it seemed to be a few years ago, but is in fact an important element of a successful omni-channel mix.
At Abercrombie & Fitch (A&F), the message has sunk home and nowhere is this more apparent than in the opening of the firm’s second UK store – yup, just two in the UK – in Manchester’s Trafford Center mall.
It’s one of A&F’s prototype stores, which CEO Fran Horowitz sees as central to the retailer’s omni-channel thinking, where offline and online are complementary revenue generators:
It is already demonstrating how our physical stores act as a gateway to the brand driving incremental digital sales.
What’s in this ‘gateway’? When the 5,554 sq. ft. ‘concept space’ was announced, the pitch for the new store format was:
The modernized space was imagined with the best customer experience in mind; the layout includes accommodating features such as innovative fitting rooms with thoughtful amenities designed to enhance the customer’s mood, including separate controls for light and music, as well as a phone charging dock. Select fitting rooms act as private suites to accommodate larger groups of friends and families. Furthermore, cash wraps will be placed throughout the space, enabling a quicker and more accessible checkout experience.
So a millennial-friendly, hi-spec physical environment with an emphasis on using tech to create as personalized a shopping experience as possible. Horowitz says:
Our online and in-store shopping experiences are well integrated. We are already seeing strong up tick of purchase online pickup in-store and order in-store as it’s rolled out globally mirroring the successful rollout of similar capabilities in the US back in 2016 and 2015 respectfully. [This year] was also our first Black Friday with all our US stores being equipped with handheld technology allowing associates to better serve customers with mobile access to product availability and loyalty data and line busting capabilities. I am delighted with this positive impact on the customer experience.
While the new prototype stores are put through their paces, the ongoing rationalization and upgrading of the existing US store fleet continues. The store closure program for 2018 has in fact slowed down, coming in at a third fewer shut downs than originally planned. Nonetheless by the end of this year, more than 450 stores will have been shuttered since 2010.
But this is seen as essential in order to deliver what Horowitz calls “engaging new store experiences, both [from] a physical design and technology integration perspective”. Chief Operating Officer Joanne Crevoiserat explains the rationale:
We’ve been very active in aggressively managing our fleet as we’ve watched the customer shopping preference change over time. We’ve invested in our digital capabilities and our omni-channel capabilities and we’ve managed our square footage, closing several stores over 400 stores since 2010.
We are very focused on driving productivity and the tools that we have at our disposal include not just store closures, but right sizes to your point and investments that we’re making and improving the experience and we’ve seen those investments pay off in terms of productivity. So our focus is really on driving productivity in our store fleet and improving the customer experience.
Digital customers
Getting closer to the customer remains a priority for A&F, with Horowitz explaining:
We believe the key to success is having an obsessive focus on the customer. We’re getting closer to our local customer in each of our international markets, leveraging our growing royalty program data, building on our local infrastructure and developing our teams and processes to ensure timely, market specific insights that can be used to better inform localized planning, merchandising and marketing.
On the marketing front, integration of online and offline is again a priority, says Horowitz:
We are ramping up integrated marketing activities leveraging authentic user generated content in the places that are digitally native customers spend their time. Our recent Ultra Coat launch is a great example of our integrated marketing and action…The launch event and marketing campaign resulted in more than 190 million impressions across paid, earned and shared media and the Ultra Coat collection has delivered some of our top performing outerwear sales this season in both men and women.
We’ve done a lot of work on integrating all of our campaigns. I sort of refer to them as a real 360 in our business. Our integrated campaigns are paying off. We had a strong ‘back to school’ campaign for Hollister…But what you see in our marketing is every channel that you go to, whether it’s through our Awesomeness TV show, whether it’s Instagram, in-store or e-mail. it’s very connected.
Rolling out a global loyalty program is another key initiative, adds Horowitz:
Loyalty is a critical marketing investment it’s already delivering with more than 23 million member accounts across both brands, it delivers valuable insights about a core of engaged customers who shop more often and spend more.
A&F is now looking at exceeding $1 billion in digital sales this year. Direct-to-consumer (DTC) sales were up 16% year-on-year in its most recent quarter to $243.6 million and now account for 28% of total net sales, up from about 24% last year. Horowitz says:
The transition to mobile continues and it accounted for over three quarters of our digital traffic in the third quarter. Our highly rated apps are still our fastest growing digital platform from both the traffic and sales perspective.
And now customers will have somewhere to charge their mobiles in-store!
My take
Sadly I ceased to be a core A&F target demographic quite some time ago. But it’s interesting to signs that the retailer’s transformation program is beginning to deliver results. How quickly the limited number of prototype stores becomes the de facto norm is another question entirely, but A&F looks to have better prospects now than it might have been afforded a few years back.
Image credit - A&FRead more on: Analytics planning and data analysisContent marketingCRM and customer experienceDigital and content marketingMobileRetail e-commerce and the omni-channelSocialUser experienceUX and application design 