
The peak of innovation?
I do find it amusing from my side of The Pond that Starbuck’s CEO Howard Schultz first port of call when demonstrating innovation at the firm is to cite the Flat White as a major achievement.
Not that I’m knocking the Flat White, mind you. In Europe we’ve been enjoying those for some considerable time and it’s good to know that our US cousins are now doing the same.
It’s just that there’s so much more going on at Starbucks that can be flagged up as best practice in using digital technology to enhance customer experience and boost sales. He cites, for example, Starbucks loyalty card program:
We know that increased Starbucks card sales drives increase My Starbucks Rewards membership and in turn increase traffic and sales in our stores.
Starbucks Chief Operating Officer Kevin Johnson adds:
Each new My Starbucks Reward member represents a deeper more personalized customer relationship and more personalized customer relationships allow us to better serve customers and grow our business as evidenced by the significant increase in the number of active My Starbucks Reward members we are serving.
The stats around this are impressive:

Over 10 million active My Starbucks Reward members in the US, up 27% year-on-year.
1.3 million new MSR members in the last quarter alone.
Over 8 million mobile payment transactions processed per week, equalling nearly 19% of US store tender.

The firm is still benefitting from a hangover from the 2015 holiday season, which saw $1.6 billion loaded onto Starbucks gift cards. Schultz notes:
We are now seeing large numbers of last holiday’s first time gift receivers become loyal, engaged, repeat Starbucks customers, supporting and contributing to the growth we’re seeing across our global customer base. And with the increasing customer acceptance of our mobile app, we now have over 16 million active users.
We added 1.3 million new My Starbucks Rewards members alone in Q2, more additional members in one quarter than most loyalty programs have in total and now have over 10 million active members with almost $6 million members being active Gold members.
Game change
But it’s not just the loyalty cards that are working to support what Johnson calls:
game changing innovation taking place on the customer digital experience.
He points to initiatives such as Starbucks’ movie order and pay which is now rolled out to 600 stores in the Pacific Northwest:
Enhancing our in-store experience with customer focused digital experiences like mobile order and pay creates a positive flywheel effect on our business and attracts more My Starbucks Rewards members.
There’s much more on the mobile ordering front to come, states Chief Digital Officer Adam Brotman:
In terms of the rollout plans and what we are learning, we are very pleased with how this has started. We will actually see a significantly ramped-up, accelerated pace of rollout in the second half of the year.
In fact, Seattle started out even quicker than Portland and as we roll it into more urban environments that bodes really well for how this is going to continue to drive transactions and be a great thing for our customers.
We are also going to be adding for Android app and launching this in the UK and in Canada, all before the end of the year. So we are truly just getting started.
Howard Schultz
Matt Ryan, Global Chief Strategy Officer, talks in terms of a virtuous cycle that increasing the membership enables the firm to do more precise one-to-one marketing:
Certainly the ability to become more and more targeted and send more offers to the right person at the right time in the way that they want it, is the capability we have been growing here.
But the growth of that platform is in fact the permission that we have to do more over time in the digital space because as we grow that engaged space of customers, the adjacent things we can do with them, starting with mobile order and pay, moving on to delivery, and on to other opportunities, it’s going to be an enormous long run play for us.
Inward looking
As well as the digital customer experience, Starbucks has been drilling down further on the digital employee (or partner) experience. Johnson explains:
I think we are ahead of the industry in thought leadership around the digital customer experience and we’re going to keep pushing the envelope on that.
The area that I think we have opportunity certainly is with our in-store partners on leveraging technology to help our in-store partners with the tasks they have to do that are more about the administrative side of things, like inventory management, making it easier for them to do scheduling of our store partners, communicating with our store partners, the way we reach in-store partners with training and communications.
We’ve got tremendous opportunity to step up our game in that particular area and we’re going to do more there. If you look at how we are utilizing information across the enterprise to make more informed and better decisions, whether it’s using data, Big Data kind of analytics to help us with store location or Big Data analytics to help us understand how to do a better job of promoting to our customers at different times of the year, I think those are the big opportunities that we see and we’re going to continue to drive forward with those.
My take
Away from the Flat White, Starbucks continues to impress a digital thought leader and sets a benchmark for how to grow new business from an installed base.
Shultz has made the point that it wasn’t that long ago that Starbucks stores did most of its business before 11am and stores were closed by 7pm.
Canny use of digital tech has been one of the contributors towards making that seem like a long time ago.

Read more on: Analytics planning and data analysisCRM and customer experienceDigital and content marketingMobileSocial 