
Whilst everyone is still recovering from the shock of the EU referendum, it seems that the UK will continue to lead the continent on digital activities for at least the short to medium term. That doesn’t just stop (it’s the medium to long term we’ve got to worry about).
A recent report from PwC highlights how the UK’s sharing economy has grown significantly faster than the rest of Europe’s, whilst some work it carried out for the European Commission also found that the UK is fostering and creating more sharing economy platforms than its European neighbours.
This all comes at a time when the European Commission is looking to further embrace sharing economy companies, such as Uber and Airbnb, and has said that cities and countries should only ban them as a “last resort”.
Some parts of Europe, including London, have had a difficult time adjusting to the disruptive nature of these new companies, which have been known to have huge implications for incumbent industries, regulations and tax.
For example, Uber has been accused of sidestepping regulations that make it more difficult for the incumbent taxi industries to compete. Whilst some countries are looking at how they can more effectively tax people that let their properties out on Airbnb.
However, according to PwC, it seems that these companies are a force to be reckoned with and that European residents are seeing huge benefit in the ‘collaborative’ nature of the products that they bring.
That being said, despite soaring revenues, the amount of residents that have engaged with the sharing economy over the past year is still small in relative terms, which indicates there is still plenty of room for growth.
The UK’s role
PwC found that total transactions for the UK’s five most prominent sharing economy sectors – collaborative finance, peer-to-peer accommodation, peer-to-peer transportation, on-demand household services and on-demand professional services – could see a 20-fold increase to £140 billion by 2025.
This is up from £7 billion today. And cross Europe the sharing economy transactions could rise to €570 billion by 2025, up from €28 billion today.
However, over the past year the UK’s sharing economy has grown faster than the rest of Europe, with the total value of transactions increasing by 92% compared to 77% across Europe from 2014 to 2015.
PwC puts a lot of this down to the UK having established itself as a global FinTech hub, with the capital flowing through collaborative finance platforms expected to increase to £70 billion per year by 2025, up from £3 billion today.
Between now and 2025, PWC predicts that the sharing economy will grow at over 30% per year, with growth broadly spread across the five key sectors.
The amount of money taken home by the ‘micro-entrepreneurs’ providing these services are predicted to take him 86%, or £122 billion, of the total UK transaction value by 2025.
Rob Vaughan, economist at PwC, said:
The sharing economy has matured into an established socio-economic trend that is fundamentally changing the way we lead our lives. From freelancing platforms altering the way we work to food-sharing platforms creating ways to connect in local communities, sharing economy businesses are enabling new economic and social interactions within the UK and across Europe.
This is especially true in the UK, which is, and we expect to remain, a hub in the European sharing economy landscape. A strong start-up scene and proactive support from policy-makers and regulators has empowered the UK’s position so far, but other European countries are hungry for a slice of the action. As more policy frameworks are updated and the reach of sharing economy players expands outside their most mature markets, we expect other countries to gradually catch up with the UK.
Younger buyers
PwC forecasts that the on-demand household services will be the fastest growing of the five major sharing economy sectors, expanding revenues by roughly 45% per year in the UK and 50% per year in Europe to 2025.
It noted that the sector’s development is being driven by a “new generation of consumers” who are increasingly turning to on-demand services to resolve their needs around the home.
PwC said that only around 5% of European consumers have declared that they have participated in the collaborative economy in the past year, but the participation is highest amongst the younger generations (under 35) and those that are well educated.
The report provided to the European Commission, also notes that the majority of sharers in Europe made €1,000 or less, with the median earnings for sharers in Europe found to be at around €300.
Rob Vaughan commented:
Rather than just being a headline, major sharing economy enterprises are becoming household names and the default mode of choice for younger cohorts in society. There’s also emerging evidence that sharing models are influencing wider consumer behaviour.
On-demand ridesharing apps like Uber are changing the way we get around our cities, while peer-to-peer accommodation sites like Airbnb are encouraging a new generation to travel more often and to different places.
The rise of the sharing economy is changing the face of European business – creating opportunities for new entrants, challenges for incumbent players, and searching questions for all stakeholders. We think it will be those that respond to the new reality the quickest that stand the best chance of creating advantage and capturing the value in this space.
My take
Whatever your view on the ‘platform’ approach to the collaborative economy is, it’s evident that these companies are not going away and that there is growing demand from buyers. My concern is that whilst once these were diverse industries that were controlled by more local owners, this has been pushed further up the pipeline to far fewer players based out of Silicon Valley that own the industries.
That being said, services are now cheaper for consumers and many people have been able to make some additional money on the side from the sharing economy, in what has been a difficult few years financially.
But as ever, governments and regulation have been slow to keep up. And as a result, companies have ploughed ahead with their agenda. Whilst the sharing economy needs to be embraced, governments and regulators need to be thinking about how to keep this in check and fair. And they need to be thinking about it now.
Image credit - Image sourced via UberRead more on: Collaboration sharing and digital productivityThe new professional and IT as a service 