
Predictive marketing is an interesting beast. It’s something we talk about all the time, but it still isn’t widely used to improve the digital experience. I thought it would be an interesting exercise to take a closer look at what predictive marketing means, some examples of how to do it and the technology options available.
First things first, let’s put a definition around predictive marketing (this one from EverString):
Predictive Marketing is the practice of extracting information from existing customer datasets to determine a pattern and predict future outcomes and trends.
This definition comes from EverString’s 2015 State of Predictive Marketing study which looks at how organizations are using predictive marketing (if they even are) and how successful it is.
Predictive data comes from a wide range of sources, much of which is internal customer data, and some of which is external data from third party sources. It’s the combination of all this data, connected properly, that provide the best predictive insights. Once the data is captured and pulled together, statistical algorithms and machine learning are applied to derive insights based on the questions you ask.
EverString, a provider of predictive marketing technology, is clear to say that predictive is not 100% accurate – they aren’t the only ones. But it’s pretty clear that if you spend some time looking at the history and current activities of your customers, you can deduce reasonable assumptions on who your best customers are, what prospects have the best chance of converting, and how to cater more to existing customer needs to increase and improve relationships.
In EverString’s study, 68% of respondents said that predictive marketing is a key piece of the marketing technology stack, and 98% are committed to or are currently implementing predictive marketing in some capacity.
Predictive technology adoption
EverString isn’t the only provider of predictive marketing technology. Others include InsideSales, Radius, LeadSpace, Lattice Engines, 6sense and more. While some capabilities are similar, some vendors have unique elements that cater to specific needs. A few marketing automation vendors offer predictive capabilities, such as Marketo, and others integrate with vendors like those listed above. Then you have your digital experience/marketing cloud vendors like Adobe, AgilOne, and Oracle.
There are endless opportunities to get predictive technology. The challenge is figuring out where it fits best in your marketing technology stack.
In a study Forbes Insights did with Lattice Engines of North American enterprise companies, 41% indicated that improving customer retention rates was the metric used most often to measure the success of predictive marketing. Thirty-six percent use customer value metrics.
But this study also found that adoption is still low:

13% plan to use in 6-12 months
22% started six months ago
23% started 6-12 months ago

Only a small fraction have been working with predictive longer.
The biggest challenge for predictive
One of the challenges that plague predictive is not the predictive technology itself, but the data – finding and connecting the right data. In the Forbes Insights survey, only 28% said the majority of their data was ready and available to analyze. More concerning, 39% said that only one-quarter or less of their data was ready and available.
Data comes from such as a wide number of sources: website, demographics, firmographics, behavioral, search, CRM and ERP systems, call center and support logs, online and in-store transactions, campaigns – these are all the internal sources. Then you mix in the external sources of data available from emerging IoT and interactions across the web, even offline, and it gets pretty muddy.
In the Forbes Insights study, 52% said that a key challenge for predictive was identifying and capturing key data and analytics. I’d suggest connecting the data together to be part of this challenge.
A few ways you can use predictive
Predictive isn’t about analyzing the past to understand why things happen. It’s about looking at history, combined with current activity to best decide how to proceed now. It helps you understand the best ways to interact with customers and prospects, as well as the right customers and prospects.
Some ways you can leverage predictive analytics:

Adding intent to the scoring model (from Danill Karp) – Karp suggests that the MQL (marketing qualified lead) is no longer useful because there’s just no way every person that downloads a resource or engages on your website in some way is planning or considering purchasing from you. But he suggests that if you add in third-party data from publisher networks and then applying predictive modeling, you get a much better picture of intent: “Firmographic and engagement scores from your marketing automation coupled with intent information can help drive conversion rates up not by percentage points, but by orders of magnitude.”
Customer lookalike marketing (from Forrester’s Wave for Customer Analytics Solutions, client access only): Who are the best customers to target? You know you don’t have the time or resources to build strong relationships with all your customers. You have to figure out who offer the highest lifetime value. Predictive modeling can look at your current customer base and analyze who the best customers are, then apply that model to prospects and other customers to determine who you need to focus your marketing efforts on.
Cross-selling and upselling (from XMPro): Maybe you already know who your best customers are. But how do you grow that relationship? You’re looking for opportunities to cross-sell products or upsell depending on the customer. Predictive analysis can help you figure what the best products are to pitch to certain customers or customer segments. Customer like that you aren’t just pitching everything – there’s an understanding of their needs, and revenue grows more quickly because you are matching best-fit.

And from the Forbes Insights survey, the same types of uses for predictive marketing technology:

From Forbes/Lattice Engines Report: The Predictive Journey: 2015 Survey on Predictive Marketing Strategies (free with sign-up)
My take
The opportunities to take advantage of predictive marketing technology are great. But the reality for many organizations is that they are still in the process of understanding how to leverage basic customer analytics to improve marketing campaigns and strategies. We think that analytics should be straightforward, any maybe they should.
But it requires the marketing team to plan what they want to achieve and how they want to achieve it. It requires training on technology and then the application of that technology in test scenarios and pilots to ensure the expected results are accurate. It also requires the data to be complete and connected properly.
The Content Marketing Institute does an annual survey on how many companies document their content marketing strategies. A good majority still don’t. I’d love to see that same question asked of marketing strategies overall. I suspect the answer is very similar. And without a clearly documented and understood strategy, I don’t see predictive getting the attention it deserves.
Image credit - Portrait Of Businessman Predicting Future With Crystal Ball © Andrey Popov - Fotolia.com.Read more on: Analytics planning and data analysisDigital and content marketing 