
Conventional wisdom in the news publishing business is that you can’t charge a premium for online access. There’s so much digital content freely available online, it’s hard enough to persuade readers to keep on paying for print products. So most global news publishers throw in digital for free when you sign on as a paying subscriber for the printed publication.
Three years ago, weekly news publisher The Economist decided to defy conventional wisdom, as Subrata Mukherjee, VP of product management explains:
We tested the waters to see if any of these users that were loyal print subscribers would be willing to pay a little more to become premium subscribers. We saw that there were a lot of willing people. We increased our revenue 25% on those willing to add digital to print.
Looking ahead to the next five years, The Economist aims to double its current profits from subscriptions by ramping up circulation, particularly among digital subscribers. It will do that without undercutting or devaluing the print product, says Mukherjee.
Many of our competitors have cannabilized print. What inadvertently that has done to them, if you reduce the cost for subscription, what you just did was reduced your revenue. So we have not gone down that route.
Making change possible
As global head of the publication’s CASE digital transformation program, it’s Mukherjee’s job to put in place the systems the Economist will use to achieve that goal (CASE stands for customer, access, subscription and e-commerce). He’s careful to emphasize that this will be a business transformation rather than merely a switch from older technologies to digital.
We think that what happens first is business transformation. Technology is the enabler.
The focus, therefore, is on developing new propositions and working in new ways, with technology supporting the transition. But that’s still a crucial role, as replacing existing systems is often the key to making change possible.
We’re trying to make our systems more nimble so we can try things out very quickly. There are different cross-sell and up-sell opportunities that we have.
Our systems have not been ready for that transition. Through this project that we’re doing, our systems would be ready.
Earlier if you had to experiment on a product to get a different product category created, it took us somewhere in the tune of 3-4 months. Once we go live towards the later part of the year, we plan to do those kinds of things within a day.
The new systems are cloud-based, centered on Zuora’s subscription management platform and Salesforce sales automation. Readers will start to encounter the new sign-up pages next month, and then in the summer the all-cloud process will start rolling out. It’s a step-by-step implementation that will gradually see “antiquated” back-end systems phased out, says Mukherjee.
Our market has been very slow to get the systems in. To be able to make a content company successful, sometimes it underlines the fact that you have to have good commercial systems working behind the scenes like a charm to be able to do that.
Once the new systems are in place, the aim is to be able to introduce new offers without having to invoke an IT development process, allowing a more iterative approach to product development. Rather than attempting to customize the Zuora platform, Mukherjee has made the case for using its built-in capabilities.
You can fail fast. We’re trying to aspire to just configuration in the tools.
People think we’re overly aggressive to pull off this transformation within a year. A lot of people fall into the trap of [saying], ‘This is how we do things and this is how the technology needs to work.’
We’ve turned that on its head. What is so rocket science about your current product you have to do it in a certain way?
Revenue recognition wrinkles
To make sure the out-of-the-box product would fit the bill, The Economist insisted on Zuora adding an extension to its core product to provide more flexibility in revenue recognition schedules. In the print publishing business, subscription revenue is recognized each time a new edition is printed. This gets complicated at certain times of the year, for example when doubling up issues over the Christmas/New Year holiday season. With digital, a new edition may appear every day — or special products may have their own schedules, for example, a US election product might have a schedule linked to key events in the primaries calendar.
Other publishers had said that they had spent a lot of time and customization effort to accommodate these wrinkles in revenue recognition, so Mukherjee’s team lobbied to have the functionality built into the product.
Zuora were pretty open to come up with something in their codebase. They came up with milestone revenue recognition and put it in as an extension. We aggressively pushed them on that and said we would not sign up unless they had that.
Converged data and teams
One of the biggest impacts of going digital will be the ability to consolidate subscription management into a single system. In the physical circulation world, subscription tends to be managed through partners who have their own, often inflexible, systems. Mukherjee is looking forward to getting that control.
In a certain way we were held hostage by these fulfilment vendors that we had, who for a lack of suitable technology, you were not able to do a lot of things with them. That is why we were so behind with our systems. I said you have to break the cycle otherwise you will never get anywhere.
Our CEO calls it our biggest project ever on a technology front. We are changing everything for it to work in concert.
For the first time, the publisher will be able to analyze data on subscriber behavior so that it can nurture relationships.
One of the reasons we’re doing this is to start to own our own data. The data used to be held hostage by the vendors we had and we had to pay them to get hold of our own data.
From the mid-term of your subscription, we want to check your behavior. We don’t want, when we send you a renewal offer, to have you decline. We want to make sure your engagement is there.
To manage this more responsive approach to product management and subscriber engagement, the way teams work internally in the organization has changed too, says Mukherjee.
More and more with agile methodologies, our technology teams have been targeted to become more cross-functional. What we’re now doing is taking that to the next level and taking business teams and integrating them as part of the team.
There are forty to fifty people working on this [CASE] initiative — technology, marketing, finance, all sitting together in one open layout space where those boundaries have been erased.
That has been a mindset change we are looking to embrace more and more generally as a company as this goes live and we go on to tackle the next problem.
My take
A hugely significant project for The Economist that consolidates Zuora’s presence as a leader in subscription publishing systems — a market that was one of the first beyond software-as-a-service to latch on to its cloud-based product.
Also some interesting insights into how underlying technology either drives or hampers product innovation.
Image credit - Printing press © industrieblick - Fotolia.comDisclosure - Salesforce is a diginomica premier partner at time of writing. Read more on: CRM and customer experienceDigital transformation - frictionless enterpriseUse cases 