
During London Technology Week I got the opportunity to listen to author Andy Law give a presentation on the development of the Internet, which focused on how he believes that we as humans now see connectivity as a physiological need and how this has resulted in us climbing up the evolutionary ladder to become ‘virtual beings’. Law has written two books on the growth of the Internet, Implosion and Explosion, with a third due out soon.
He also took time to explain his view on the role of data and automation, painting a picture whereby we essentially have separate virtual entities that are whizzing around the web and are being used by companies to have conversations about us and make decisions about what we mean to them.
Law also commented that the next phase of the Internet will see the large legacy businesses playing catch up with digital, as they begin to realise that they can use their existing assets to create new Internet-based business models.
The beginning
Speaking at an event hosted by digital media agency Tug, Law began by explaining that in his view the Internet was an invention that drastically changed the world, but is one that wasn’t desperately needed by all industries and areas of society. I think you could easily argue the case against this (inefficiency always drives innovation), but it’s an interesting take nonetheless. He also believes that we are now physiologically dependent on the Internet as a result.
One of things that I learned was that we suddenly started to get used to something that we had never got used to before. No-one had asked for the Internet, the Internet arrived completely unexpected. It wasn’t driven by desire or driven by necessity, it just appeared. Necessity has been the mother of invention, the Internet is not. It’s the one invention over the last 200,000 years that appeared uninvited.
Very quickly, in matter of years, the Internet became a physiological need. It is every bit as important as the things that sustain us and keep us alive – eating, shelter, sex. If you don’t believe me look at your behaviour. Once upon a time, going to sleep was defined as a period of rest, now it could easily be defined as period where you take a gap in connectivity. Sleep has become a period of time between our process of connectivity. It has become a physiological need, where without it, we feel bereft.

Law believes that this physiological need for the Internet is as significant to humans’ evolution as the opposable thumb was to our ancestors (bear with me on this background, this does lead to some enterprise topics further on in the piece). He said:
The Internet operates on a similar basis, it has moved us as humans so far up the evolutionary scale, it is almost unreachable by any other animal on this planet. Dating, for example, is now possible to be undertaken in an entirely virtual way – we can now find out mates without sniffing them, looking at them, touching them, knowing where they live, knowing how old they are, knowing what they look like. The Internet has taken us to a new place of capability.
The age of screenagers
This ‘evolution’ has meant that we have actually all become a new kind of person, according to Law – we are now all screenagers. But what this is defined by is not the fact that we are all communicating through screens, but by the fact that we are doing so by donating data to each other.
As we know, the topic of data sharing, ownership and security is a huge area of debate in an era when people are no longer storing information on their own devices, but are instead taking advantage of cloud computing and shared, scalable resources on the web. But what this has resulted in, Law said, is that you no longer need to be present for companies and machines to be having conversations with you – you are virtually having these conversations via your data. He said:
As we look through the screens and communicate, we are doing one substantial thing, we are talking to each other by donating data to each other. We talk about data like it’s a third party thing, but what we are doing is that we are data ourselves. Whether we are donating data to each other on a dating site, or whether we are donating data to shops or services, or on Twitter, we are all communicating the very important facets of ourselves via data.
We are walking, talking pieces of data. This means that our data is as different as we are different people. We define ourselves as we communicate differently with our data, as we do ourselves. We are data communicating with other pieces of data. And that process of communication is becoming in percentage terms, largely unknown. As we communicate with Amazon or John Lewis, and they communicate machine to machine, and other people are communicating with everybody else, all our profiles are going around the world, a little bit of our genetic data is communicating with somebody else.
Pre-Internet the main way to communicate was by voice or by telephone. Now we can communicate by not being present. We are donating that data, it goes around, other people are seeing it, they recognise that we are talking to them, without us actually talking to them. Think about that for a moment, we are constantly talking to people, outside this room, right now, telling them things about ourselves, telling them preferences, and people are answering us and some point will come back to us. That’s actually happening right now.
Law said that the next phase of the Internet will see us conducting new experiments that will take place using these new virtual data driven versions of ourselves. He sees this already happening in certain parts of the world. For example, in Iceland, people there can now download an app so that when they meet somebody new, before they start dating they can check whether or not they are likely to be related. Dating a relative had been a concern in Iceland given the low levels of immigration and the small population – now there’s an app for that. Law said:
Explosion (the next phase of the Internet) begins to look at the marvellous experiments that begin to take place, as we as humans begin to realise what this full potential is doing to us. We are a changed species, no make mistake of that.
The impact of automation
Law went on to say that the biggest leap in technology over the last 25 years is automation, as this allows for connectivity to happen when people are not present. However, unlike many, he doesn’t believe that means unemployment for the masses. Law suggests that innovation throughout history has always meant some sort of redundancy, but has also resulted in a new set of careers being formed. He said:
M2M communication has outstripped Internet communication in my opinion. What is happening with M2M communication is that we replicate our decision making and our desires and wishes, then we host those on servers a long way away. We are automating ourselves, we are automating our decision making processes.
We are doing things that we could never do before, that’s the gift of the Internet. When you talk about automation, there is a slurry of books out at the moment saying that we will all be unemployed, because everything will be automated. That happened in 1920 by the way with the mechanisation of car production, every automation through history has had a spectre of redundancy.
I think far from being redundant, there are going to be a myriad of jobs that we don’t even know about. The most important jobs to go into are the ones that don’t currently exist. Most of the jobs now have job titles and job descriptions that simply just did not exist five years ago. The most important job is to be the most important version of yourself as an automated Internet human being.
Law said that the best example of how automation has penetrated our everyday lives is through the use of banking apps. He argues that twenty or thirty years ago people guarded their banking details with their lives

and wouldn’t share that information with anyone, let alone enter it into their smartphones. However, now, people are willing to do exactly this and even use apps to send money to send to each other. He says:
Why are we happy to put all of our information onto a little piece of silicon? Because the banks have facilitated it to be effortlessly simple. Why? Because automation is a huge money-saving device.
If we can do that with banking, it’s not surprising that everything else becomes effortless. So now actually we have got ourselves into a position where we say that anything I want to do, I am prepared to do virtually. We are not only giving our data away, our personalities, our lives are living in this virtual existence.
Finally, Law had some comments about the new sharing economy business models that are emerging and were born on the internet – the likes of Uber and Airbnb. He believes, interestingly, that although the companies that were born pre-Google are now struggling, they will resurge in years to come once they put their assets to use, using digital business models. Law states that Uber and Airbnb aren’t rocket science, they have just figured out how the digital business models work.
Somewhere just down the road board directors are sitting there wondering what has happened to their lives. The C-suite is sitting there thinking ‘my god, how did Airbnb do that?’. ‘How did Uber do that?’ These heroes of the silicon world stand as absolute pillars of success. But what that success actually means is automated, facilitated, very easy, me-driven products.
The irony is that you can actually be a very large pre-Google company and you can do Airbnb. The only thing you need to have is a different mindset. It’s the mindset that’s the problem in those large organisations, where they think that the ability to create an Airbnb is not their job, but is somebody else’s responsibility.
The next phase is when the large organisations attach human capital to internet capital and suddenly offer an enhanced version of what’s around. That’s when we are going to enter a really exciting phase.

Read more on: Future of work 