
 
Last night, Channel 4’s Dispatches ran an exposé on the Department for Work and Pensions’ (DWP) welfare reform project, in which a trainer tells an undercover reporter posing as a member of staff that certain funds available under Universal Credit are a bit like Fight Club – stating: “we don’t discuss what happens in Fight Club”.
Whilst the footage is shocking, considering that the funds in question relate to giving claimants access to emergency cash for things like food or bus fares, I couldn’t help but laugh. The rules of Fight Club seem to be very much embedded within the culture of DWP.
The first rule of Universal Credit: DO NOT talk about everything that’s gone wrong with Universal Credit.
By way of background, Universal Credit is DWP’s flagship £2.4 billion welfare reform project, which aims to roll six of the main social security payments into one core payment, which flexes up and down in a seamless way when claimants dip in and out of work.
Despite the system having strong cross-party political support, it has experienced significant development problems since its inception and could potentially see over £600 million worth of IT assets written off once completed.
This is largely because the original IT system that was developed by the likes of HP, IBM, Accenture and BT, has been found to be unworkable at scale and requires a significant amount of manual intervention. DWP is now working on a digital end-state solution alongside the original system, which is likely going to be the final solution used by all claimants.
However, this “twin-track” approach, although sensible given that the original system is thought to be unworkable, has meant that millions of pounds worth of IT assets will likely been thrown out in the long-term.
A recent report by a group of MPs on the Public Accounts Committee warned that “very little progress” had been made on Universal Credit, despite having spent approximately £700 million to date.
DWP has also been heavily criticised over the course of Universal Credit’s development for creating a culture of secrecy and ignoring warnings of failure.
Channel 4’s programme this week saw an undercover reporter spend just under two months working at a Universal Credit contact centre in Bolton, where he was told by his trainers not to raise the topic of certain advance payments with claimants while they waited for their first Universal Credit instalment.
Footage saw the reporter being told not to bring up the payments with claimants unless he was specifically asked about it. The trainer said:

If we did, everybody would want one, yeah, and it’s a very small budget, so we don’t talk about it.
It’s a bit like Fight Club – we don’t discuss what happens in Fight Club. So you don’t talk about flexible support fund either… so the work coaches usually bring this up…

The journalist also experienced IT problems nine days out 20 days during his training and on one occasion the computer programmes went down for a whole day.
DWP commented on the show that overall feedback from staff is that training is effective and that none of the IT problems cited related specifically to Universal Credit.
However, coinciding with the Channel 4 show, the Public and Commercial Services Union has released a survey of staff working on Universal Credit, in which it found that nine out of 10 said that the technology that they are using for the system is less than adequate.
More than 80% of those surveyed also said that the training has not prepared them for working on the scheme.
Approximately half of the staff in the UK’s four universal credit centres took part in the survey.
PCS cites one member of staff as saying: “I have never in all my career felt as stressed, unsatisified and under pressure as I do now”.
My take
2nd rule of Universal Credit: DO NOT talk about the problems with Universal Credit.
[mailmunch-form id=”14637″]
Read more on: Digital government and public services

