
Mike Ettling, SAP
Prior to attending SuccessConnect Las Vegas, I posed eight questions to SuccessFactors I was looking to answer. It’s time to revisit the questions and see where we stand.
Looking back at the SuccessConnect news announcements, the frontrunner is clearly the Intelligent Services announcement. No, it wasn’t on my list of questions, but I’d be a knucklehead to ignore it.
Holger Mueller issued a detailed review of the Intelligent Services announcement. SAP probably hates me for saying this, but Intelligent Services strikes me as good old-fashioned workflow automation, albeit with a predictive turbo-boost.
As ASUG’s Craig Powers reported, the August SuccessFactors release contains services for 16 employee-related changes, such as termination and promotion. More Intelligent Services are planned. The idea is to push changes from Employee Central, SuccessFactor’s core HR system, into other SuccessFactors modules and third party systems.
So what makes that “intelligent?” Yeah, I wondered that too. Powers has SAP’s answer:
[Intelligent services] react to changes by predicting the next steps according to predefined rules, role-based permissions and notifications. A leave of absence request would trigger the system to reroute those expense report and personnel requests to the proper person.
With that covered, let’s revisit the questions.
1. What is the roadmap for SAP HCM on-premises and cloud, and how is it impacted by S/4HANA? This was addressed before the show in David Ludlow’s blog. There weren’t any big news or changes announced in Vegas. I didn’t see much confusion on the cloud versus on-premise HR deployment options in Las Vegas. This is an area where SAP has been pretty clear.
S/4HANA was not the central focus of this show, so the bigger picture of where S/4HANA is headed will wait for the SAP TechEd season. What we know: there isn’t going to be a “simple HR” along the lines of Simple Finance and Simple Logistics. SuccessFactors is SAP’s go-forward HCM solution, aligned with the Fiori UI. No surprises there.
2. Is SAP still on track to run SuccessFactors entirely on HANA by fall of 2016? Not quite. SAP is now saying that “All SucessFactors customers will be on HANA in 2017.” SuccessFactors executives went into detail on which SuccessFactors modules are running on HANA now, and what’s next. What they didn’t cover were the benefits, if any, that were derived from this significant move. That surprised me.
In my meeting with Adam Kovalevsky, SuccessFactors Product Management Lead, I put the benefits question to him. Kovalevsky responded:
One of the main benefits for us: it’s a dramatic simplification of our infrastructure. Does a customer notice that? It has to be a fairly savvy customer to pick up on that. For me, the biggest advantage is today our analytics and transactional systems are in separate repositories. We essentially do a replication of extracting the transactional information and depositing into analytic systems.
Our May release was the first release in which our analytics and our transactional data structures could be in the same schema. This is a huge simplification for us. It eliminates data latency. More than that, it’s just an elimination of a bunch of complexity in our data centers. That’s actually the single, most immediate and attractive benefit that I see out of HANA, and I’m super excited about it.
From a customer view, Kovalevsky believes the biggest benefit to date is running queries that a relational database can’t handle:
It’s unsurprising that HANA, given its origins, handles analytical queries in orders of magnitude faster. Customers might not always notice that a query happened in a hundredth of a second rather than 15 seconds. But we’ve seen some analytical queries that frankly couldn’t ever resolve in a relational database, get resolved in seconds in HANA.
Kovalevsky conceded that for transactional queries, “there’s not as much difference,” and some transactional queries are slower on HANA: “We have to invest in tuning that, because clearly that’s not acceptable to customers.” He added:
I guess the reason you’ve seen us being more forceful about SuccessFactors on HANA is because we’re further along. We know more, and we’ve achieved more with it. There’s frankly more that we can communicate that’s real and not just marketing.
3. Can SuccessFactors turn the HANA Cloud Platform into an extensibility advantage?
Short answer: yes, it’s already happening. I did an entire piece (and podcast) on extending SuccessFactors on the HANA Cloud Platform. SAP is further along with enabling SuccessFactors partners to use HCP for last mile extensions than I thought. On the down side, the apps stores are a mess in dire need of clean up and consolidation. See my piece for more on why HCP apps (and partners) matter.
4. What is the timeframe for rolling out MDF across the entire SuccessFactors product?
I was unable to extract a precise timeline from SAP executives, though I had fun trying. I was told that extending MDF across SuccessFactors remains a development priority. You may also hear more about the Extension Center, which, as per consultant Luke Marson, is SAP’s newly-branded front-end for MDF activities.
5. What is the update on providing native time functionality within SuccessFactors?
SAP’s Thomas Otter promised  SuccessConnect would be bringing answers to nagging time questions. SAP lived up to Otter’s billing, announcing a significant time-related partnership with WorkForce. See my full piece with Thomas Otter for the skinny.
6. How will SuccessFactors ramp-up qualified consultants and avoid certification pitfalls? I talked to several SuccessFactors executives about this. SuccessFactors consultant Luke Marson wrote a comprehensive post about SuccessFactors certifications. Jarret Pazahanick and I also discussed these issues in our event wrap podcast.
I’m glad to see SAP’s emphasis on the Professional-level certification for SuccessFactors, which includes project validation on two projects. I’m also pleased that SuccessFacors certifications require continual re-testing to maintain, even at the lower Associates level. It’s great to see folks like Marson and SAP HR chief Mike Ettling emphasizing customers should hire Professionally-certified SuccessFactors consultants.
But I worry about customer confusion between the two certification levels. The Associates-level certification doesn’t do much for me. Passing a multiple choice test doesn’t correlate to staffing a successful enterprise project. From my experience, customers feel the same way. Of course, growing a skills ecosystem goes way beyond certification. Ettling speaks frequently on the difference between on-premises and cloud consulting, and why customers need to be savvy about selecting the right partners with the right experience. That’s a good message – one that HR godfather Bill Kutik investigated in his recent video with Jarret Pazahanick and Luke Marson.
7. What is the story with the SuccessFactors-ASUG “Trip Advisor” consultant rating project? It’s official, folks. This was announced by ASUG during the show. The aforementioned Craig Powers of ASUG News was on the ground in Vegas. So was ASUG HR advocate Sherryanne Meyer, who is doing a solid job of advocating for customer views. During our video hangout, she did not mince words about the need for public roadmaps, and other issues of community import.
As for the ASUG program, the GA rollout is end of August, so you’ll be able to give that a spin any day now. During our event wrap podcast, I asked Pazahanick for his first reactions:
It’s a great concept. Delivering that concept is where the challenge lies, Just to give a little background, this site is going to be a way that customers can go out and rate their partners. In theory, that sounds great. I’m a big Amazon Prime user, and I do look at those recommendations. Where I see the potential issues are: customers, from a legal standpoint, going to be empowered to give a bad rating to an SI? SIs will have an ability to see a bad rating and try to rectify it.
Well, if everyone on that tool gets five-star ratings, it’s a useless tool, because we all know there’re 800 partners out there. They’re not all superstars. We should make a point next year to come back to this podcast again and see where it’s at.
8. What are the customer experiences running SuccessFactors? I got an earful from customers in Vegas. It was mostly good stuff, though these projects are always a gut check on the IT-business relationship. I filed one in-depth use case, How Edgewell Personal Care conquered data and skills issues on their SuccessFactors go-live.
I thought Edgewell’s Jermaine Holt did a good job of outlining the skills needs of a successful cloud HCM project. He also called for strong IT leadership, because somewhere along the way, there will be resistance to change:
You need someone who can see the future of where the software is going to get the organization and the value proposition. You won’t get there without that. They have to be true to that vision. They cannot waver, because there’s going to be people wanting to jump off the fence, and they’ve got to stay the course.
My take
You might be thinking, “That’s wasn’t a report card.” Well, you see, I went to an awesomely weird college where there are no letter grades. I’m not a believer in grading events anyhow. Keynotes fade. The follow through is ultimately what defines the success – or not.
SuccessFactors has its share of obstacles, but it’s one of the best stories in SAP’s portfolio, from the leadership on down. After the HANA tech hyperbole I get exposed to at other SAP events, it was refreshing to hear an emphasis on business outcomes, with SaaS multi-tenancy being a given, not a matter for architectural debate.
My meetings with SuccessFactors executives were characterized by the kind of frank/transparent comments you see above from Kovalevsky (For more of that, check out my five SuccessFactors differentiators post with Mike Ettling).  I’d be remiss not to note the ongoing success of SAP Jam, the collaboration product that stemmed from SuccessFactors, but now has broader reach (Jam head Sameer Patel blogged on the 20 million subscriber milestone).
The current rate of SuccessFactors growth is going to test SAP. As many have said, you can’t just dust off SAP HR on-premises consultants and cross your fingers. That’s a good problem to have, but a problem nonetheless. The leadership is aware of it, so time will tell.
There are several user groups that play a role in the SuccessFactors market. I urge SuccessFactors customers get involved in ASUG and other SAP users groups globally. Those networks will help greatly with avoiding skills shortfalls and bad project decisions (e.g. choosing the wrong prime vendor for a cloud project).
If I’m a SuccessFactors customer, I want to influence SAP’s entire direction. That means being a part of a larger user group. I want a forum to ask SAP hard, pesky questions about S4/HANA on a regular basis. Which reminds me: it’s almost time for TechEd.
End note: Thanks to Jarret Pazahanick for a couple of fact checks at press time.
Disclosure: SAP is a diginomica premier partner as of this writing. SAP paid the bulk of my travel expenses to attend SuccessConnect.
Read more on: Cloud platforms - infrastructure and architectureFuture of workHCM and the digital future of work 