
I  think I’ve covered just about every aspect of digital marketing in 2018 – and there’s a lot to cover. With so many different tactics and strategies marketing can perform, it’s a wonder they get anything done at all. But things are getting done, and the way it’s getting done is improving, if not slowly.
(1) Influencer marketing
Too many brands are using subjective assessment of influencers and pitching them based on their follower count. This approach is crude because influencers are more than just their follower count and the obsession with it is one of the reasons we have fraud in the industry.
Why? No, we won’t be saying goodbye to Justin Timberlake, Chrissy Teigen or any of the Kardashians anytime soon, but there’s new thinking around influencer marketing that’s taking hold. By focusing on micro, or niche, influencers, marketers may have a better chance of getting in front of the people they actually want to reach and not a bunch of fake followers.
It’s not all silver and gold though, I’ve heard. So we’ll keep an eye on this topic in 2019.

Forget celebrity influencers – reach micro-influencers who impact your brand
The surprising value of an Instagram business profile and influencer campaign – SOMNOS’ story

(2) Privacy’s effect on marketing
GDPR was a wakeup call to marketing and the rest of the organization – put your customer first. Ask them for their information, tell them why you want it and use it appropriately. Marketers should have been doing that a long time ago. Digital has spoiled organizations, and it’s time they had a good spanking.
Why? 2018 was the year privacy took center stage and had marketers across the world scurrying to send out their opt-in emails (how many did you get?). It started with GDPR, but that is only the beginning. California, New York, and Colorado all have their own privacy laws wreaking havoc on marketer’s plans. But here’s the thing – how many companies are changing their ways for the better, compared to hoping they just won’t get caught?

Has GDPR changed marketing?
Is GDPR an opportunity to improve CX? Yes – if you do right by your data subjects

(3) Focusing on the right technology for marketing
Marketers are continually challenged. They have to understand and work with more and more technology to help them do their job, while at the same time strive to find creative and innovative approaches to building experiences that customers appreciate. These two things seem at odds much of the time, and if you ask marketers, the technology often wins out.
Why? We’ve all seen Scott Brinker’s martech landscape, and we’ve all freaked out at the number of technologies everyone says we should be using to improving marketing. Every day we learn about a new marketing software vendor, and that’s not going to change in the coming years. So what is a marketer to do? Figure out the technologies that will allow them to focus on the creative and the content and the customer. Nothing more, nothing less.

The future marketers want is less technical, but requires the right tech
Are digital marketplaces the future of retail?
How artificial intelligence is changing web content management

(4) Blockchain and marketing
Everyone is talking about blockchain technology, but what exactly does it have to do with marketing? According to some people, it’s the next big thing that will change the way we do marketing. I think the jury is still out on that, but the possibilities it brings are intriguing.
Why? I was fascinated by all the ways blockchain could affect the way marketing works. Jeremy Epstein took me through a number of scenarios, and I talked with one blockchain vendor that is focused on privacy (not something blockchain is known for). The possibilities are there, but are we ready? My guess is we are a few more years away from real disruption. But watching the space evolve is something we all should be doing – lest we get left behind.

Blockchain and marketing – disruption in the works?
How Lightstreams is putting the privacy back into blockchain

(5) The struggle to keep up with the customer
Sales people have a challenge. They need to engage with these different buyers according to each buyer’s preference, and certain buyer personalities are more open to working with salespeople earlier on than others. Figuring this out is an important step in closing that seller-buyer gap.
Why? The customer is in control. That’s the story here plain and simple. The sooner Sales and Marketing accept that the sooner they’ll start giving the customer what they need to make a decision. It requires truly listening to and understanding the customer’s story and their needs. And you have to provide value – that may well be your differentiator.

The buyer-seller gap is real – and it’s a big problem for B2B
Sales and Marketing 2.0 – why marketing and sales have to adapt to today’s buyer

(6) Experience-driven marketing
We keep hearing that consumers want a better shopping experience. They say that loyalty is hard to come by these days and if you want your customers to stay (and new ones to come), you better do more than offer a list of products and a shopping cart (the traditional model).
Why? What the heck is experience-driven commerce? What’s wrong with a product list, a shopping cart, and a good delivery system? Apparently, a lot. Yes, all that is important to get right, but it’s table stakes. Understanding the customer journey, mapping the shopping experience to that journey and supplying content that moves the customer along are all important as well. Even the big name brands haven’t figured this out yet.

Can experience-driven commerce change online shopping and increase customer loyalty?
Why do brands struggle with content-rich e-commerce experiences?

(7) Content-driven experiences
We have to rethink how we connect our prospects and customers with the content they need to make decisions, stay informed or use our products.
Why? It’s now an “official” software category – content experience software. Regardless of whether we need a new martech category, the concept of content-driven experiences is real. Think about how you search and consume content. It kinda sucks right? Search is a mess and if there is a better way to wrap the content you need into a single experience, wouldn’t you like to have it?

Thinking about that elusive target – content-driven experiences
Why do brands struggle with content-rich e-commerce experiences?

(8) Experimentation is the name of the marketing game
You have to think about experimentation as a formal program and strategy that you need to design and manage.
Why? We’re too quick to pass off experimentation as a series of A/B or multivariate tests. There is so much more to experimenting – at least if you want it to be beneficial to your marketing strategy. It’s not just about tools. It’s more importantly about your approach, your strategy and the support you have from the top that gives you permission to try new things, learn and adapt.

Is your marketing experimentation program ready for prime time?

(9)Personalization – still working on it
It’s not a tech problem but a strategy discussion, Lustig said that strategy is challenging retailers to get personalization right. He said retailers need to have a plan, one that has the customer as their core focus. They need to show the customer they get them. Loyalty programs, product recommendations, modifying images on the website, email based on purchasing behavior – these things show customers you know who they are and what they like.
Why? For as long as we have been talking about personalizing experiences you’d think we’d have it nailed by now. Not by a long shot. Personalization isn’t for every brand’s website, but it is for every brand. Because it requires you to understand your customer and show them that you do. It isn’t about matching someone to a segment or a persona (in fact, I heard personas might be dead). To get personalization right, you have to dig deeper and go further.

Meaningful personalization – are you there yet? A look inside Sailthru’s Personalization Index
True 1-1 marketing isn’t segment or persona-based – Conversant’s AI personalization story

(10) Is the age of the analyst over?
Maybe it’s time to leverage the wisdom of your peers. You know, the people who have been there, done that, are dealing with the same challenges and opportunities you are. This is what Pulse is doing for CIOs, and it seems to be working.
Why? Sorry, the big name analysts aren’t going anywhere. The model is too deeply established, enterprises have put too much time and money into these firms, and buyers still believe they have good advice. But the peer to peer model for sharing perspectives has taken hold this year, and we are only starting to see what they bring to the table. In my conversation with Mayank Mehta, co-founder of Pulse, I saw a new model that has the potential to bring real change to how enterprises get their information about products. It’s a model worth looking into.

How Pulse is crowdsourcing the wisdom of the CIO

Image credit - Freeimages.com/Julie Elliot-Abbshire Read more on: Collaboration sharing and digital productivityData privacyDigital and content marketingDiversity 