
A worthy goal
We are hoping this will be a defining moment for the country and the digital economy.
So said BBC Director General Tony Hall earlier today as he launched a new initiative – Make it Digital – to get the UK’s 11-year olds started on coding. It’s a bold sentiment and one that again leaves me slightly uneasy, however well-intentioned it is.
Earlier this month I posed the question: can data-driven BBC be the digital heart of the nation? In two articles, I looked at the grand digital ambitions of BBC Director General Tony Hall and while broadly appreciative of his realisation that the corporation needs to evolve, questioned the somewhat grandiose nature of some of his claims, such as the BBC being the only institution that might unify the United Kingdom in future days.
I pondered then that others would suggest the BBC is reaching way beyond its remit and personally I was conflicted in my reaction.
I had that same thought today when the BBC announced it would be giving away one million coding devices free of charge to UK children as part of a major program to get kids into coding and digital technology.
With the UK facing a vast digital skills crisis, this is on the one hand a great initiative that could deliver major national dividends.
On the other hand, I have to ask again: is this what people pay their (mandatory) licence fee for the BBC to do?
What’s it all about?
Let’s have a closer look at what’s actually happening under the auspices of the Make it Digital campaign. Here’s the top line:

A major partnership to develop and give a ‘Micro Bit’ coding device to all year 7 children across the UK for free to inspire a future generation – 1 million devices in total
A season of programmes and online activity involving the BBC’s biggest brands, including Doctor Who, EastEnders, Radio 1, and The One Show. There will also be the 2015 Dimbleby Lecture from Baroness Martha Lane-Fox on BBC One; Gordon Welchman – The Forgotten Genius Of Bletchley Park on BBC Two; and documentaries on the pioneering mathematician Ada Lovelace, and the wonder or algorithms on BBC Four.
A Make it Digital Traineeship to create life-changing opportunities for up to 5,000 young unemployed people, the largest traineeship of its kind. Partnerships with around 50 major organisations across the UK, including Apps for Good, ARM, Barclays, British Computing Society, BT, Code Club, DWP, Google, iDEA, Microsoft, Nesta, Samsung, Skills Funding Agency, Tech City UK, the Tech Partnership, TeenTech, Young Rewired State
A range of formal education activities and events, including Bitesize, Live Lessons and School Report

Of all of these, number two – the one that involves BBC TV programming – makes perfect sense. This is an excellent exploitation of well-loved brands.
Coding for kids and Time Lords
So, there will be a upgrade to the existing The Doctor And The Dalek coding game, which was launched to demystify coding for kids and teach basic programming principles. The new update – which will appear just as the next series of the TV show does in the autumn/fall – will continue to use the game’s existing pseudo code, but also gradually increase in complexity. Support packs for teachers and parents will also be updated, alongside interviews with experts giving tips on how to build the best levels.
Meanwhile EastEnders will link in with BBC Make It Digital by:
inviting audiences online to get involved, use their digital creativity and engage with the show in an entirely new way. By launching a new online kit this September, EastEnders will let fans give their own take on an upcoming storyline and create graphical versions of how they think a plot might play out. These alternative ideas and endings can be played on the EastEnders’ website, bringing fans into the heart of Britain’s best loved soap.
The digital traineeships, well, again very good. The nine-week-long BBC Make it Digital Traineeship aims to get 5,000 young unemployed people to boost their digital skills and help them get on the jobs ladder. Partnering with the Department for Work and Pensions and Skills Funding Agency, the BBC promises that for those who show “particular aptitude for skills suited to the creative industries” there will be a route to apply for opportunities, including some at the BBC. Splendid.
 BBC Micro reborn?
So far, so good. But then there’s the Micro Bit. It probably won’t end up being called that, but whatever its name eventually is, this is going to be small, wearable device with an LED display that children can programme in a number of ways. It will be a standalone, entry-level coding device that works with the likes of Arduino, Galileo, Kano and Raspberry Pi, as well as other Micro Bits.
The BBC named product partners who are taking the lead on design manufacture and distribution of the Microbit, including ARM, Barclays, element14, Freescale, Microsoft, Nordic Semiconductor, Samsung, ScienceScope and Technology Will Save Us.
Back in the 1980s the BBC launched the BBC Micro with similar ambitions, but against a very different technology backdrop. Given that there are already devices such as the Raspberry Pi out there, it has to be asked why the BBC needs to be involved in producing computer hardware at all?
The BBC’s position on this is that the Micro Bit won’t be a rival to the likes of Raspberry PI, but should be seen almost as a stepping stone up onto such devices. This will, according to Director General Hall:
channel the spirit of the BBC Micro into the digital age.
A Micro Bit prototype
For his part, Hall has no doubt that once again this is the sort of digital public service that the broadcaster absolutely should be providing and repeats his brash claim that in fact the BBC is the only organisation that could do this:
This is exactly what the BBC is all about – bringing the industry together on an unprecedented scale and making a difference to millions. Just as we did with the BBC Micro in the 1980s, we want to inspire the digital visionaries of the future. Only the BBC can bring partners together to attempt something this ambitious, this important to Britain’s future on the world stage.
To which the BBC’s critics will reply that perhaps for the government, the Department of Education or The Department of Business, Innovation and Skills, could – some might say, should – be delivering this.
Or that an established technology vendor, such as a Google or an Amazon et al ,might also be able to step up to the mark as effectively as an organisation charged with educating, informing and entertaining though TV and radio programming? (Indeed Google, Microsoft and BT are all partnering in the wider initiative in some form or another.)
But no, it’s all about BBC and that ‘heart of the nation’ stuff again. And that makes me uncomfortable once again.
My take
Look, it’s hard to criticise this initiative to any great degree. The UK – in common with so many other nations – desperately needs to play catch-up after decades of neglecting to invest in tech skills. So it’s only possible to wish Make it Digital every success in its endeavours, particularly when it comes to the trainee scheme side of things.
And for the BBC to lend its brands and create original programming to support promotion of this seems to me entirely proper and a genuine example of public service broadcasting in action.
It’s only the BBC getting back into computer hardware production that sets a little alarm bell ringing in my head. There are plenty of others better placed to do this. The comparison with the BBC Micro just doesn’t hold water. That was groundbreaking in its own way. But we’re in a completely different tech world these days.
Hall was a bit vague today around how all this is being funded. It seems that funding will be allocated “project by project” while the traineeships budget is coming from the DWP. As for the Micro Bit, the “majority” of the funding will come from the partners, which implies that some funding is coming direct from the BBC.
If it’s coming out of the licence fee or if any of the BBC’s multiple enemies can make a case that it might be, then the corporation will unfortunately open itself to criticism again at a time when its entire funding model has been called into question by politicians from right and left of government.
So overall, of course I wish this well. But with an important reservation that the BBC is opening itself up to more criticism from its enemies in one respect.

Read more on: Digital skills and trainingFuture of workInternet of Things 