
In my prior feature on Sift Science with CEO Jason Tan, we talked about how his early struggles led to an embrace of the “weird,” – in his case, the wonderful weirdness of high-tech startups. But our chat about about Sift Science’s approach to fraud detection missed something: Tan continues to put the sensibility of “weird” to good use, standing out from other big data startups.
The term “weird” has been through somewhat of a corporate rehabilitation, thanks in part to Seth Godin’s ebook missive, We are all Weird, which in turn was impacted by Chris Anderson’s landmark books, Free and The Long Tail. One learning from these books: the digital economy enables us to break away from the business of mass. Instead, we can connect with niche audiences by serving up experiences/content that are deeply relevant to that specialization.
I would criticize both Anderson and Godin for romanticizing the concept of the digital niche. Even if you capture the attention of your target demographic, that doesn’t mean you can translate it into a sustainable business model. It’s pretty darn easy to fail, and contrary to Silicon Valley’s “fail fast” love affair, finding yourself in a failed venture you sunk your life into sucks eggs.
That said, I’m always interested to learn about companies that grow by being refreshingly different. In Tan’s case, “weird” in a startup context means his team is willing to experiment with personalized services and transparent pricing. So in this follow-on, we explore how Sift Science has used this expanded notion of weird to grow.
Jon Reed: Let’s talk about “weird” a little bit. In the pitch your PR team sent me, they referred to an event where you won the crowd by extolling the audience to “embrace the weird.” I don’t like weird in the sense of being weird for the sake of viral attention. But if you want to tweak the meaning of weird to mean the boldness to re-invent, it gets interesting. What’s your view?
Jason Tan: Especially at a startup, you have to do things differently to stand out. Everyone’s trying to compete for the same customers and the same recruits. If you don’t embrace what’s unique to you, and you don’t try to do things differently, it’s hard to have an advantage. It can be a small thing. For example, whenever we make an offer to a candidate, we try to do the offer in person. We always start with an offer letter that’s printed. We put the name of the candidate in cursive on the front of the envelope, and hand-deliver it.
It’s a personal touch that we apply to the recruiting experience, and it gives the candidate something real to bring home to talk over with their husband or wife or their friend. Most companies will send an email with the offer letter digitally attached, but we want them to have something real in front of them.
Reed: Do you take people by surprise when you show up with the offer letter in person?
Tan: Of course. We think that surprise shows our preparation. It shows how much we care about the candidate.
Transparency as a web design principle
Reed: Give us some other examples.
Tan: If you look at the web sites of other fraud vendors, they are very opaque. You don’t understand clearly what they do, you don’t have their pricing on the page, it’s all hidden. You have to talk to a salesperson to learn more information.
We went to the opposite extreme. If you look at our website, we try to put everything out there. We’re very transparent with our pricing; there’s a link to it on the homepage. You can sign up for an account and try the product free for thirty days without talking to a salesperson. We embrace the mentality we can be different in the industry. We can be known as a vendor that does business transparently, in an easy way, and we want to continue to build on that.
Weird marketing
CEO Jason Tan
Reed: Are you finding that this notion of the weird, or the transparent, is also helping you get the word out?
Tan: It’s a core part of our sales and marketing strategy. If you can be transparent and simple to work with, you don’t have to sell the customer as much. You can just ask them to try with no commitment. If they don’t like it, they can leave. That mentality forces us to have a really fantastic product, because the product is what’s going to sell, rather than a sales person. Don’t get me wrong – we do have sales people to help educate, but they’re more evangelical or educational rather than a classic sales person.
The principle of installation (and UX) simplicity
Reed: And are you able to carry that simplicity over to the implementation itself?
Tan: Typically, our projects are less than a few days of actual engineering. Now, that engineering time might be spread out over a couple of days or weeks, but in terms of sitting at the computer and writing the code to integrate Sift, it’s usually less than two or three business days.
This goes back to what I was saying earlier. Being an engineer throughout my career, I realize how valuable that time is, and how precious those developer resources are for these businesses. We don’t want this to be a hassle. You can just get up and running, and it works.
Reed: And how does the user experience fit in?
Tan: I am personally obsessed with pixels. Design has moved from a commodity to a competitive advantage. It can help distinguish you from your competitors. In this day and age, because information travels so quickly, you need to make sure your first touch with the customer is fantastic. As a result, we’ve seen so much business come in through word of mouth.
Making machine learning accessible
Reed: But not all customers have the resources or internal skills to launch machine learning projects.
Tan: For us, it’s really about the mission of making data accessible, and taking action based on data. We’re trying to make that whole process easy and accessible. You don’t need to have a team of machine-earning engineers to be able to leverage your data to make better decisions. For us the vision is not just around fraud, it’s how do we help merchants predict other types of user behaviors beyond fraud. We want to give them the same class of technology that Amazon has or Google has. We are constantly asking ourselves, How do we make that technology accessible and easy for everyone to use?
Reed: You land in an interesting debate there, because some feel that data science is the province of experts and that you can’t propagate those skills to individuals without advanced statistics and programming backgrounds. But it’s not easy to recruit that background. It seems to me there’s a middle ground, where you start cultivating these skills internally, but you also find packaged solutions that give you a leg up, because essentially the data science is embedded in the tool. If you get that in front of a business analyst that has some background in that industry and topic, hopefully they can do something with it.
Tan: Right now there’s an insane amount of demand and not enough supply. Some of our customers are much larger. But we also work with mom and pop shops that are just getting to their first million dollars of sales a year. With those customers, we have to do a little bit of education, but we also have a lot of great content on our website that explains some of these concepts. Again it goes back to taking a transparent approach and sharing as much information as possible. If you do that, customers can get up to speed.
Image credit: Change direction.be different © alphaspirit – Fotolia.com
Disclosure: Diginomica has no financial ties to Sift Science. I was approached by their publicist and I found the pitch interesting.
Read more on: Analytics planning and data analysisDigital and content marketing 