
Late last month, Gartner issued one of its famed Magic Quadrants. This one is aimed at Cloud Core Financial Management Suites for Midsize, Large and Global Enterprises. It’s a curious affair because SAP is positioned as a niche player. Unsurprisingly perhaps, a few of my colleagues drew a sharp intake of breath along with a collective WTAF happened there?
Vinnie Mirchandani used that assessment as a jump off point for one of his fairly frequent swipes at SAP. On this occasion, the tone was surprisingly neutral-ish but even so I found it interesting that he makes the point:
Either Gartner could not validate SAP’s statement that over 5,800 customers have licensed S/4, or more likely (my speculation is) they are confirming what I wrote after SapphireNow : “What I would have liked to have seen is more public cloud use cases of S/4. Lots of on-premise/private cloud deployments which could potentially continue the bad habits from ECC world. With lots of exposure at the event to what they called the Big 3 “cloud infrastructure” vendors – Google, Microsoft and Amazon, we will see more interest in public cloud deployments of S/4.”…
…Finance is a strong suit for SAP. I doubt they like being considered a niche player.
Pay for play?
That got me thinking about the whole Gartner model and the ongoing problems that are perceived by many vendors, not least but wrapped up in the ‘pay for play’ argument, where vendors are of the view that the more you pay, the more likely you are to get treated sympathetically by Gartner.
For its part, Gartner analysts and supporters are firmly of the belief that commercial considerations have no bearing on the final outcome of an MQ. Gartner is flat out wrong. And here is why.
Any vendor can brief a Gartner analyst for no charge. That’s not at issue and never has been. But, in order to engage in any depth, Gartner offers a range of briefing and advisory services for which clients, naturally, pay. It is a matter of commercial fact that Gartner spends far more on SG&A than it does on research. Check out the latest financial scorecard.
In the real world, that translates into nagging sales calls and the attendance of sales personnel on briefing visits during which Gartner analysts soak up the vendor’s words but without necessarily offering advice.
At that very superficial level, vendors come away with the perception that to get Gartner attention, they have very little choice but to pay what is often termed ‘the Gartner Tax’ for doing business. Whether that is entirely fair is moot but is easy to understand, especially given that even the most superficial engagement with Gartner sets back any company a low five figure sum.
In that sense, small vendors in particular are faced with an unfair disadvantage when set up against their well heeled competitive brethren, for whom a $1 million check is chump change but enough for them to wield influence of their own back into Gartner.
The opinionated dot supremacy
The problem for vendors is manifold, not least because a perceived Gartner seal of approval by way of a dot in an MQ is often regarded as a highly valuable proof point in any deal. In many cases, that proof is considered an essential ‘tick in the box’ by CIOs anxious to get the CFO to open the clamshell otherwise knows as the check book. In short, there is bi-lateral interest in having a favorable appearance in an MQ.
What is perhaps less well understood by buyers is that what Gartner has to say about any vendor is an opinion. It is not a statement of fact. This is especially relevant to the MQ, which has been occasionally tossed around in courts over the years by vendors who felt embittered by something a Gartner MQ and/or report said. Gartner for its part does very little to dispel the myth that the MQ is a fact based judgment.
But I think it is much more problematic than Gartner is willing to acknowledge. Having ‘Gartner analyst’ on your CV does no harm at all, largely because of the perceived power that Gartner wields and the door openings a good relationship with Gartner analysts can bring to the table.
At the analyst level, the acquired kudos is valuable. Former Gartner analysts have told me that one of the key reasons they did the job wasn’t for the money (which isn’t shabby these days but not great either) but for the recognition. I know from personal experience that ‘recognition’ is a drug all of its own that easily translates into a subtle form of arrogance that renders people rigid in their views.
In this particular case, while Mirchandani’s argument might seem odd given the actualité of this MQ, he has a fair point. Without taking anything away from what Gartner said, I know that one of the analysts named in the report really likes S/4HANA to an extent I found unusual.
My sense is that a lack of adequate engagement between SAP and Gartner has led to a failure on Gartner’s part to properly appreciate what Business ByDesign actually is, let alone understand the context in SAP markets. It is something they could readily overcome with a bit of desk research and a couple of calls. IMO.
I also have to bear in mind that among my peers, I am the only person willing to give a consistent thumbs up to ByDesign. But then I’ve made it my business to remain close to those at the center of ByDesign development.
I also know that inside SAP, the ByDesign group has had more than its share of challenges, so there may be a fair argument for finger pointing towards Waldorf in this instance.
Unconscious bias
My assessment may sound harsh but when you offer yourself up as operating a high bar, then expect to get a good kicking when you don’t pay attention to the inevitable consequences of unconscious bias. This is something I believe is rarely recognized as an important component in any software assessment. No-one is immune and to that extent, if Mirchandani is to be taken at his word, then Gartner has issues that might have impact to ByDesign further down the track.
But then I am equally minded of the fact that ByDesign has been successful as a Tier-2 offering among SAP customers that might have been tempted by alternatives. Which triggered the reminder that Salesforce, while it picks up kudos from Gartner today, didn’t need that to become a $2 billion business…
Image credit - MQ via GartnerDisclosure - SAP and Salesforce are premier partners at time of writing. ByDesign has been a past client but there has been no commercial engagement for over a year. Read more on: Cloud ERP financials and supply chainFinancials 