
Don Tapscott, live
During his afternoon keynote at Connected Enterprise, Don Tapscott re-assessed his landmark 1995 book, The Digital Economy: Rethinking Promise and Peril in the Age of Networked Intelligence (The book is now available in a 2015 anniversary edition).Tapscott remains bullish on the future of digital. But as Tapscott told me afterward, he thinks Silicon Valley is in dire need of a digital reality check.
Tapscott’s live talk revisited his 1995 warnings on the dark side of the digital age. After hearing boatloads of digital utopianism on the 2015 trade show circuit, Tapscott’s candor was refreshing.
Tapscott deviated a bit from this Dark Side of the Internet Revolution infographic. Here’s a review of each issue, along with keynote standouts:
The job market is a problem
Tapscott’s view of digital job displacement from the 1995 edition is disturbingly prescient:
We can see dislocation in the labor markets with old industries and jobs disappearing. The fact that we’re entering a new economy is of little consolidation of the displaced worker. Have the management transition to new types of work and new knowledge base.
If anything, he sees the problem as bigger today, with new companies generating far more revenue growth than jobs. From the 2015 keynote, twenty years later:
We have these new species of business that are enormously powerful and successful – they are coming in and wiping out entire industries. They deliver better value for the customer, and they leave behind 10% of the jobs that used to exist before. I call them digital conglomerates. They can enter into adjacent or even not-so-adjacent industries. Let’s take Google as an example. What business is Google in? Yeah, Google is in the ad sales business. It’s an advertising agency. But it’s also a multi-media company. With YouTube, Google would like to dominate television… It’s got Android, so it’s in the platform business – and so on.
After extolling the virtues of his Tesla and its software upgrades, Tapscott pointed to Uber:
In the big battle between Uber and the taxis that exist all around the world, whoever wins that gets a Pyrrhic victory. Because Google’s invested in Uber, and the plan is to replace all these drivers with autonomous vehicles. For humanity, that’s going to be awesome. For taxi drivers, not so good.
When you factor in youth unemployment, the job picture gets worse:
I’m off to Barcelona next week. Youth unemployment in Barcelona is close to 75 percent, so if you’re a young person you have pretty much no hope of getting a job. This is a big problem, because we told young people around the world: work hard, stay out of trouble, be a good kid, and you can graduate and you can have a prosperous life. Not true.
Privacy issues won’t go away
In 1995, Tapscott warned, “This could happen, we could have a destruction of privacy in an unprecedented irrevocable manner.” So how does he feel about the state of privacy today? Not so swell. And he’s not amused by the insistence it’s time to move on:
Those people who say “Privacy is dead, get over it,” this is not only foolish – it’s dangerous. Privacy is the foundation of a free society, and identity is not just the foundation of citizenship, but of our existence. It needs to be managed in a responsible way, and it needs to be controlled by us. And what’s happened? We’re all leaving a trail of digital crumbs as we go, and we have these data frackers… The wealth of data in the digital age is concentrated in Facebook’s hands. It also means that our privacy is being seriously undermined.
Tapscott changed his 1995 analogy, playing the Kafka card instead:
Back in The Digital Economy, I didn’t say this right. I said, “There’s a danger of Big Brother, Orwell will be watching you.” It’s more like Franz Kafka and The Trial, where all of a sudden you can’t get across the border one day, or you don’t get that dream job. With Kafka and The Trial, this guy’s tried; he didn’t know what he’s being tried for; he didn’t know who his accuser was, and he didn’t know what the evidence against him was.
What does it mean for corporations to have perfect information about us? On the one hand, it’s awesome. They can deliver customized services as you’d been discussing this morning. But there is a dark side.
Bipolarization of wealth cements the digital divide
Bipolarization of wealth is another 1995 prediction that hits too close to reality:
Social inequality has become such a big issue that a Marxist named Thomas Piketty had the best-selling business book last year, and it won the Financial Times best business book of the year award. Lots of people have disputed his conclusions, but the data is pretty robust. What’s going on here? People like me said the digital age will bring us great prosperity… It’s bringing wealth, but prosperity means that wealth gets distributed, and we have a bifurcation. How can this be?
Digital impact on the family – not nearly as bad as alarmists claim
Tapscott switched it up here, lambasting those who claim that digital is creating a myopic generation:
On this one, I think that it’s not so bad. Especially all negative stuff about young people – I don’t buy it. “They’re net addicted; they’re losing their social skills. It’s the ‘Dumbest Generation’“. “A little army of narcissists.” says Jean Twenge in a book.
There’s no evidence to support any of that. This is the smartest generation ever. It’s never been tougher to get into the best schools. SAT scores should have come way down. Because everyone is taking them now, it should have put downward pressure on the mean, and that hasn’t happened. Youth volunteering in high schools and in universities has been going up here for nearly twenty years. The percentage of kids that don’t do drugs or alcohol in high school has been going up year-for-year for almost fifteen years. So I think we fear what we don’t understand here. I’m more optimistic.
The re-invention of government – how much progress have we really made?
Tapscott is encouraged by digital governance trends such as government as a platform. But he does not see the fundamental change he was hoping for:
I had a whole chapter on the re-invention of government. How can we open up governments and create a new platform – a new division of labor and society by creating public value? Well, we could have government as a platform; some are doing that. But look at your government today. Is it any different? Fundamentally? They sort of paved the cow path, didn’t they? Using technology that automated existing business process. You have some services that are delivered electronically. You’re still not treated as a citizen, you’re treated as a department of this or that.
The new age of democracy – err, maybe not
Tapscott thought digital might push democracy into a new era, or take a wrong turn. Yeah, it went wrong, but not how he expected:
I thought we might dangerously move into some kind of hyper-democracy, electronic town halls and voting every night on the evening news – the electronic mob. That’s not what democracy is about. Democracy is a lot more than majority rule; it’s also about protecting the rights of minorities. But that’s not the danger that happened. What happened was: technology was used by politicians purely for cynical ways, rather than to open up democracy. And we have a new crisis of legitimacy that’s emerging in our democratic institutions. All around the world, youth voting has been collapsing for a decade, year over year.
Tapscott cited comments from youth leaders like the co-founder of Avaaz, a 34 million member network-for-change that, as Tapscott put it, views “the fossilized institutions of democracy as bankrupt.” Tapscott doesn’t argue the flaws, but he is alarmed by the notion of toppling democratic institutions:
Democracy is the best thing that we have… But the Internet, rather than transforming it, is challenging it. Last year, I was on a panel about citizen engagement. I said, “I think that the legitimacy of democratic capitalism is now being questioned. And we need to fix this. If we don’t, there’s going to be an explosion that will make the sixties look like kids stuff.” This goes back to my 1981 book. When I first wrote that book, there were 3,000 protests around the world. Last year there were 260,000.
Tapscott called for the attendees at Connected Enterprise to take this issue on:
Young people have this powerful tool for finding what’s going on, informing others, and organizing collective responses. We are in the early days of a firestorm here. I appeal to you as business leaders and as leaders, because business can’t succeed in a world that’s failing.
On education and the perilous amorality of networks
In the infographic comparing the two editions, the final category is education. Tapscott didn’t address education in detail in our keynote, but he believes academic institutions are finally waking up to how they can use digital rather than perceiving it as a threat.
Instead, Tapscott wrapped by warning that online networks do not dictate positive communities. He cites the potential example of a terrorist education web site:
It could show you how to do all kinds of stuff – like how to make a suicide jacket. Its user interface could be excellent; it could have a “help” button in case you are having trouble navigating around the explosives department. This platform has awesome neutrality.
In the book, twenty years ago, I said, “Unlike the old media that’s centralized one way, controlled by powerful forces, this is highly distributed – it will be what we want it to be.”
Well, it turns out some people want it to be a platform to commit acts of evil. I was talking to Tim Berners-Lee, He said, “It’s true, you know – we were right. It’s a distributed platform, but it got laid on top of a society that’s anything but.” Around the world, we have governments that are totalitarian – they want to create a surveillance society and a closed Internet.
Final thoughts – Tapscott is sunny on the blockchain
This piece might imply Tapscott is a pessimist. That’s not my impression. Tapscott ended on a hugely optimistic note, expressing confidence that the blockchain is a fundamental shift with the potential to turn the Internet into the decentralized network it should have become. Elevating the blockchain to the invention of the world wide web itself, Tapscott visualized the potential of the blockchain as a flock of birds. He sees a poetry in what these leaderless, networked flocks could accomplish:

Is technology bringing us closer to behaving like ‘nature’? Murmuration example by @dtapscott #CCE2015 pic.twitter.com/3JNMrRkMBb
— Phil Komarny (@PhilKomarny) November 4, 2015

As a blockchain semi-convert myself, I appreciate the analogy – though I’m hedging my bets (I think we’re back to the platform amorality issue – see the use of blockchain for Dark Net transactions). Tapscott’s views on blockchain have changed from skeptic to convert, as this short video shows. Tapscott says:
It’s going to radically transform not just commerce, or the nature of the corporation, but many of our institutions in society, and everybody needs to pay attention to this. When you have through the blockchain, a ledger of everything that’s happened, that is unhackable and irrefutable, that eliminates the needs for all kinds of intermediaries that we have in society.
That’s the best thing from Tapscott’s talk – not the reality check of the digital undertow, but the imperative to re-evaluate our positions, seek better information, and take action forward. Whether we live up to Tapscott’s exhortations remains to be seen.
Image credits: Feature image of Don Tapscott live at Constellation by Jon Reed. Additional Tapscott photo by Vala Afshar.
Disclosure: Constellation Research puts on the Connected Enterprise Event and provided for my conference attendance and hotel. Diginomica has no financial relationship with Constellation, but Den Howlett serves on Constellations’s Board of Directors.
Read more on: Future of work 