
Loïc Le Guisquet.
“Digital transformation”, “disruption”, “change” are words on the lips of many in the technology industry and perhaps more to the point, in the world of business right now.
Digital trends are shaping every kind of business and there is a clamour – even urgency – among companies old and new to understand the implications and embrace the benefits.
Change that was once measured in years is now months, months now weeks, weeks now days and businesses know they need to keep pace and must innovate to do so.
Nowhere was this clearer to see than at Oracle’s recent OpenWorld event in San Francisco. More than 60,000 attendees from 141 countries came together to discuss, debate and understand how they can modernize their business models – faster, better and more efficiently.
Crucially this wasn’t just a technology conversation. All lines of business were represented and united by a desire to embrace and effect change. Across more than 2,500 sessions, in excess of 3,000 speakers, including customers and partners, shared their stories, insights and advice.
The UK’s DVLA, which as part of the Department for Transport manages driver and vehicle licensing, is just one organization that has embraced digital transformation to considerable effect. Its move from a heavily paper-based system for both vehicle taxation and driver licensing to a digital approach has delivered efficiency savings of £40.6 million in the first year, while delivering additional benefits such as reduced fraud and greatly improved environmental impact.
As well as clearly measurable benefits such as cost savings, a key theme from many OpenWorld speakers was the need to ensure digital transformation is strategic and that businesses move as one in an agile, flexible way. Consistency, collaboration and co-operation were front of mind for many and that requires not only technological change but cultural change within organisations if they are to avoid creating silos in their technology, their processes or their knowledge and skills.
Fast-growing challenges
Fast-growing companies have often tried to accommodate rapid growth by adopting what seemed to be the best software at the time during different stages in their evolution and by addressing projects or resourcing needs in isolation. But this resulted in fragmented systems and disjointed processes and teams. There was potential for different departments within the business to act with little business-wide awareness.
Similarly, more established companies may have inherited old legacy systems, structures and ways of working that were never designed to compete in today’s social and mobile world and which could make companies unresponsive to change.
Now organizations must move forward as one to deliver their digital ambitions – quickly. For many the answer to that need for speed from a technology perspective will be the increased adoption of cloud technology.
Swedish construction company Skanska has impressively sped up many of its internal processes by migrating to the cloud and putting more data at the fingertips of its staff, wherever they are, which is crucial in a business that works out in the field for so much of the time. Cost and complexity have been reduced and responsiveness and decision-making have been improved based upon increased access to real-time information.
Cloud delivers not just speed but consistency across businesses and disparate systems. Similarly the scalability afforded by the cloud platform makes it easier to integrate mobile strategies and extend systems out to a mobile workforce. It also makes it far easier to integrate third-party digital and social channels.
Club Med
Club Med is a travel and tourism brand with more than 50 years of heritage which is achieving great results from its own digital transformation. The company has put cloud at the heart of its customer service strategy, making the organisation more responsive and more agile in an increasingly competitive market space.
Cloud has enabled Club Med more easily to link its systems and integrate the social and digital channels its customers increasingly occupy. Club Med now sees 60% of customer interactions happen through these digital channels compared to five per cent previously, improving service levels and reducing cost.
As these examples show digital transformation isn’t necessarily about coming up with whole new business models, or about start-ups flipping entire sectors on their heads. It is about all organizations writing the next chapter in their story and bringing their customers and their staff into a new era of business.
However there is an urgency and a need for organisations to get it right because increased competition and an increasing pace of innovation means there is a shrinking window of opportunity for those organizations hoping to win the race to digital transformation.
Read more on: Cloud ERP financials and supply chainCloud platforms - infrastructure and architectureCRM and customer experienceDigital and content marketingFuture of workInfrastructureMobileOraclePartner ZoneSocial 