
Dave Wright, ServiceNow CSO
As I’ve highlighted previously, ServiceNow is a bit of a dark horse in the cloud platform wars. Although it started out by selling itself as a tool for companies that wanted to improve their IT service management, in recent years it has quickly garnered business-wide interest.
Why? Service applies to almost all areas of a business, not just IT. Any task that is repeatable internally, or externally for that matter, could benefit from being streamlined within a platform that not only lets you make requests, but also gives you insight into who owns the task and its progress.
As much as I hate the term ‘uberization’ – you can think of ServiceNow as Uber for the enterprise. What is Uber when you drill into it? It’s a service app that allows consumers to make a request, declare their preferences for that request, and follow that request to completion. You can apply that to endless tasks in a company – tasks that currently rely on email and using endless follow up emails to chase.
Email is not efficient, the UI is distinctly average and there is little insight or control. The ServiceNow platform resolves this issue to a certain extent. It ties back end process to front end engagement, building an internal service management layer that speeds up tasks across the organisation – whether that be an IT fault that needs to be resolved, or the on boarding of a new employee.
Read Martin Banks’ excellent piece on diginomica about how ServiceNow solves the challenge of integration and management for siloed data and systems.
My main criticism of ServiceNow in the past has been that it spent too much time speaking to IT and not enough time thinking about how this could be translated into a business sell – but that is very much a thing of the past.
At the company’s Forum event in London this week, chief strategy officer Dave Wright took to the stage for the opening keynote and there was barely an ITIL process map or a workflow diagram in sight. Instead, Wright spent most of his time talking about the time organisations waste on inefficient tasks and processes, and how this experience could be improved with the ServiceNow platform.
A platform play
I got the chance to sit down with Wright straight after his keynote, where he gave me some insight into ServiceNow’s future strategy – much of which rests on the ServiceNow platform and the data that resides on it. The platform itself has been being pushed for the past couple of years and has recently been made available for purchase, as a separate product from the applications itself.
Dave Wright
Wright said to me that one of the challenges of being a platform business – and one that focuses on multiple enterprise areas – is that focus is of critical importance. Where do you put your energies when the platform can essentially be applied everywhere?
However, this also plays to ServiceNow’s strengths, as any development on the platform, even if it doesn’t end up as a standalone product, can be integrated into other areas. Wright said:
The challenges are that once you go into a separate business line, how do you clearly position that business line from a marketing perspective? How do you indicate that you’ve moved into that market? The other challenge that we get is, quite often ideas appear just by innovation.
Someone just says ‘it would be really good if I built this’. When I joined the company there was probably a handful on engineers, and now there are hundreds, so it’s very easy for people to build things. So the interesting thing is that we don’t discourage people from building.
Even if they built something and we decided not to go to market with it, because it’s all on one platform, there will be elements that we can use. So customer service is a great example – if we had said we don’t want to go to market with it, there were things that were created, such as the telephony interfaces, such as the timeline displays, that we just roll into incidence, problem, change. There is little waste in development effort, because of the nature of the platform.
Wright said that over the past two years the number of products that are available on the ServiceNow store has increased from 30 to 300 – so there is evidence of growth and increased interest.
Which is good for ServiceNow, particularly as it considers how the platform can be applied to industry verticals. Wright doesn’t believe that ServiceNow should plough its resources into creating vertical offerings, and instead would rather work with partners that already have the know-how to create their own. He said:
This is the first release where people have been able to buy the platform without the applications. What we’ve got now is people actually white labelling it and putting a new product out there that doesn’t even mention ServiceNow. Some of it service integrators, some of it start-up companies, some of it ISVs.
But the interesting thing is is that they verticalize. What they do is that a lot of these companies don’t want any connection, they wouldn’t have any interest in meeting our customers, they are building things for medical institutes, or for pharmaceutical business lines – where they are taking the same processes and putting it over the top, but it’s a completely different economic buyer.
My preferred route would be to get partners to do that verticalization – particularly the big SIs, they’ve got those verticals anyway. Rather than us hiring a load if people who are specialists and selling to that area and hoping that it worked, it’s probably much better to work with someone already in that area and to give them more solutions.
A data play
It occurred to me during Wright’s keynote this morning that ServiceNow has a real opportunity to take advantage of its platform, if it were to look at the data at an aggregate level and provide customers and users with comparative statistics. This is a trend we are seeing more and more amongst the cloud platforms – see examples here for Coupa and InsideSales.
And ServiceNow has too become wise to this, offering customers the deeper insights in its latest release. Wright admitted that the company would have liked to have taken this further and offered comparative analytics on the systems and engines running its users’ organisations, but this presented legal problems. He said:
It’s quite a hard thing to do, because people obviously don’t want their data out there. What you can do now though, is when you go into what we call our high instance, which is what we use to support customers, they can go into that.
They’ve always been able to go into the performance dashboard and see what issues they’ve had, what availability they’ve got. Now they can go to another screen and it will show how they can compare to peer groups. You can do that either by industry, or you can do it by company size.
It would have been good to go to the next level – which is technically possible – and actually start to do analysis and say ‘this router is breaking down way more than it did last year, maybe it’s something people should end of life’. But what you find contractually is that most vendors won’t allow you to expose that data. So you can anonymise the customer side, but as soon as you anonymise the vendor side, that data is useless.
However, providing the peer-to-peer analysis should prove beneficial for ServiceNow and its customers, which will likely then be driven to redesign their processes at a deeper level. Wright said:
You get a red or a green indicator to show whether you are above or below. Then the next natural act for a customer is to contact ServiceNow and say they’ve noticed this discrepancy and ask what other people are doing that they’re not doing.
However, the future for ServiceNow and its data play inevitably lies with AI and machine learning. Wright said that he can’t go to a customer meeting without the customer asking what ServiceNow has planned in this area – and if done properly, you can see the opportunity is valid. Wright explained:
If you look at all the conversations I’m having at the moment, it’s all around machine learning, artificial intelligence, Then it’s around asking us what we are going to do from a management perspective for all these devices that are now IP addressable. And thirdly, people just want a completely different user experience.
And actually when you start to combine those together, it’s how can you build things like dynamic interfaces? How could you start to have systems that self analyse? If you’ve got the data of how something moves through the system, why couldn’t you use AI to analyse that process and start to say ‘it spends 70% of it’s time in this certain phase, maybe you should automate that phase’. Do you even need that phase? The machine being able to do self introspective is something that will be pretty cool.
We are starting the process of doing that now. It’s cool because [because of the platform], we then we have got a learning engine that you can keep on processing that data and re-injecting it back into instances. So then you can start to do things like predictive categorization, which gives you predictive assignments, then you can look at how long it takes you to close those kinds of issues. So these are all things in the pipeline.
My take
The progress of ServiceNow as a company has been fascinating to watch – and I’m pleased that it now realises the enterprise-wide potential of its service architecture and platform. And if its third quarter results are anything to go by, buyers are seeing that potential too.
Enterprise processes are often archaic and painful to work around. ServiceNow offers an alternative that doesn’t rely on new social platforms of engagement or new ‘cool’ collaboration channels. It’s not replacing email with some other tool that looks a lot like email – it’s automating processes and workflows.
More importantly, it’s pulling all those silos together. Something that has been notoriously difficult to do in the past.
Whilst the SIAM and ITIL message still baffle buyers to a certain extent – ServiceNow is working harder to look at the outcomes and the opportunity at a top level, which resonates better.
As Wright highlights, picking what to focus on (and what not to focus on) as the company scales will be the key.
Image credit - Images sourced from ServiceNowRead more on: Cloud platforms - infrastructure and architectureIT service managementMachine intelligence and AI 