
There are signs that the ‘low code’ movement is getting ready for the next stage of its development, going the ‘whole nine yards’ and offering complete applications suites, as well as more tools to build low cloud applications.
This became the not-so-underlying theme of this year’s AppianWorld, held in Miami Beach, USA.
One of the keynote speakers, Forrester VP, principal analyst, and the man credited with creating the phrase ‘low code’, John Rymer, suggested that it was now time for the user community to take the technology to the next level:
Low code has so far been used for a lot of singles in baseball terms. It has been used a lot to do operational processes, has functions in common.
Taking the baseball analogy a bit further he suggested it was now time for users to start going for those home runs, and that businesses now need to be ready to incorporate new use cases as they come through, using low code development processes.
The company itself has obviously decided to take that lesson to heart, as indicated during CEO Matt Calkins’ keynote presentation. There was the usual list of new developments in the line of low cost tools and sub-routines available, as well as outlines of new technology developments coming through, such as AI and Blockchain.
But then he announced what does look like a significant step up the `food chain’ with the announcement of a complete and fully packaged business management application – a Call Centre Management system.
When I’m calling you
According to Calkins this step has been taken at this time not because the company has all the relevant pieces of the call centre jigsaw already, but through the realisation that when they were put together they made a whole that is more functionally rich than any other available on the market.
Malcolm Ross, Appian’s head of Product Management, took delegates through a demo of the call centre in action, where the key feature is the application of AI to bring in relevant additional information from internal and external sources.
As this is about to become rocky ground with the coming of GDPR (General Data Protection Regulation), it is most likely that this will therefore be of more immediate interest to businesses working the B2B sector, where customer contacts and enquiries from potential customers build a more assured and auditable indication of acceptance that ‘personal’ data can be used.
For B2C businesses, some of the Appian capabilities could create GDPR compliance issues if more than publicly available name and address data is accessed from an incoming caller’s telephone number. As the demo showed – using that typical B2B existing customer scenario – ID-ing the caller from their number, can then kick other possible services, such as authenticating callers and their details to validate the call.
The AI tools can then not only pull in all current transaction data so the caller handler has a picture of why they might be calling, but also set up an array of possible personalised recommendations for cross and switch selling, depending on the nature of the call. It also provides the handler with both the facilities and time to make relevant and actionable notes for subsequent actions, such as special offers in the near future. The Call Centre also uses the company’s first AI tool, a sentiment analyser as part of this process.
It can work with chatbots and SMS messaging tools, which can then use Robotic Process Management tools to handle straight forward calls. But should it become necessary it can also be set up to advice the handler that it is appropriate the step in and take over the exchange directly. Work is already well advanced on integrating the call centre system with Google’s Dialogflow and Alexa voice interaction technologies, to take this type of operation a good deal further.
From a management point of view, the same transaction data can then be used by a manager to work with staff, see their weak spots and success areas, identify any problem areas and work with staff to resolve issues or provide additional training.
In answer to later questions about whether existing call centre players can match such capabilities Calkin made the point that it is what lies behind the application – the data management and handling capabilities of Appian – that is the important differentiator.
Docking with Docker
In other announcements at the conference, Appian talked through its new compatibility with both the Docker application containerisation technologies and its increasingly common complement, Kubernetes. Though Calkins said he sees Appian increasingly becoming its own orchestration environment, the compatibility with these two does mean that Appian-developed applications can now be moved and orchestrated along with many other applications from other vendors:
When it comes to automation, the process layer of Appian has become the orchestration layer, which means we can now start to offer orchestration capabilities. This should also help us build and simplify intelligent automation.
This is expected to add to Appian’s capabilities and flexibility when it comes to scaling applications both up and out.
Drag and drop building of user interfaces, with more options available now and more to be included has become a particular focus this year. Ross claimed that it can build a typical user interface in half time other tools take. The company is also looking to forestall possible areas of doubt about using proprietary software in an age of increasing openness. So it has set its sights on providing more integration through wider use of open standards and open systems. It has also become a member of Open API in order to connect with more applications.
Though Calkin publicly insists that there are no current plans for a wholesale move up the food chain into applications that have horizontal applications, it seems clear that the call centre will not remain an only child for too long. Under pressure he did acknowledge that one application are would make an attractive marketplace, and it is one that was actually on display at the conference.
Tales of mystery company X
One of Appian’s customers, for reasons of its own, decided that it did not want its story told, even though it was telling it to the delegates and the assembled press and analyst community present.
The one important factor about mystery company X is that it operates in the financial sector, and is therefore more than somewhat interested in the application of compliance and governance management over everything. The second important fact is that its story contains interesting lessons.
X started using Appian to build an integrated set of due diligence workflows that would cover the management of financial deals in any business sector with the minimum of modifications. It also wanted to manage them all in one place, rather than allow sector silos to build up, so that maximum levels of compliance and governance controls were not just in place but seen to be in place but were auditably in place as well.
Building this involved observing every stage of the workflow and lifecycle of every deal, taking every project through from the initial sales pipeline and the deal signing through to partial or full exit. It had to answer questions such as what is this stage? why is it important? what does it do? There was also the objective if cutting down the wave of emails that any such project can create.
X has, of course, produced this management system for its own needs, but it has built it not only using Appian tools but also with the help and support of Appian staff. So while there are no plans for the company to add a second full application to its product roster as of now, there is a good reason why this one would be a good candidate for the role.
One criticism of the low code movement is that it is now starting to gather real momentum, just as the next cohort of senior – and tech savvy – business managers start to take up positions of influence and authority. They can be the ones that not only order the development of applications but can also sit down with Appian and produce them as well.
This does have a potential and serious downside, however. The more business managers can become the company equivalent of `citizen developers’ the more chance there is that they will build what they think is needed with little or no reference to the compliance and governance environment that might exist for their business.
So having a ready-made application capable of managing such a diverse development environment could be a major benefit for a growing number of users – and not just for users of Appian.
My take
The move up the food chain of applications development seems a natural, indeed, inevitable step that Appian has to take if it is not to risk becoming just the base technology provider to it growing and enthusiastic collection of partners. If Appian doesn’t do it then at least one of them most certainly will.
If it just targets those management holes in the wider use of Appian and its apps amongst business users (such as the possibility of a compliance check/management environment) that will make an important improvement for the users, and could readily be extended to other areas of development, such as the fast-moving world of DevOps.
Image credit - TwitterRead more on: Cloud platforms - infrastructure and architectureDevOps NoSQL and the open source stack 