
The first enterprise software conference season of 2017 has pretty much come to a close. Having attended a number of events both here in the UK and the US, I thought it may be useful as we enter the quieter summer months to reflect on what the key takeaways have been – particularly when thinking about the changing challenges facing customers.
I’ve tried to whittle the list down to just three key trends that kept recurring over my time spent at the conferences, although it could certainly have been longer. It’s also worth noting that these key themes shouldn’t be observed in isolation – they’re inevitably intertwined and impact upon each other, as digital permeates all aspects of company strategy and begins to take hold of broader structural reform within organisations.
It’s also worth adding that these themes are limited to my own personal experience and the events I attended, so it’s certainly not something that should be taken as gospel for every event that took place or every customer out there (I’m only one person, after all).
However, these are themes that I myself have been pondering for the past few months and it seems that they are continuing to dominate discussion and will become a key focal point for buying decisions over the next year or so.
The integration challenge
A number of vendors and customers spoken to in recent months have pointed to the challenge of integration – an age old problem. Whilst digital should enable the seamless flow of data across the entire organisation, creating a frictionless experience as employees and customers tap into whatever tools they need, many are finding that the silos found in legacy on-prem systems are simply being replicated in the cloud.
Take a look at what Shell CIO Craig Walker recently said, who is using Salesforce to improve Shell’s customer and employee experience:
How do I keep people engaged and say, “Hey, here’s something. Here is a platform that really gives us great opportunity.” Now, with great opportunity, of course, comes great risk, because, as we all know, I have a lot of legacy that isn’t very well joined up at times. It takes a lot of integration. You could end up in the same place here with Salesforce.
Equally, Vodafone recently explained how it is using ServiceNow in the cloud to try and eradicate its existing siloed systems, as it was finding that employees and customers were having to use their own know-how to navigate a number of tools to get the service they desired. Paul Myers, a user experience evangelist at Vodafone, said:
We were going to mediate all of that with an enterprise service BUS, so being able to mediate across all of those different systems underneath. Of course you start to get into all the challenges around, what is the data model across each of those different systems where you’ve taken a best in class solution?
You’ve now got to join those things together and really start a seamless experience from a presentation perspective. The big challenge for all of that though, is that you’ve ended up with a number of different systems, you still end up with a big amount of fragmentation within your environment.
At Apttus’ event in San Francisco, I even spoke with one customer (I haven’t got round to writing it yet, unfortunately) that was struggling to deal with integration challenges between a number of applications that were all built on the force.com platform. That’s not a problem of the platform itself, but rather an unwillingness for different vendors to collaborate and ensure that when upgrades take place that connections between different applications don’t break. Otherwise, you end up having to allocate resource to managing these connection breakages – which isn’t a value-add proposition by a long stretch.
We saw how, however, that if you’re starting from a greenfield position, what the art of the possible is with MuleSoft customer, Atom Bank. Atom Bank is using MuleSoft as an API platform to allow all of its different systems to speak to each other and work together seamlessly. CTO Damon Roberts said:
We have integrated best of breed for auto conveyancing, but because we own the APIs, we can do that. We are in control. We don’t mind which vendor we pick, as long as they can publish their technical specs and data contracts with us, we are good to go.
Our mortgage process is actually straight through processing – auto conveyancing, auto valuation, auto credit scoring. A human being shouldn’t have to touch it because the systems do all the work.
We have one of the first platforms that’s truly straight through processing in the market. I’ve tried to do that in a number of other banks and the architecture gets in the way. We were lucky because we could make the middleware part of the parcel of that.
And if we take a look at ServiceNow’s new CEO’s strategy, it focuses largely on working as an integration layer to connect the dots between cloud systems, so that a seamless service experience can take place (whether that be internally or externally). John Donahoe said:
I think that’s what we’re discovering – I’m a little hesitant to say that we are the integrator of all the clouds, that’s too arrogant and that’s not our goal – but actually what we are pretty good at is this cross-functional service management. We’re the grunty guys and we understand the hard work that takes to do that, that used to be called IT, but is now turning out to be pretty important. And I think that’s our role, to do that with customer focus and humility and stay with what we’re good at.
Artificial intelligence
It’s unsurprising that Artificial Intelligence (AI) formed the basis of many conversations over the previous few months. It’s been a buzzword for a while and it presents a big revenue opportunity for the major cloud players. Questions remain, however – How do you charge for it? Is it a reality or is the technology still in its infancy? What are the implications for the workforce? What checks and balances are being put in place?
And to be honest, a lot of what we are hearing is still very much rhetoric. The real world examples being put forward are still few and far between, which makes it difficult to give you real insight into how use cases are being formed. That being said, it does appear that AI is being taken seriously amongst buyers, particularly as buyers consider how it could be used to streamline workflows and automate processes across the organisation.
However, going beyond this, some vendors are looking to AI to provide human-like recommendations to users. For example, quote-to-cash vendor Apttus is seeing how AI and machine learning can be implemented to give sales people effective recommendations. Elliott Yama, VP of best practices and knowledge management, said:
It can actually give you a set of actions – I think you should sell this offering to this customer and I think you should sell it at this price, to be consistent with the actions that you’ve taken in the marketplace in the past.
So I can give that set of choices and even automatically bring that up as the starting position for that seller, if I have enough of that data and I can bring those analytics to bear. At this point we are beginning to bump into what we would call cognitive intelligence, the ability for the solution to understand, reason in a human like way and learn over time. So the system becomes more valuable in the insights that it provides as it goes forward.
ServiceNow is also looking at sales as a prime starting point for AI-recommendations. Speaking with ServiceNow Chief Strategy Officer, Dave Wright, he said that people worrying about the impact of Artificial Intelligence on jobs are thinking about it in the wrong way. They should be thinking about how AI could be used to make people work more effectively. Wright said:
One of the interesting use cases I’ve seen is people using AI to analyse sales opportunities. Normally a really good sales person will look at their opportunities and analyse which ones they think are going to come in. If the machine comes back and says six out of the 10 opportunities aren’t going to close, you have increased that sales person’s skill by enabling them to focus on things that are going to get benefit.
A lot of people said they were struggling to find the right people for the job. They were also saying that a lot of people were spending two days a week doing admin work. Now if you can automate some of that admin work, you don’t need to struggle the people, you’ve already got them. You’ve just got them doing the wrong things.
The Internet-of-Things also is a prime use case for the application of AI, thanks to the huge swathes of data that can be collected. Speaking with connected homes company, Hive, CTO Seb Chakraborty explained that the use of AI could potentially help it provide a more personalised experience to individual households – something that is quite challenging, given the diversity of homes across the UK. He said:
It actually makes it more interesting. And challenging. And fun. All houses are different, people are different, building materials are different, customers want different things. Trying to tie all those together is why I have a data science team and why algorithms are useful. And why services like Einstein/Watson are useful, because you can then begin to tailor the service to what their interests are.
Figuring out the service models
We hear time and time again how incumbents are being disrupted by the likes of Uber and Airbnb – digitally native companies. And whilst it may sound like a bit of a cliche now, thanks to the reputation of it all, there’s no denying that this is true. And what it comes down to is those companies’ ability to service their customers effectively. The use of digital tools should enable a frictionless enterprise structure, which creates a seamless experience for the end user.
Simply put, it’s not enough to simply rip out your old processes and replace them in the cloud. You need to be thinking differently about how you can service your customers and how new digital tools can be implemented to support that. The old rules no longer apply and this idea of figuring out new service models is something that I continue to see customers grappling with.
For example, Shell Downstream CIO Craig Walker recently said that the company “should be scared”, as smaller innovative businesses have the potential to take out key parts of its business model, which could lead to losses in revenue. He said:
That’s not solely my fault, but I think as their CIO, my job is to have some future vision. And you look at what other companies are doing and how easily I could be taken out.
You only have to think about your own life and how things work, right? If it’s easier to go order what you want here or get it through this route, you will do it. And actually, you probably don’t care if it costs five cents more, or five cents less, you just don’t have the time to piss around on a site that doesn’t take your credit card properly, doesn’t seem to know who you are, and just seems a pain to get around.
I think part of my role as a CIO, is how do I use all of this great technology, not only to understand you better, and that’s one side of all of this, but ultimately, through that, make your desire to come to me, or drive an extra mile to come to me, rather than stop at this service station, a more enjoyable experience.
Make it easy, make it surprising, make it something the customer’s not expecting. But that’s my retail business. Then you think of all my other businesses and look at the potential disruptions there – because you can bet your bottom dollar I know where the money’s made on that value chain. So do 20 million other people out there, who are going, “All right, Shell are slow. Shell will struggle to disrupt themselves.” I’m gonna take that bit away from them.
Equally, Vodafone’s IoT Director, Ivo Rook, demanded that its not enough for companies to use digital tools to optimise what they’re already doing, they really need to rethink the whole service approach. What can be done differently? He said:
I wonder, if we are really critical around our own companies, what ecosystems and what metaphors and what paradigms do we still work in? Do we really see it coming when everything will be simplified, digital and different? I don’t think we do.
I think that too many companies want to stare at the parts they know so well because short term shareholder gain is about optimising, it is not about disrupting.
The same is true for connected homes company, Hive. Whilst it is a leader in the UK and it is one of the few companies that is a true IoT play, Hive CTO Seb Chakraborty admits that it and its customers are still figuring out how these new service models work. This is particularly true given that Hive is catering for such a diverse, and what is often deeply personal, market – the home. However, what is key that Hive is aware that new service models are needed. Charkraborty said:
That’s been our whole story, we want to get our customers excited as much as we can about what the potential of connected home is. Our goal is really around how to make that whole thing slick, easy and give people back time – the time to do the things that really matter to you.
The home is a place where people want to feel comfortable, people love their homes, people want to protect their homes, people want to protect their loved ones – that’s why connected homes are so interesting, it offers all those things. People want all those things, but they don’t know how to make it happen yet. That’s what we do, that’s what our agents do, that’s what all the technologies we put into place do, that’s what our app does.
My take
Plenty to digest and as I noted above, these topics shouldn’t be seen in isolation – they all very much play into my colleague Phil Wainewright’s idea of a ‘frictionless enterprise’. It’s worth taking a read of his discussions on the idea, which look to digital tools to create a seamless experience both for employees internally and customers externally.
Image credit - Images free for commercial use Disclosure - ServiceNow and Salesforce are diginomica premier partners at time of writing. Read more on: Use cases 