
The devastating terrorist attack in London on Saturday night has prompted Prime Minister Theresa May to pursue a further crackdown on Internet regulation and encryption – despite facing increased criticism from the tech sector for doing so and challenges in the European Courts from privacy activists.
The Prime Minister claims that the Internet provides a “safe space” for extremists and that the big technology companies are allowing these spaces to exist. However, those defending end-to-end encryption and online privacy claim that Theresa May has failed to fundamentally understand how the Internet works – and that her actions could have unintended consequences that make surveillance even harder for governments.
Critics have also highlighted that May presided over extensive police cuts, and seems reluctant to discuss Saudi funding of jihadi groups in the UK – which are likely having a greater impact on the safety of British citizens.
Speaking the day after the tragic events in London Bridge on Saturday night, just two weeks after the bombing in Manchester, the Prime Minister said:
Defeating this ideology is one of the great challenges of our time. But it cannot be defeated through military intervention alone. It will not be defeated through the maintenance of a permanent, defensive counter-terrorism operation, however skilful its leaders and practitioners. It will only be defeated when we turn people’s minds away from this violence – and make them understand that our values – pluralistic, British values – are superior to anything offered by the preachers and supporters of hate.
Second, we cannot allow this ideology the safe space it needs to breed. Yet that is precisely what the internet – and the big companies that provide internet-based services – provide. We need to work with allied, democratic governments to reach international agreements that regulate cyberspace to prevent the spread of extremism and terrorist planning. And we need to do everything we can at home to reduce the risks of extremism online.
Third, while we need to deprive the extremists of their safe spaces online, we must not forget about the safe spaces that continue to exist in the real world. Yes, that means taking military action to destroy ISIS in Iraq and Syria. But it also means taking action here at home. While we have made significant progress in recent years, there is – to be frank – far too much tolerance of extremism in our country.
A reputation
Theresa May has a growing reputation for wanting to both make it harder for users of the Internet to have privacy online and for governments to have sweeping surveillance regulations that allow largely unchecked access to citizen data.
At the end of last year a bill was passed that gave the UK intelligence agencies and police the most sweeping surveillance powers in the western world. The Investigatory Powers Act is being challenged in the European Courts by privacy experts, but it essentially legalises powers that security agencies have been using for years – without public or parliamentary knowledge.
At the time of the bill being passed, US whistleblower Edward Snowden tweeted:
The UK has just legalised the most extreme surveillance in the history of western democracy. It goes further than many autocracies.
Critics argue that whilst the intention of the bill may be good, it allows agencies and police unfettered access to citizen data without enough checks and balances in place. Equally, the powers rely on the UK having a trustworthy government in place that won’t abuse the powers in any way – but as we have seen in recent years, democracy has a tendency to surprise.
Following the Manchester terror attack just two weeks ago, sources told the Sun that it was the Prime Minister’s intention to clamp down on end-to-end encryption – used by popular online messaging services as a way to protect user data – as it makes it impossible for governments to read conversations between extremist groups online.
May continues to pursue this agenda, despite continued warnings and criticisms from cyber and security experts. The first complaint being that it’s not entirely clear whether or not a ‘back door’ for governments and companies is even feasible, given that end-to-end encryption is designed to make decryption impossible.
However, if the technicalities were over looked, it is also argued that if we make it harder for extremists to converse online, this will only force them to create more sophisticated technology and use more advanced techniques too – making it even harder for security services to track them down. It becomes a race to the bottom.
Finally, it also raises concerns about protection of information for citizens, which use encryption for a wide variety of online services – for everything from messaging to banking. If a a backdoor is created for government, it is inevitable that this will fall into the wrong hands and be used for a wide range of criminal activity.
Still doesn’t get it
Despite mounting criticism for comments made in the past, Theresa May still put the security of the Internet at the centre of her criticisms following Saturday’s attack.
However, there has been an inevitable backlash against her comments about ‘safe spaces’ online, with vocal critics calling on the Prime Minister to focus on the actual causes of terrorist activity.
Jim Killock over at the Open Rights Group, which campaigns on digital privacy rights and has taken the government to court over the issues discussed in this piece, said:
It is disappointing that in the aftermath of this attack, the Government’s response appears to focus on the regulation of the Internet and encryption.
This could be a very risky approach. If successful, Theresa May could push these vile networks into even darker corners of the web, where they will be even harder to observe.
But we should not be distracted: the Internet and companies like Facebook are not a cause of this hatred and violence, but tools that can be abused. While governments and companies should take sensible measures to stop abuse, attempts to control the Internet is not the simple solution that Theresa May is claiming.
Real solutions—as we were forced to state only two weeks ago—will require attempts to address the actual causes of extremism. For instance, both Jeremy Corbyn and Theresa May have drawn attention to the importance of finding solutions to the drivers of terrorism in countries including Syria, Iraq and Libya.
Debating controls on the Internet risks distracting from these very hard and vital questions.
Equally, Cory Doctorow, co-editor of Boing Boing, and a vocal opponent of restrictive surveillance laws, said:
Theresa May says that last night’s London terror attacks mean that the internet cannot be allowed to provide a “safe space” for terrorists and therefore working cryptography must be banned in the UK.
This is a golden oldie, a classic piece of foolish political grandstanding. May’s predecessor, David Cameron, repeatedly campaigned on this one, and every time he did, I wrote a long piece rebutting him.
It’s impossible to overstate how bonkers the idea of sabotaging cryptography is to people who understand information security. If you want to secure your sensitive data either at rest – on your hard drive, in the cloud, on that phone you left on the train last week and never saw again – or on the wire, when you’re sending it to your doctor or your bank or to your work colleagues, you have to use good cryptography.
Use deliberately compromised cryptography, that has a back door that only the “good guys” are supposed to have the keys to, and you have effectively no security. You might as well skywrite it as encrypt it with pre-broken, sabotaged encryption.
Doctorow’s blog is certainly worth reading in full, as it goes into much greater detail about why Theresa May’s proposals are technically illiterate.
My take
Terrorist attacks always, understandably, stir up a lot of emotion in the public domain. However, this emotion shouldn’t be used as collateral to further infringe on our civil liberties. Theresa May should be listening to the experts, almost all of which have unanimously said that the Internet is not the problem. Careful thought and trepidation needs to be used when it comes to privacy – whether that be online or in real life.
Image credit - Credit: Tom EvansRead more on: Data privacyDigital government and public servicesGoverning identity privacy and security

