
Ciuffini, Derrick and Godfrey
Once, in UK public sector tech-driven we had electronic government, e-gov. And things were good.
Then we decided that was inadequate, too. So we moved to t-gov, transformational government; and things were good.
Then we decided that was inadequate, so we have d-gov, digital government. And things are… not really that different, when you look around, as we still seem to be at pilot stage and the early days of a national journey to joined up government (Remember that one? ).
Spot the pattern here? Amanda Derrick OBE, Digital Transformation Consultant has. In fact, her fingerprints are over all this, too, as she’s been at the heart of a lot of the major e-gov projects of Central Government of the past 15 years, like the Identity Assurance Platform, Verify ), and indeed the Government Digital Service itself.
Looking back, she now says:
A lot of the messages we hear about the need to redesign services end-to-end, putting the citizen at their heart, via technology? They’re pretty much the same messages we were all hearing in 2006. A lot of the pictures seem the same, too.
Don’t die of shock, but you are allowed to not buy cloud if you don’t want to!
What’s gone wrong? Derrick is one of a growing band of committed public sector ICT professionals who are getting a little frustrated about the endless re-invention of wheels, here. What seems to be happening is that it’s a lot easier, and gives the speaker a lot more prominence, to talk Big Vision and Strategy – and a lot harder, and hence just not happening on the ground, to actually do the work. Derrick says:
We’re not building on the shoulders of giants, here. We don’t share the successes and learn the lessons. Yes, it’s great and valuable to see the need for this, and at the C-level, local government CIOs, CTOs, CDOs and CEOs, too, do agree that digital is the best way forward, using cloud to ‘de-silo’ everything.
But what we’re not doing enough of is celebrating the practical effort and projects of the implementers and more mid-level people.
It’s a pretty withering observation. It’s one that goes to a big problem with the entire UK G-Cloud project, in fact; poor, apparently structurally so, communication.
Sure, sites like diginomica cover the subject, in depth, and there is a stream of positive propaganda from Derrick’s partial brainchild GDS. But little of it seems to be sticking where it matters – the target buyer, and presumed main beneficiary of all this effort to do some Business Process Re-engineering (and hey, remember that one?) – the customer, the procurement teams in Whitehall, the Town Hall, the NHS Trust and the Police and Emergency Services sites.
Not everyone is as bothered about changing fashion, of course. Tonino Ciuffini, Head of Information Assets, Warwickshire County Council is cheerfully agnostic when it comes to terminology for what he’s trying to do:
I don’t focus on ‘cloud.’ It all started for us with shared services – I just see cloud as the ultimate shared service, to be honest. Cloud isn’t always the answer, actually, nor is technology the best place to even start. We’ve got some excellent deals recently by going on-premise, in fact, as vendors are looking to get rid of their old stock as they move to cloud.
You need to step back and ask what the business challenge the Council needs to solve, first.
Don’t lose focus on why we are using IT in the first place
Yes – but what are the challenges? Why are we doing all this? It’s clear that for a CIO in a commercial firm, cloud – or Open Source – is to cut costs. And the Chief Executive or Local Authority Finance Director certainly does want to hear about using IT to cut their bills and get sparse funding go further.
But practitioners like Derrick and Ciuffini say that it’s not so clear cut for them, as the former stresses:
Cut costs, yes. But outcomes matter an awful lot in local government. Cloud or digital by default isn’t the right answer if it isn’t going to help deliver what we’re really for – a better public service. What’s the main pain point for the organization?
A case in point in how cloud can help do something very useful that doesn’t straightaway shout ‘cost cutting’, is using it as a medium to encourage sharing of data between organizations, she says. That is becoming increasingly important as health and social care is integrated, for example.
Another UK pubsec IT leader, Richard Godfrey, Former Assistant Director: Digital, Peterborough City Council but who has since jumped ship to work for a cloud vendor,  says that in fact, cost is not the best lens to start looking at any IT work in the sector. As he points out:
My IT budget was about £6 million. The plans we put in place actually call for a 10% short-term increase in expenditure. But social care is a £77 million line item at Peterborough… and we are looking to get major savings through technology in that area. In five years, I’d see the IT budget down to 50% of what it is now, thanks to cloud – but with big savings right across the organisation as a result of that up-front extra spend.
My take
Derrick’s right. We have spent long enough talking up the need to start this journey. Let’s get on with it, implementing the kind of sensible work people like Ciuffini and Godfrey are doing. So we agree that we need fewer slogans now and more of this:
UK local government is a very mixed environment, from big County Councils to tiny District ones. We need more guidance around digital to help everyone, all down the hierarchy, so more case studies need to be generated, with real figures.
We need more practical guidance, even step-by-step guides. let’s have less vision and more celebration of the implementers and doers and show they are valued.
It’s time to walk the walk and not just talk the talk.
Hear hear.
Read more on: Digital government and public servicesG-Cloud and the Digital MarketplaceLocal

