
On advice from Jon Reed, I’m revisiting Diigo as I search for fresh ways to manage the Juicy Morsels section of the digiDaily.
Juicy Morsels are links to content I discover during the day as I wander around the Interwebs that I think might be interesting for one reason or another. I annotate them as reminders of why they’re interesting, sometimes including quotes, other times simply adding a note.
If you don’t already get the Daily – which in itself is an anachronism because it is usually published Monday to Thursday based on what readers tell us they want, then please consider subscribing here.
Anyhoo, to my surprise, I’d already got an account with Diigo, but the last time I used it was late 2008.
There were over 1,400 entries most of which are redundant but as I went through the mass deletion process, I found a handful of stories that are relevant today for various reasons. Either the content continues to resonate or some of the stuff was flat out but hilariously wrong.
So, for your Friday pleasure, I proudly present my own collection of Best of the Rest Hits & Misses from October 2008, the last time I used Diigo before the current incarnation. I include my original terse notes, updated for today’s environment.
Be aware that a few of the links are dead but heh…if you are intrigued then I’m sure the Wayback Machine will be your next BFF.
2008 goodies

Calif County Accuses Lehman Executives, Auditor Of Fraud In Suit 
As memory serves, they all pretty much got away with it.
Rough Type: Nicholas Carr’s Blog: Zuckerberg’s Second Law 
“Shall no fart pass without a tweet? – is the punchline. The rest is worth a read as well.” Except the actual post can no longer be found from this link but I just loved that punchline. 
Seth’s Blog: A friend in need 
“Your customers and employees and investors will remember how you treated them when times were tough, when they needed a break, when a little support meant everything. No one in particular will remember how you acted during the boom times” – Words to live by then, today and tomorrow. 
thingamy: Contrarian or not? A consensus that consensus is wrong. 
“When all around are saying…Sig comes along and makes you go ‘uh?’ He’s right of course. But then contrarians with reason usually are…until they’re proven wrong.” And sometimes what they say lives much longer than we think.
Five Things About SAP’s Strategy That You Need to Know – CIO.com – Business Technology Leadership 
“For anyone reviewing their SAP strategy, this is a good introduction. Don’t forget the maintenance cost and lock-in.” Was I saying that back in 2008? Sheesh. Still true.
Twitter developer claims the ‘the internet is built wrong’ | Negative Approach – CNET News 
“If you’re a follower of micromessaging then this is a biting piece. The poll predicting Twitter’s disappearance is right on.” Ummm…didn’t happen although many wish it had. 
A Software Insiders Point of View: Tuesday’s Tip: SaaS – Integration Advice 
“Provided it all gets easier then it all makes sense. Provided…” Guess what? We’re still sayin’ it.
MacBook Pro Tradeoffs | Venture Chronicles 
“Battery life (sigh)That’s a bummer. OK – so no new MBP for me.” And like a muppet, I am still saying the same thing, three MBPs later.

Enjoy.
Image credit - Photo by Doug Kelley on UnsplashDisclosure - SAP is a premier partner at the time of writingRead more on: Cloud ERP financials and supply chainCustomer service managementRegulationSocial 