
Content-driven experiences. I like that phrase because it explains what the two most important things are in customer experience today: content and experience. Although many marketers understand this on a basic level, they still don’t connect the two in the best ways that support a customer’s needs. But what are the best ways exactly?
Creating content-driven experiences
I watched a short webinar (they called it a “webinine”) by Randy Frisch, CMO and co-founder at Uberflip and Jay Baer, President at Convince and Convert, called 4 Marketing Strategies that Bring Your Content to Life. They talked about the vast amount of content that marketers create today and how much of that content isn’t used.
Sure you may post it to your blog once or drop it in your resources section on your website. And you might do some social posts to let people know it’s there, but then what? For many, that’s the million dollar question. You’ve created all this content (and some of it is pretty darn good), but it just sits there waiting for someone to dig through it all and find what they are looking for.
Frisch and Baer outline four strategies: inbound, demand generation, ABM and sales enablement that all benefit greatly from rethinking how you provide content within your customer experiences. For example, for demand generation, instead of creating a campaign that drives prospects to a single content asset, consider driving them to a page that offers a series of related content assets, with the primary asset predominant in the view.
Frisch pointed out research that says a prospect will consume at least seven pieces of content before they make a decision or come to the company asking for more information. So why only show them one (“one and done”)? Offer them more content, stay high level, go deeper, make the experience meaningful for that specific audience. Give them the information they need, don’t make them go looking for it.
With ABM, you create an experience that is like the demand gen example, except it’s a 1-1 content experience, with the content very focused on that account’s challenges or issues and opportunities. And with sales enablement, flip the ABM approach to your salespeople, giving them a content experience that includes all the content they can send their prospects when working an account.
I can’t remember the number of times a salesperson has asked me where a piece of content is located? Or if we have a case study in this market or any whitepapers related to this market. Make it easy for Sales to leverage all that great content you’ve developed for the customer journey. And I’ll note here – you can do the same thing for your service and support reps.
Delivering the right content experiences
Frisch said people aren’t looking for content for the sake of reading content. They are looking for content to solve problems. So why do websites only offer a resource section that simply dumps all the content they have created into a big vat for people to search through? And how do you know that a visitor who consumes one piece of content is better than one who consumes seven?
We have to rethink how we connect our prospects and customers with the content they need to make decisions, stay informed or use our products.
Another webinar I watched recently from CMI and LookBookHQ (now PathFactory) said that clicks don’t matter – they all look the same. And because they all look the same, we treat all leads the same way. VP of Marketing at PathFactory, Elle Woulfe, introduced the idea of intelligent content delivery.
Woulfe talked about the need to spot buyers who actually consume the content for real (meaning they interacted with it for more than a couple of seconds). If you recognize someone is spending a lot of time with a piece of content, you can then figure out the next best piece of content to deliver to them in session. This is another way to get past that “one and done” content experience.
She also pointed out that you will create different experiences for those who consume a lot of content in a fast period (a “content binger”) to someone who looks at only one piece.
Changing the way we do content analytics
Delivering better content-driven experiences is important. But how do you know which pieces of content are the right ones to provide? You need content analytics. You can track clicks and downloads, but these don’t tell you what you need to know – did the content do what you intended it to do?
You can track page views on a website, and clickstream analysis will help you understand where a visitor came from and where they went next, giving some insights into the visitor’s content consumption journey. There are even tools that will help you understand how long someone spent reading an asset. But we’re missing the bigger picture.
One piece of content is used (or should be used) across multiple locations. On the website, a mobile app, another website, delivered via email to a customer, in a support portal and the list goes on. The same content could be used in a chatbot, a video, a podcast, infographic, a community forum on a support portal.
If we want to know how well a content asset is performing to understand if it’s meeting the needs of our customers, we need to understand that performance everywhere the content is used. And we don’t do that for a couple of reasons, according to Cruce Saunders, founder of [A], a consultancy that delivers content intelligence services.
First, we don’t create our content the right way. We create copies of content and cut and paste it all over the place. When we cut and paste, we lose the ability to look at a piece of content holistically.
Second, we don’t look at content use across the organization. Marketing thinks about marketing content, support thinks about support content, sales thinks about Sales and so on. There is some overlap happening between the divisions, but we still haven’t been able to build that complete view of the customer experience, from pre-acquisition all the through to, and including, retention and loyalty. Sometimes, we don’t even have that cohesive view within a single department (ahem – marketing). And because we don’t have the cross-organization view, we can’t see how a content asset actually performs.
Saunders pointed out that we need asset level analytics that will tell us how a content asset performs wherever it is used in the customer experience. Once we have that perspective, and we know how much the asset costs to create, we can determine the effectiveness and efficiency of that asset.
Three things drive the best customer experiences. A central focus on the customer. An understanding of the content needed to support the customer in their journey. The delivery of that content experience the best way possible. What do you think? Is the struggle to create great content-driven experiences happening in your company?
Image credit - Thinking. © BillionPhotos.com - Fotolia.comRead more on: Analytics planning and data analysisContent marketingCRM and customer experienceDigital and content marketing 