
The travel industry was one of the first examples of digital disruption out there, with the once familiar high street travel agent supplanted by online aggregators of great offers on low-cost vacations and hotels. 
That said there are still examples of the traditional agency out there, now adapting its business model to tackle the digital competition. One such exemplar is Thomas Cook, whose recent financial statement provides a telling insight into the Group’s priorities. 
Over the past year, the company has spent some £7 million upgrading and improving its offline stores. At the same time, it’s laid out over ten times that amount – £73 million – on IT and digital. That’s money well spent, it seems, as web sales now account for 43% of total revenues, 3% up year-on-year and expected to keep on rising. 
CEO Peter Fankhauser says this has important cost-efficiencies attached: 

This time last year, I [said] we are aiming to achieve up to £30 million of EBIT  (Earnings Before Interest and Tax0 benefits from our web and omni-channel initiatives by 2018. In 2016 alone, our growth in web share together with efficiencies in our retail network, have meant we’ve achieved £17 million of this target.

But beyond this, the IT and digital spend is about driving a better relationship with the customer. The company has recently merged its digital and group marketing functions, overseen by a new Chief Marketing and Digital Officer role with the aim of boosting Thomas Cook’s use of social and digital in its campaigns and creating more personalized and targeted offers to prospective holidaymakers. 
It’s all about getting the right deal to the right customer at the right time, says Fankhauser, and:

developing close and direct customer contact, whether online, by phone, in store, or in destination. This will help us build strong relationships, improve loyalty and provide more personalized services.
The customer is at the heart of our strategy for growth. We know that happier customers are more likely to stay loyal to Thomas Cook and to recommend us to others. This will lead to a top-line growth, lower customer acquisition costs and greater shareholder value. 
We view that focus on the customer in two ways: the care we provide, which we believe sets us apart from the competition; and the direct contact we are building with customers whenever and however they want to engage with us. This absolute focus on the customer shapes the approach that we take throughout the business, most importantly in the holidays we sell.

Thomas Cook has three promises for its customers, says Fankhauser, namely quality, service and reliability: 

Through these promises, we make sure we see things from the customers’ point of view; we put ourselves in their shoes. We like to say that we wear our customers’ flip-flops. 

IT spend
This has resulted in more investment in CRM and customer management systems, he adds:

We have also introduced new software and processes to help us better manage the customer relationship throughout their journey with Thomas Cook. In the event that there is a problem, we aim to handle it better, with a target to resolve 80% of issues before customers return home from holiday.

There’s also been a rollout of new ‘companion’ apps to keep in touch with holidaymakers during their vacations: 

Launched in the UK, Germany and Northern Europe, these apps allow customers to manage their bookings, view information about their holiday and add ancillaries and excursions all with their smartphones. So far these apps have been downloaded 1.3 million times and are accounting for a growing revenue stream of bookings and ancillary income.

Last year the firm started tracking its Net Promotor Score (NPS) as a KPI to measure the effectiveness of these investments.. The results have been promising so far, says Fankhauser: 

We have made huge strides in just one year. Overall NPS for the Group rose by six points this summer. Progress in our own-brand hotels was higher, with NPS up seven points; and in our airlines, NPS was up four points.
Our customer initiatives have also given our people something to really get behind. Our recent staff survey showed an employee engagements score of 74%, up 2 percentage points on last year, something I’m particularly proud of. Thomas Cook feels a very different business to a year ago. 

My take
Thomas Cook has had some tough years of late and even in its most recent quarter, profits and revenues dropped. But Fankhauser’s identification of the importance of growing customer satisfaction is a sound strategy. As he notes: 

Our strategy is clear: to deliver sustainable growth by giving our customers great holidays which inspire them to come back to Thomas Cook and recommend us to their family and friends. This renewed focus on quality and service delivered a six-point increase in customer satisfaction in summer 2016 telling us that the changes we’re making are having an impact where it matters most.

Read more on: CRM and customer experienceDigital and content marketingDigital enterprise in the real worldMobileRetail e-commerce and the omni-channel 