

Marc Benioff
After all the fuss last week about Salesforce supposedly hiring bankers to deal with acquisition offers, potential buyers seem to be falling over themselves to rule themselves out of the running.
While everyone was pitching in with their views on Oracle as the prime candidate, Bloomberg, which first broke the bankers story, followed up on its claims by announcing that SAP and Salesforce had discussed a potential acquistion of the latter last year.
Bloomberg claimed that Salesforce CEO Marc Benioff initiated this by phoning SAP CEO Bill McDermott before SAP reported quarterly earnings in April 2014.
Salesforce has made no comment on this, but SAP’s been quick to shoot down the idea, stating:

There is no truth whatsoever to the suggestion SAP is considering or ever did consider acquiring Salesforce.

And in a somewhat sniffy follow-on, the firm’s spokesperson added:

Any such suggestion misses the point that salesforce automation is a 20th century solution to 21st century business opportunities.

Meanwhile over at Oracle, CEO Safra Catz also seemed to put clear water between her company and the takeover rumor.
But unlike SAP,  Catz fell short of actually denying that Oracle is in play here despite some rather over-excited headlines to that effect. What she actually said was:

We never comment on these kinds of thing. We’ve never had a deal leak.

There are various ways to interpret that.

Oracle isn’t in play.
Oracle is in play, but trying to keep a lid on the story.
It suits Oracle down to the ground to have rumours and speculation about Salesforce’s fate swirling around in the market.

Safra Catz
Catz certainly seemed keen on the idea that Salesforce might be bought by the likes of Microsoft:

If Salesforce is acquired by someone else, it’s probably good for us, at least in the short term, because it would cause a lot of disruption in the market.
I would view that as something that would be helpful to us especially in the short or medium term, dependent on who it was.

She did address one bit of speculation head-on: the idea that Benioff would become Larry Ellison’s heir apparent. Catz insisted that there’s not going to be a vacancy to be filled any time soon:

I personally don’t believe he’s ever retiring. There is no near-term or even medium-term scenario of him retiring. I suspect that I will retire before him.

Over at Microsoft…
Meanwhile analysts at Citigroup are among those now backing Microsoft to acquire Salesforce. Citigroup analyst Walter H. Pritchard told investors:

If Salesforce is in play, Microsoft could be the most likely suitor.
Such an acquisition would make Microsoft newly relevant to developers, in our view, given the importance of CRM in the front-end application ecosystem.

Microsoft CEO Satya Nadella said last week that the firm aims to generate annual revenues of $20 billion by 2018 from cloud business. To do so, the company would have to triple triple its cloud revenues over the next 3 years.
It could try to do that organically. Or it could buy its way to that target. Citigroup’s Pritchard noted:

Acquiring [Salesforce] would potentially put it in a clear position as #1 enterprise cloud company and add a second leading SaaS franchise (to Office 365).

For his part, Benioff got Microsoft conspiracy theorists into a tizz by tweeting from the firm’s Build conference in San Francisco last week:

Meanwhile the real winner remains the Salesforce stock price, with analyst firm Brean Capital noting:

CRM is now the most expensive SaaS stock we cover.

My take

SAP said a definite no.
Oracle did not say a definite no.
Microsoft’s said nothing at all on the subject.
We’re not much further forward.


Read more on: Cloud platforms - infrastructure and architectureCRM and customer experience 