
Last week, online gossip rag Gawker exposed the shocking news that highly valued ride service Uber is losing money. Its story was greeted by a chorus of yawns. Of course Uber is losing money, as all hot cloud startups do. Those who are posting profits are the ones doing something wrong.
What matters is not whether a company is showing a loss, so much as whether its revenue growth and funding sources allow it to manage those losses at a sustainable level. We’ve seen this again and again in the SaaS and cloud industry over the past decade or more.
Where a start-up is forging ahead in a large addressable market, it makes sense to invest in sales, marketing and product development to maximize its penetration of that market. Slowing the pace of growth to report a profit is simply squandering opportunity that others will seize instead.
Market dominance
Geoffrey Moore showed a long time ago why rapid growth is important for innovative products. It’s all about seizing market dominance so that buyers will choose your product or service over the also-rans in the market.
With SaaS and cloud, growing fast also brings the economies of scale that come from high volumes. For the likes of Uber, which makes its money by connecting buyers and sellers, reaching scale becomes even more important to its ultimate success. It must do everything in its power to ensure the reach of its network outclasses all rivals.
So while loss-making startups that have never posted a profit are an easy target for knocking copy — especially if they’re highly watched darlings of Silicon Valley — the fact is they’re merely following a well-established pattern that has previously proven successful for the likes of Amazon, Salesforce and many others.
But that doesn’t mean that every startup that’s making a loss is on track to make it big. While fast-growing success stories tend to make eye-watering losses in the early years, so do high-speed flame-outs. How to tell who’s destined for glory and who’s on a hiding to nothing? Based on what I’ve seen over the past two decades of closely watching the winners and losers in the SaaS and cloud business, here are three red flags to watch out for.
1. Lavish spending
Some of the most successful entrepreneurs — and the businesses they lead — are careful spenders. Even though they’ll risk huge sums on a calculated strategy, they like to see a well-argued business case for any expense, however small.
Be wary therefore of startups that appear to be spending on items that don’t have a clear business justification. The warning signs include expensively furnished headquarters, costly giveaways to entice prospects, conspicuous marketing without a well-defined target audience, or early hiring of high-paid executives who lack a clear role.
In Silicon Valley, it can be difficult sometimes with spending on staff to distinguish between unnecessary fripperies and essential items. Recruiting the best people may mean paying high salaries as well as kitting out the office with items that would look like luxuries in more conventional businesses. It can also involve significant levels of stock-based compensation that may disguise the true cost of staff.
Opinions differ on the specific question of what is the right level of spending to acquire and retain a growing customer base.
A company like Salesforce will argue that the large outlay required to land a high-value enterprise contract is worth it when you measure the long-term returns. But as Zoho’s frugal CEO told me earlier this year, the danger is that high spending becomes too much of a habit: “Your culture intrinsically changes and you cannot get back to the mindset of actually making money or being prudent.”
2. In search of a business model
Some markets are considered so hugely valuable that building scale is prioritized over building revenues. With sufficient venture funding, this approach can sustain a startup far longer than is justified by its business fundamentals — in the case of Twitter it has even carried the company through an IPO.
This is all driven by the philosophy of building network scale, but without the inconvenience of first pausing to consider where, when or how the venture will extract value from the network. The theory is that, once dominance has been achieved, it will become self-evident where the value lies.
In practice, a management that has avoided ever thinking about how it might earn money as it nurtured its free-of-charge service to massive scale has squandered any opportunity it might have had to test out potential revenue streams on the way up. By the time the network has reached dominant scale, its participants have grown used to extracting its benefits without having to pay, and any attempt to retrospectively change the rules to start clawing back value meets with uproar.
Even when a venture does achieve significant revenues, be wary when they are built on easy money and trend-following. Y Combinator co-founder Paul Graham once wrote of his experience of Yahoo!’s early success, describing the banner advertising of the dot-com days as a “de facto Ponzi scheme:”
Investors were excited about the Internet. One reason they were excited was Yahoo’s revenue growth. So they invested in new Internet startups. The startups then used the money to buy ads on Yahoo to get traffic. Which caused yet more revenue growth for Yahoo, and further convinced investors the Internet was worth investing in.
As Yahoo discovered, those revenues can vanish as quickly as they first appear. More recently, we’ve seen once-trendy Groupon discover how difficult it is to sustain interest from partners and consumers in its discount promotions model. And while Facebook’s financials appear to be on a sounder foundation than Twitter’s, much of the spending on social media is still based as much on faith in its effectiveness as on proven utility. Those revenues could still vanish in an economic downturn or a switch in crowd behavior.
3. Overfunding
Uber’s Achilles’ heel is its extreme valuation, now said to be in excess of $50 billion in the wake of its latest rumored $1 billion funding round. As lampooned in the opening episode of season two of HBO’s Silicon Valley sitcom, raising too much money sets expectations that are often difficult to fulfil. If the valuation treadmill reverses direction, the spectre looms of restructuring or outright collapse.
But once a venture survives past IPO, investors begin to be at the mercy of the markets, and their fate begins to detach from the fate of the corporation itself. The values of stocks can go up or down without affecting the solvency of the business itself, provided it has enough finance to fund its operations. This is where the ability to generate real-world revenues comes into play. So long as the burn rate can be controlled or eliminated, the views of investors become immaterial, unless they can engineer a boardroom coup.
Debt is the other warning flag to watch out for in a fast-growing business, as Zirtual has learned to its cost. While equity investors have committed their funds with no turning back, creditors can choose to call in their loans. It’s tempting for the founding management of a startup to opt for debt as a means of financing growth without diluting their ownership. But they must be careful not to get into a position where they can’t service the debt.
Again, this comes back to realistic, sustainable revenue. SaaS ventures with a solid contract book can turn to specialist lenders to borrow against that future revenue. It’s not cheap, but it’s a valid means of funding the growth needed to get to scale faster, without giving up control to venture investors.
My take
The key to survival in any of these scenarios is having a durable revenue stream. Uber is still a risky play, and its reliance on paying drivers as contractors rather than as employees is a big risk exposure to its profit margins. But it earns real revenues from real-world activities — people need rides and expect to pay for them. Whereas it’s moot whether corporations will always pay for the ability to post messages in the social media streams of Facebook users.
In the end, it’s all about judgement. There’s no such thing as a risk-free risk. If you want to profit from investments, you have to stick your neck out and put your money on the line. But if you look out for these three red flags, at least you’ll be able to make a more informed judgement about the prospects for loss-making startups.
Disclosure: Salesforce is a diginomica premier partner.
Image credit: Dollar bills in waste disposer © Amanda Faulkner – Fotolia.com.
Read more on: Cloud platforms - infrastructure and architecture 