
It’s been a difficult summer at ThyssenKrupp. Following a fierce boardroom battle over the the €41.5 billion German industrial group’s future direction, the company lost both its CEO and its chairman last month.
That has led to speculation that the wide-ranging group – a manufacturer of elevators, submarines, food packaging, factory equipment, steel and more – could now be broken up. In fact, that’s what some investors are demanding.
A potential break-up would almost certainly include ThyssenKrupp’s cash-cow elevator business, its largest in terms of employee numbers and easily its most profitable. In particular, rumours have resurfaced of talks between ThyssenKrupp and Finnish rival Kone, regarding a merger of their respective elevator businesses.
Whatever the future direction for ThyssenKrupp Elevators, it will bring with it some respectable progress on digital transformation. It has been working hard at using data from sensors, combined with analytics, in a big push for predictive analytics, as has competitor Kone.
Breakdown mayhem
That’s important when you start to consider the mayhem caused by delays and service outages among malfunctioning elevators worldwide, says ThyssenKrupp Elevator’s head of digital transformation Hyun-Shin Cho. An elevator might be expected to break down, on average, four times per year, he reckons. If you consider the average time each breakdown takes to get fixed, and extrapolate that to the combined 12 million elevators in operation globally,
… that’s 190 million hours of downtime each year – something like 216 centuries.
These calculations may be a bit fanciful, but it’s clear that elevator downtime is an issue that needs fixing. With that in mind, ThyssenKrupp has now rolled out its Max system to around 120,000 of its elevators already in the field since its launch in 2015, says Cho.
Max is based on Microsoft’s Azure cloud. Each elevator is fitted with a custom-designed hardware device, the Max Box, for which connectivity is provided by Vodafone. This collects real-time machine data from sensors and systems in elevators and sends it to Max, which calculates the remaining lifetime of key components in order to determine which parts will require maintenance and when. In this way, it flags repair issues before they occur.
Two-path data model
Data typically takes two paths on its journey into Max, Cho explains:

There is a ‘hot’ path and this for real-time analytics. As data arrives in the cloud, it is analysed on the spot, looking for patterns and specific signals that flag up an issue. It’s basically for creating active alerts, which are despatched immediately to our back-end systems to raise a ticket for a technician on their mobile device. Since Max has already analysed the situation, it is able to give some indication of the probable cause of the failure, allowing the technician to decide what spare parts will be needed for the job.
The second path is for predictive maintenance. We collect all the data and combine it with ERP and CRM data and use this data to train our models and periodically score individual elevators against the models that we’ve trained on historic data. In this way, we can predict which elevators have a high probability of failure. Again, a technician can be sent out or the elevator unit can be flagged, so that next time the technician is performing routine preventive maintenance work, they can take a look at the issue that the predictive algorithms flagged for us.

According to Cho, the machine learning-based predictive models on which Max is based have been improving as more data is collected and the company reckons that Max reduces downtime by up to 50 percent.
Real-time insights
More recently, a customer service portal has been added to the system, giving building managers access to real-time information about their elevators’ performance, so that they can coordinate more timely interventions with ThyssenKrupp’s maintenance engineers, who make up around half of the division’s 50,000 employees.
Wider uncertainty in the ThyssenKrupp group seems unlikely to impact the rollout of Max, given its benefits for the Elevator group and its customers. Says Cho:
We’ve got 1.2 million assets [elevators and escalators] out there in the world, so yes, there’s still some way to go. Right now, we’ve retrofitted about 10 percent of the installed base and new elevators obviously leave the factory with the Max Box installed. But we’re ambitious and the goal is to have Max touch the majority of ThyssenKrupp elevators within the next few years.
Image credit - Via pixabay Read more on: Analytics planning and data analysisDigital enterprise in the real worldUse cases 