
As with every new technology that is hyped to the point of flagellation, Blockchain is currently the potential answer to anything and everything, including all the future things that none of us has thought of yet. And as with every other new technology, Blockchain’s reality is likely to be significantly less all-encompassing.
For a start, one of the key issues is that there are no real standards yet, and every company that is jumping on the bandwagon is, in practice, designing its own bandwagon. It always amazes me that differentiation is seen as one of the hallmarks of innovation in the tech industry, whereas it is usually one of the greatest roadblocks on the road to real innovation – its application in, and by, the real world.
It was therefore no surprise to learn, at last week’s Tibco NOW conference in Las Vegas, that the company was pushing itself forward as a player in the Blockchain arena. After all, the key objective of Blockchain is to create highly secure, immutably ascribable records and management of transactions of business data between between individuals or businesses acting or working together. That type of data integration is right in Tibco’s balliwick.
But it was a bit more of a surprise to learn that at least part of its approach is to investigate ways in which some of the technology’s real-world weaknesses might be resolved. The company’s new Global Chief Technology Officer Nelson Petracek announced during a conference keynote that one of the new projects being launched as part of the new Tibco Labs service, was to be Project Dovetail.
This was hinged around the notion that it should at least be possible to create an environment where developers working with Blockchain should be able to build an application once, and have it run in any Blockchain environment without re-writing. In practice, as Petracek told the audience, the start point is slightly less ambitious, targeting just one task – the writing of smart contracts – together with just two versions of Blockchain.
Is this a Blockchain bridge I see before me?
But as Petracek told me in a post-keynote interview, this is also very much an open source project, and if it works as well as he expects it to he also expects the open source community to join in by developing implementations that fit with other Blockchain versions and other tasks that can follow the same approach:
We’ve got that far with a handful of frameworks. Obviously, there’s hundreds of them, so we’re not going to support them all. That’s why the idea is to make it open source. If people have their own blockchain framework that they want to layer this on top of, they just have to write that bridge.
He is keen not to fall in the trap of making outrageous claims and wants to be clear that they only expect to get a certain percentage of the way along this road. Each framework is going to offer certain capabilities and extensions that don’t translate into another framework at all. So the core goal for now is to create an environment that is very extensible.
The result so far is a plug-in activity model where users can plug in their own activity and generate a generic model that can be moved from one framework to the next. The will still be a need to tailor for all the proprietary activities, but he sees that as a core role for the open source community as an individual user’s specific issues go beyond the responsibilities the Labs can take on.
To this end, though Project Dovetail is not yet available on GitHub, it most certainly will be in the near future. Right now it only works with two versions of Blockchain, R3 and HyperLedger, said Petracek:
We picked those two because they’re two very common ones in the industry and they’re about as different as you’re going to get. R3 is not necessarily a blockchain and traditional definition of a blockchain fabric is much closer, although it’s more geared towards being an enterprise blockchain. But I can take a smart contract authored in Dovetail and push it to R3 and it’ll run. I can in turn push it to HyperLedger fabric and it’ll run.
Petracek is well aware that this is very early days for notions of bridges existing between different variants of Blockchain. But he is also aware of the need for them, particularly in areas such as financial management where banks and other organisations really need a standardised Blockchain environment across of all them if they are to manage trades such as inter-currency movements between them effectively.
In this particular sector Blockchain also has competition from an alternate solution, the Interledger Protocol, which approaches the issue by using a variant of IP to allow different ledgers to interoperate together, whereas Blockchain sets out to build a single, distributed ledger between the individual parties. It seems likely that an Interledger connecting different blockchains may be the solution here, reducing the need for blockchains to interoperate directly.
He does see more scope that this might be required in areas such as healthcare, particularly in the USA. Given the complex way US healthcare can be managed, it is quite possible that there is a need for smart contracts, and other transaction documents, to be passed around between different blockchain networks.
Abstractions that lead to libraries of templates
With Dovetail the original premise was first make it easier and create smart contracts, which is hard to do today. The second part of it is was making a generic framework through which smart contracts need be written only once. So they have already started to create a level of abstraction away from the actual code:
And then we said it would be interesting to have a library of smart contract templates by vertical market sectors. So I could have healthcare templates, I could pick another industry’s supply chain, I could get some subset of a business problem and create a set of templates. And because our language is very graphical, and is now built on the rules embedded in the company’s Flogo micro-services integration tools, not only do I have flow-oriented Blockchain smart contract constructs, I also have ruled turn constructs automatically.
It’s kind of easy to have a library of these things. And with open source, people can pull the library down and use a template as a starter to get going to write their smart contract. You can have full-on industry standard templates that are just used. But that is way down road.
Other areas of `blue sky’ being painted in at Tibco Labs is the combination of Blockchain smart contracts and another Labs Project, AuditSafe. He sees real value coming from this for users that participate in Blockchain ledgers and need to run a node because they get better transparency and visibility into the transactions that are on the audit trail. They can then participate in the consensus and the creation of the transactions. But they can then use Dovetail to create some smart contracts developed against that audit trail.
Now they can have business logic embedded in their node, running on their site as part of the blockchain network, and running transactions that are using smart contracts against those transactions:
That’s where we would want to go with it. Step one is to trial it and get it out there as a typical Labs project, to see what people think and go from there.
Further out still, and still on some long term `wish list’ of possibilities, is the possibility that the extensible generic Dovetail activity model may grow into a wider, more flexible bridge between different Blockchain technologies, creating the ability to take inputs from one Blockchain and provide comparable, and secure, outputs for a different Blockchain. But that is still in the realm of ‘maybe’.
My take
Despite its many fans and numerous pilot projects, the suspicion is that it will be a while before Blockchain is remotely close to being ‘mainstream business tool’. And the general ‘gee whizzery’ that surrounds the technological aspects, almost for their own sake, may even slow down the innovations that will most certainly follow in its tracks in time.
So it is perhaps not surprising that one of the more interesting Blockchain developments of late has come from a company not known to be in the technology’s A-team of vendors. But what Tibco is doing here with Project Dovetail is trying to look at a more real world interpretation of what can be done with what Blockchain can do. They don’t know whether it will move things forward or not – the uptake from GitHub by the open source community will be one good guide.
But the company will surely learn much that is useful from the process, as will any third party that fancies getting involved. It will be a while, but this could mark the start of the shift for Blockchain from propeller-heads on pilot projects to the real world
Image credit - Blockchain concept digital chain 3D © sashkin - Fotolia.comRead more on: Cloud platforms - infrastructure and architectureInfrastructure 