
As Tibco’s CEO Murray Rode said at the start of his keynote presentation at the recent Tibco NOW conference in Berlin, the road to digital transformation for most businesses is not about how much money is spent on the process of digitalisation, but about how it is spent – and why.
Though the technology is obviously of crucial importance still, it is no longer the key driving force.
As a simple example, he referenced a survey the company recently undertook, which showed that, in the banking sector alone, that those companies which had not yet set out on a digital transformation path suffered a negative impact on revenues of around 35%. Those that had set off down that road, on the other hand, had seen revenue gains of around 45% on average:
Digital transformation gives businesses the ability to focus on customer experience first, and other good things follow from this. It gives them the ability to measure and monitor just about everything so that they know what is happening everywhere within their business. That, in turn, gives them the ability to use data as a fuel for the business.
This pushed the company in an interesting direction for its obviously self-centred event, in that it wasn’t particularly self-centred at all. Rather than focussing on the wonders of its technology – and to be fair Tibco does have more than its fair share of that available – the focus of the main keynotes was directed more at the experiences of its users.
Making millions of small bets
For example, Rode spoke of Melbourne airport which, perhaps surprisingly, now the fourth busiest airport in the world. It launched itself on a digital transformation journey that started out just looking at what happens during passenger journeys. The aim was to determine how to best use the resources at the airport to give passengers a good experience.
This led to the need to be more transparent and to give passengers as much information as possible,; which in turn has led to the interconnected monitoring and reporting of as many events within the airport as possible. The result, Rode suggested, i0s that Melbourne airport has turned itself into what is, in effect a small smart city.
The aim here is the same as with most businesses, to no longer make one big business ‘bet’ that is taken once in a while, and instead make an on-going series of small bets. And the developments in technology now make that possible.
Tibco now aims to provide customers with two things: the ability to create an environment of `interconnect everything’, together with augmented intelligence tools that together become what he called the connected intelligence cloud. That can then be delivered where, and in a form, that is appropriate to a customer’s needs, such as on premise, in the cloud, in a virtual private cloud, or in a hybrid cloud.
Several of the company’s customers were there to tell their stories and experiences themselves, with pride of place going to Matt Harris, the head of IT at Mercedes AMG Petronas, or as many might better know the company, Mercedes F1.
Mercedes recently formed a partnership with Tibco that is planned to run deeper into areas of in-depth decision making support than would expected from the type of relationship that often proliferates in F1, where money – and equipment is exchanged for the benefits of brand association. Here, the partnership is setting out to exploit Tibco’s technologies to provide decision support in both car technology health and efficiency, and in race strategy.
According to Harris, the key part of the Tibco relationship is set to be predictive work on decisions such as assessing critical car sub-systems for all-important will it/won’t it fail assessments. Here, the need is use machine learning and predictive analysis tools to remove the requirement to keep looking at all the data all the time; what he called getting rid of the data noise:
There is a need to be more clever with our data and to understand that the piece of paper printed out by the ERP system at 9am is probably useless at 9.01am.
Much of this work will be conducted at the Mercedes factory, but it will also have a `front office’ that travels to every race. This will have the side benefit of testing the equipment and software in the pressure cooker environment that is an F1 pit.
This will involve a regular 36-hour set up, working perfectly from at least Friday morning to Sunday afternoon, followed by a rapid – 6 hour – breakdown and packing process that has to be complete correctly otherwise the next set-up will go wrong. In addition it has to be able to work in the widely varying environments that the F1 series of races face, such as the heat, dust and sand of Bahrain through to the high humidity of Singapore.
One fascinating factor of the partnership is that Tibco will be adding a large element of human resource to Mercedes.
Harris told the keynote audience that his team will be working with a team of Tibco data scientists on some longer term projects, particularly in the area of work/fail analyses of complex subsystems such as gearboxes.
Tibco CEO Rode acknowledged that this was a new development for the company and one which might open up new business opportunities in consultancy and specialised `body shop’ services. At present its team of data scientists provide help and support to customers starting out on big data analytics, but the move by Mercedes has created an opportunity that Rode is now considering as a possible line of business in its own right.
This maps onto the latest developments from the company in the area of analytics and data science. This includes a new Insight Analytics Platform, for which the company tag line is `too many companies still working hard, not smarter’, the appearance of a Smart Spotfire Data Catalogue, and the arrival of Data Science as a Service, which would fit well with that `body shop’ idea. This would provide a single click contextual compute capability, transparently embedding predictive models. This uses open data science architectures.
The recent acquisition of Statistica also adds advanced analytics done by data scientists to the Tibco armoury. This brings data mining recipes that can be used by `citizen data scientists’, and has a complete, validated lifecycle management model. It also connects to open, algorithm marketplaces, and tools for IoT edge analytics.
An interview with Matt Harris about the Tibco/Mercedes AMG Petronas partnership and what is expected from it will follow soon.
Erwan Vezin, the Vice President of Enterprise Architecture at AccorHotels, told the delegates about how Tibco’s Integration Platform is now the centrepiece of a €225 million digital transformation programme that covers more than 4,000 hotels spread across 95 countries, providing some 600,000 individual rooms.
The company is on both an acquisition and partnership building campaign which current sees it adding one hotel that is new to its roster on average every 36 hours. Managing bookings across this global network was, therefore, becoming something of a logistical nightmare. This was only compounded by the fact that the company also partners with all the major online booking agencies, all of which have their own terms, conditions and margins that need to be accommodated.
Anything, meet anything else
Matt Quinn, Tibco’s long-standing CTO, told the audience that he now sees a diaspora of business logic, management and control – and the IT resources needed to provide it – out to the edges of business networks. Yet the core of the network – even if it is only as repository of the journals of record, still need to be contemporaneously maintained:
The need now is to fully address both. Businesses now need to connect anything to anything else, any device that they require, anywhere it happens to be. And the guiding principles for sourcing such resources are cloud first, ease of use and industrialisation.
He acknowledged that ease of use is often talked about but rarely achieved. But he suggested that Tibco’s new, fundamental design principle would make a difference here. This is a significant volte face away from the technology and towards the user, built around the notion of building virtual personae of the types of user businesses tend to have.
To make them as `real’ as possible, these are given names, and have reasonable back stories to help developers understand the type of person they are developing for. Staff even then `act out’ being that character to test processes and designs:
There is a need to cover off a broader spectrum of users. There are developers, obviously, but there is now also the office hero, that individual with the right mix of business and technical experience. And there are the centre of excellence specialists. So there is a redefinition of the elements and delivery alternatives such as self service and unified access. There is now a need to empower the whole organisation, for Digital Transformation has now become a team sport.
The company has also adopted Industrialisation models to help give users a full spectrum of deployment options so that anything can be anywhere. This comes from the ability to expose the integration and APIs, and the supply of opensource devOps tools to help bring together the different capabilities together as a whole.
Some of the company’s technology developments over the past year map onto these changes in approach, as Quinn pointed out:
The company has recognised the notion of users being on an individual journey to the cloud. So we have introduced Tibco Cloud Path, where users can sketch out their own journey to the cloud, whether that be lifting and shift applications, refactoring them or whatever.
This is a move towards using low code models of development, where the charting process then drives a largely automated development process where most of the common elements are known and pre-written.
My take
‘Soup to nuts’ seems pertinent here, for not only is Tibco working to fill in as many of the ‘courses’ as possible in this meal, it is, with factors such as Data Science as a Service, the use of personae in developing new tools and capabilities, and the appearance of low code models in building end user applications, it is also trying to make it as palatable and easy to swallow as it can.
Image credit - Mercedes F1Read more on: Analytics planning and data analysisCloud platforms - infrastructure and architecture 