
Hand arrange wood letters as Value word
Tibco recently splashed out to acquire Scribe Software and its cloud-based integration service that connects Software-as-a-Service (SaaS) applications and automates data flows.  It’s an interesting move, and not just because Scribe is already said to be used by some 10,000 businesses.
The more interesting aspect is that one of the stated reasons for Tibco making the acquisition is, I suspect, to be found in this statement from Rajeev Kozhikkattuthodi, Tibco’s Vice President of Product  Management and Strategy:
This acquisition enables Tibco Cloud Integration to better serve a broader set of needs and enter new market segments. We look forward to working closely with Scribe’s world-class partner ecosystem in pursuit of our mission to interconnect everything.
To me, this  suggests the company has spotted that the next stage of development in the delivery of cloud services will require an extensive and growing amount of work from the partner eco-systems of every one of the major vendors. The fundamental shift now is away from large soup-to-nuts applications that do just about every part of some major business or process task.
What we need now is CEVARs
In its place is coming an increasingly API-linked, multi-cloud world, every business will find they need to pull together services from a huge range of service providers.
Increasingly, the IP of the end user business will only be the original idea, what I call the  ‘wwe need to do this, but we need to do it that way’ moment. But that begs an important question: why spend time trying to engineer this when there are specialists with knowledge of both the technology and marketplace domains that can do it faster and better?
This is a model already well established in the IT business, especially since the birth of the PC and its off-spring server families. I argue that the Value-Added Reseller (VAR) will get a new lease of life with the cloud.
More than that,  the services VARs provide will be increasingly made up of ever smaller and more targeted micro-services, some of which will be part of the IP and expertise of the VARs. Most of them, however are likely to be pretty generic, off-the-shelf little apps, pulled together and linked by APIs to create tailored business services that specifically meet the needs of individual businesses.
Business users will then find these needs keep changing as markets and competition change around them. The vast majority of users won’t have the skills available to do this themselves, and neither will the big Cloud Service Providers, certainly across the spread of customers they will have.
There is then, I believe, a huge potential role for what we’ll call Cloud-Experienced VARs (CEVARs) to take over that role of integrating and re-integrating different applications and services for clients as their business operations grow, change or just die off.
The need will get bigger, for not only will individual user businesses have their own cloud environments, individual staff within those businesses will also have their own clouds. And while they will be able to manage the detail changes – drag and drop an icon or two on to their an on-screen workflow diagram – setting up services that cover that individual need yet unifies all users within a business environment will require some expertise.
What pushes this work towards the CEVAR community is the shortening of the time-to-cash that comes with the cloud. This all-but does away with the buy/build argument to my mind.
If a business can get a CEVAR to change its integration architecture for $100K in 2 months, so it is then earning $10k a week out of it straight out of the blocks, while still ramping that business at a good growth rate, that has to be a better option than building it. After all, that usually means starting by sending the IT people  on another new course to learn the required new tricks.
That investment in staff training or new hires – let alone the time that will take – will probably not map well onto the fact that many of these services may only have a useful life of a few months. A VAR that actually understands a business sector well will be a far move valuable business partner than the best head hunter of staff recruitment agency in the world.
In addition, developments in AI and machine-learning are starting to be delivered as integratable SaaS offerings, which makes them easy to exploit – so long as someone understands how to integrate them into what a business is already doing. (It will however be a while before AI is intelligent enough to work out what the user actually wants/needs to do and do the integration for them).
And here comes the ‘but’…
There is, of course, always a ‘but’ when it comes to such changes, and that statement by Kozhikkattuthodi suggests Tibco has such an issue in mind already. “Working closely with Scribe’s world-class partner ecosystem” can easily be taken as the fine words expected to appear in a press statement. But it could also mean, ‘This lot have some smarts about them’.
Time, of course, will tell, but when set against the evidence that emerged at the recent Pure Storage conference in San Francisco it has some loaded implications. That conference showed quite clearly that many members of the channel partner community have little concept about the opportunities coming up for them.
The two days of the customer sessions had Pure talking about integrating fast, parallel storage capabilities with technologies such as AI. This was met by a chorus of audience whoops, hollers and cheers. The customers got it.
The one day channel partners session – which is important to Pure as it sells 100% through the channel – the same information, plus data on their margins and advice on how they can build Practices based on Pure and their domain specialisms, the collective response was a very palpable ‘eh?’. The reselling partners showed no signs of getting it in terms of the opportunity facing them.
If one looks at Tibco’s stated plans with the Scribe acquisition, which center round the aim to ‘serve a broader set of needs and enter new market segments’, this says one thing to me:  the more the company achieves such goals, the more it will need a strong and proactive reseller partner community.
With the best will in the world, there is no way that Tibco can adequately service the needs of widely diverse market sectors.’ A good partner community will be vital.  But if just about every VAR cannot now make the step up to be one of my CEVARs, there is every chance that the ability to service customer needs will grind to a halt just as it is needed most.
My take
The big need over the next few years is for users to get access to an ever-finer degree of granularity in the services and functionality they need. The cloud + APIs open the door to millions of micro-services that can be integrated into billions of different operational solutions.
But until AI systems have developed to the point where they say to users ‘here is the new service you are going to need for this afternoon’s task’, it will be down to someone to actually pull it together. The likes of Tibco can provide the necessary tools, but they can’t take on that workload for every customer.
That leaves the field open for others, but they don’t yet seem to understand the need. Managed Service Providers should be a front runner, but all I hear of them is that many say the equivalent of: `I already have four customers on five-year contracts, why should I bother?’
The existing VAR community should be the best fit, but if they are unable or unwilling to grasp the nettle then the pace of development, innovation and growth of cloud services and digital transformation could well be stymied.
This may well need the major vendors to start serious educational schemes to help them understand the potential they are missing.
Image credit - Value © patpitchayaRead more on: Cloud platforms - infrastructure and architectureDevOps NoSQL and the open source stackMachine intelligence and AI 