
 
Neil Roy Chowdhury, one of Ticketmaster’s senior application engineers, took to the stage last week in London to describe how “life before Splunk wasn’t particularly pleasant” for the online ticket broker and entertainment company, because of poor insight into systems and company data.
Ticketmaster is the most popular online ticketing purchasing platform in the USA and the UK today, with 255 million user accounts worldwide and pulling in $16 billion in revenue a year.
And one of Ticketmaster’s biggest challenges is improving the customer experience for users when attempting to purchase tickets for extremely popular events – which the company calls ‘on-sale’ events – where demand is so high that a multi-date concert can sell out in minutes.
If a system failure occurs during one of these ‘on-sales’, customer opinion of the Ticketmaster brand may diminish, and the company’s reputation as the broker of choice may be impacted. Splunk is being used as a business-wide analytics tool to ensure that any problems during these events are resolved quickly and effectively.
Not only this but it is also helping to identify customer demand, allowing Ticketmaster to allocate more resources to popular events, boosting revenues.
Chordhury explained how it was difficult to address any problems during a high-demand on-sale prior to the implementation of Splunk. He said:

We take in a lot traffic and we have to transact at quite a large scale. Life before Splunk wasn’t particularly pleasant at Ticketmaster. I started off as a web operations analyst and it wasn’t the most fun thing to go out and trawl through logs. For our application stack we were maybe talking about 200-300 GBs of data that we would have to go through for an ‘on-sale’.
As a result it used to take so much time and developers didn’t really have much access, we didn’t have much insight into our web properties and it was very time consuming to troubleshoot our web issues.
Our direction as a company changed. We basically said that we wanted to move away from our old, ageing technology back-end and move towards a more modern service orientated architecture. So what we were trying to do was trying to promote Splunk to our developers. That went really well.
Through word of mouth and interesting use cases, we have moved on from our original use case, which was monitor performance, usage and availability of our website, to now being business analytics. So to have an idea of what the reservations and the customer demand on the website is and basically planning for high volume events.

Getting the necessary insight
Chowdhury explained that Ticketmaster’s vision is data democratisation. He wants Splunk to be used to enable visibility across the entire organisation. Chowdhury believes that Splunk is the best platform to do this, as it is capable of tapping into multiple data sources, creating dashboards and providing a holistic view.
That’s not to say that the platform hasn’t come without its challenges for Ticketmaster. Chowdhury said that after the initial iterations of the Splunk implementation, there was “quite a bit of clutter”. This meant reorganising so that there is now a Splunk app per Ticketmaster product, which allows developer-related knowledge to be specific and committed to certain apps. This makes it easier, according to Chowdhury, to self-serve analytics.
The other challenge was organising the 900 users of Splunk, so that the engineering team can better manage assets. This has partially been resolved by organising the users into two categories of ‘data-citizens’. One category is for producers, which are the developers, Qas, and those people in the organisation that are creating searches, dashboards and reports within Splunk. The other group are the consumers of the data, which are the product managers, the business analysts and the customer service reps.
Ticketmaster’s use of Splunk is significant. It ‘Splunks’ data from hundreds of applications, from over 10 different ticketing systems, across both Linux and Windows-based machines. It ingests approximately 2.1 terabytes of data a day into Splunk and has approximately 60 indexes. It is a business-wide analytics tool.
Chowdhury explained that one of the initial use cases from Splunk was simply to keep applications and operations running all the time, 24 hours a day, 365 days a year. It currently has 650 users globally that are using Splunk to monitor applications, to drill down and do troubleshooting on transactions.
However, Chowdhury has grander visions for the tool. He said:

What we really want to use Splunk for is to enable our customer service agents to field queries from ticket buyers that are not receiving their tickets, either by email or errors on the website itself. We want to reduce time to resolution here by putting mail logs into Splunk, creating an app for the customer service guys and enabling them to fix these issues, rather than someone in operations itself.

This is also particularly true of those high-demand, ‘on-sale’ events. Chowdhury said:

Before Splunk, most of our application territory was siloed across most environments. We really couldn’t correlate quick enough our high demand to sales. If an event sells out in 10 minutes, if something goes wrong, it can go horribly, horribly wrong. Using Splunk has helped us to drill down to those issues during our high demand on-sales and decrease scope of business disruptions.”

Chowdhury said that one user had emailed him since Splunk was introduced to the business and said that the tool had meant a “quantum leap” in terms of information available to him and that it allowed him to go to promoters and negotiate more ticketing sales, because of the analytics it brings and the reliability it has since introduced. Chowdhury said:

It also provides analytics to our product managers and business owners – the stuff they are really interested in is things like what was the response to new events, is the response here high enough so that we can create more dates at the same venue? Or more dates at different venues? Is one activity affecting our sales right now? What are people searching for and how are they hitting our website? How do you prepare for that?
If a customer is on your site, right then and there, you want to sell them tickets. If you can’t, it results in a lost sales opportunity for us. Splunk provides us with up to the minute information on ticket demand and really allows us to add new shows for artists at different venues and leads to more revenues for us.

One other critical problem that Splunk is currently helping Ticketmaster address is the issue of scouts using bots to buy up hundreds of tickets at a time and sell them on at a higher price on third-party platforms. This is a huge problem in the US and UK, where customers often struggle to get their hands on tickets at face-value, even if they are attempting to buy them when first put on sale. This is because the scouts use complex algorithms to make purchases from sites like Ticketmaster, across multiple made-up accounts at the same time. Chowdhury explained that Splunk is helping to turn this around. He said:

We feel that ticket broker automation hampers the fan experience. Bots hit our website, go in and block inventory from the end customers. But with Splunk we are able to detect any sort of anomalous activity and respond fairly quickly to those automation tactics.


Read more on: Analytics planning and data analysisUse cases 