
Marissa Mayer
We said last year that Yahoo! CEO Marissa Mayer would return from her brief maternity leave to face increased pressures back at the office.
It hasn’t taken long for that to turn out to be the case.
Yesterday activist investor Starboard Value LP fired off its most uncompromising shot over her bows to date, with what is tantamount to a call for her to step down.
While not mentioning Mayer specifically by name, Starboard calls for a wholesale change of senior management, as well as demanding the spinning-off or sale of the core internet business.
It points to a:
continued downward spiral of the operating and financial performance of Yahoo’s core search and display advertising businesses.
Over the past 12 months, Yahoo! shares have lost 35% as of this week.
Starboard has previously gone public with general criticism of Yahoo!’s strategic direction, but not called for a managerial ousting. This time it takes no prisoners, stating bluntly:
It appears that investors have lost all confidence in management. Dramatically different thinking is required, together with significant changes across all aspects of the business starting at the board level, and including executive leadership.
The activist investor adds that if the board doesn’t listen to the demands for change, then a proxy battle is likely to force a coup d’etat:
An election contest may very well be needed so that shareholders can replace a majority of the board.
Tick tock
For Mayer and her team, much now hangs on the latest plan to streamline the business and whether the board and shareholders back that. There will be more information on that later this month when Yahoo! reports its latest quarterly numbers, but reports are already circulating that this will include a 10% headcount reduction.
To date, Yahoo! Chairman Maynard Webb has publicly backed Mayer’s strategy, insisting that the board isn’t putting the core internet business up-for-sale. But he notably left himself some wiggle-room by adding the caveat that:
The board has a fiduciary duty to entertain any offers.
Starboard, which owns about 0.75% of Yahoo!, has been a long time critic of Mayer’s turnaround thinking and has been pushing to sell off the core business, as well as separation of the firm’s Asian assets, including stakes in Yahoo Japan and e-commerce firm Alibaba.
In December, Yahoo! shelved plans to spin off the Alibaba stake and said it would create a separate company that would house Yahoo’s Internet business and its stake in Yahoo Japan. This was because the firm woke up to the prospect of taking a big tax hit on its original plans for disposing of its Alibaba stake.
Earlier this week, Yahoo! killed off its Yahoo! Screen operation. The venture, which had created over a thousand hours of programming since its September 2013 launch, was launched to compete with YouTube, but in the event failed to win audiences in an age of Netflix and Amazon Prime.
A statement from the company tried to pitch this latest move as evolutionary rather than reactive, telling The Guardian newspaper:
At Yahoo!, we’re constantly reviewing and iterating on our products as we strive to create the best user experience. With that in mind, video content from Yahoo as well as our partners has been transitioned from Yahoo! Screen to our Digital Magazine properties so users can discover complementary content in one place.
So, not another strategic reverse ferret at all then. Good to know.
My take
It can’t be long now.
Of course Mayer has come under fire repeatedly and inevitably some criticisms are valid, others possibly less so. I’ve said before that while I think that Mayer has made far too many mistakes and not delivered on the ‘jam tomorrow’ turnaround, I also think that in reality nobody could have saved Yahoo!.
Photo opps with the boss
But that doesn’t excuse things like the now notorious pre-Christmas Great Gatsby themed party in San Francisco, coming in at a cool $7 million according to scuttlebutt.
Did nobody stop to think what an appalling message that gave out to irritated and beleaguered investors and suggest that it might be inappropriate? (Check out The Vice insider’s report from the party. Then decide whether to laugh or cry!)
The Gatsby thing is bad enough – has no-one in Yahoo! AR or PR read the book?  But with Mayer perched on a white armchair granting photo opps to the Yahoo! masses, I have to say I thought less of The Great Gatsby and rather more of Marie Antoinette and the Palace of Versailles.
Mayer may not be facing the French Revolution, but her very own version of Madame Guillotine is circling. Starboard means business.
Read more on: Collaboration sharing and digital productivityCRM and customer experienceDigital and content marketingSocial 