
Monopoly is one of the least appealing aspects of capitalism. Within a market lifecycle it is the inevitable result of competition and consolidation as fewer and fewer vendors compete on a narrowing set of features, ultimately peaking with efficiency, and lowest prices. It’s a process that is good for very few people other than the monopolists.
On the way up to monopoly status market competition provides several good product and service options for customers at reasonable prices, but as companies become monopolies options decline, prices stiffen and it’s often possible for the survivors to raise prices at will.
The hardest thing about monopoly is that it comes at the end of long periods of intense competition and very often the people who watched the rise of a market cycle are not the same ones to see the looming collapse of competition or consider what it portends. It’s not that the earlier human participants are dead but they may be out of the economy, retired, and not politically active.
Consequently, the people present at the inception of monopoly are rookies, they may have history to guide them but often history seems a dead and dry bit of vegetation and it’s hard for the observer to imagine its original flowering. Rookies make rookie mistakes and one of the bigger ones is to believe that this time is different. It never is. Monopoly inevitably leads to less innovation because there’s less competition and every incentive to let revenue fall to the bottom line and not reinvest for customers.
Monopolies are often tamed by regulation either by government or market imperatives. We saw attempts in this direction with the Obama administration classifying cable companies as common carriers for example. But the Trumpanistas want to move in the opposite direction and the situation is far from settled at this point. Nevertheless, in that you see the give and take of monopolists trying to corner a market and the people trying to resist it.
All of this is a prelude to discuss an even broader issue surfaced by the New York Times over the weekend. Jonathan Taplin’s piece, Is It Time to Break Up Google? is about more than the search giant. It names Apple; Google’s parent, Alphabet; Amazon; and Facebook along with Microsoft as the world’s five largest companies by market capitalization. Significantly just 10 years ago the names on the list were decidedly different with Exxon Mobile, General Electric, Citigroup and Shell Oil as the top dogs along with Microsoft. The article notes that all are monopolies today,

Google has an 88 percent market share in search advertising, Facebook (and its subsidiaries Instagram, WhatsApp and Messenger) owns 77 percent of mobile social traffic and Amazon has a 74 percent share in the e-book market. In classic economic terms, all three are monopolies.

In an example of the long gestation cycles inherent in monopoly formation as well as in support of the rookie mistake hypothesis, Taplin has to go back a century to the Woodrow Wilson administration and one of its advisors, and later Supreme Court Associate Justice, Louis Brandeis, who said,

…in a democratic society the existence of large centers of private power is dangerous to the continuing vitality of a free people.

That’s relatively flowery language compared to today but it gets to the essence of not only the decline of competition but the corrosive effect monopoly power ultimately exerts on government efforts at regulating an industry. In case you’re thinking that monopolies are a once in a century occurrence you need only look to the banking industry for another example, and not that long ago. Says Taplin,

We need look no further than the conduct of the largest banks in the 2008 financial crisis or the role that Facebook and Google play in the “fake news” business to know that Brandeis was right.

Indeed. The long era of high-tech that many trace to the early 1970’s is reaching a zenith and tech touches a lot of areas like manufacturing and certainly banking as high-speed networks have become perhaps the last firewall in the information arbitrage world.
My take
We’re at a critical point in civilization’s story with the rise of so many technology behemoths. Most are natural monopolies simply because they are networks. Networks work best when they operate at global scale and everyone is on them—nobody wants to be on a smaller network for fear of missing out. Interfaces and integrations are temporary fixes. But this does not argue for laissez faire management because the alternatives are not benign.
I might argue that the last time something like this happened Julius Caesar crossed the Rubicon River with an army. That changed the Roman Republic to an Empire though few people noticed at the time. But the practical effect was to extinguish democracy from the earth for 18 centuries. It was such a dark time that Diocletian later passed an edict tying peasants to the land they were on giving rise to the middle ages.
Many scholars refer to the period as the Dark Ages during which time the then known world even managed to lose the recipe for concrete. It would be silly to conclude that we’re facing the same kind of dark age now and for a better comparison think about telco. The Bell System was a monopoly, a regulated one but nonetheless it managed to stifle competition for a century, during which time communication barely inched ahead. With the consent decree that opened up the telephone system, the telecommunications age was able to bloom and the wireless cell phone system and the Internet are visible examples of new innovation.
Perhaps the most corrosive aspect of monopoly power is that it prevents thinking out of the box, making all kinds of unforeseeable things impossible. The idea of breaking up the big tech networks is sound because it forces everyone to compete again and to invent, two things that the tech era was founded on but that we seem to be losing the recipe for.
Regardless of the positive aspects of breaking up monopolies though, the chances of it happening right now are very slim. Invested interests will ensure that any serious talk of break up is kept far away from the U.S.’s EO-happy POTUS. However, crimping their influence is another matter, something in which we will likely have to look towards Europe for clues.
Image credit - via Star Viewer teamRead more on: Cloud platforms - infrastructure and architectureGoverning identity privacy and securityRegulation 