

Sean Rad
Web Summit in Lisbon this week took place during US election week, with the world waking up on Wednesday to an unexpected result.
And so it was that the first question posed to Tinder CEO and co-founder Sean Rad during his centre stage interview, was how he felt about the result. His reaction reflected the mood of the vast majority gathered at the event, although less dramatically than the spectacular on stage meltdown and profanities from Silicon Valley investor Dave McClure. 
Rad explained:

The candidate I wanted to win didn’t win. But what is important is, we live in an amazing democracy and the American people have voiced their opinion and chosen the candidate they want and we all now have to support the candidate America wanted.

Rad got a muted and scattered round of applause for the last part of his statement, but as head of a US-based growing tech startup, diplomacy is required. Rad has certainly had to learn to be diplomatic after he was ousted as CEO of the company in March 2015 in favour of a former eBay and Microsoft executive, only to be reinstated after a six-month tenure as Tinder president. 
Ironically Tinder, which has only been around for four years, but already boasts tens of millions of users and 20 billion matches, could be at least partly responsible for the election outcome, thanks to the firm’s efforts to encourage its user base to cast their vote. 
As Rad noted, this election marks the first time that all millennials are now old enough to vote. This younger generation accounts for about 30 percent of the electorate – and many of them are on Tinder. Rad explained:

We have a responsibility to educate and mobilise millennials. We wanted to get them to best identify which candidate most accurately represented their views, and then encourage them to go out and vote.

Tinder’s answer to this was Swipe The Vote. The new feature on the app asks you to select your preferred candidate and then choose from different options on a range of key issues, including immigration and climate change. The app then verifies whether your chosen candidate represents your views – or if you need to rethink your voting plans. 
Rad said hundreds of thousands of people used that part of the app in the run-up to the US election, and Tinder also opened it up to 14 other countries as it was an event played out on a global stage. 
Tinder gathered various data points from Swipe The Vote that reflected general sentiment – in Mexico, Hillary Clinton was the favourite, as she was with US users but at a much narrower margin. Russians decisively chose Trump as their candidate of choice, an interesting nugget for the conspiracy theorists out there…
No locker room talk
Despite Tinder not being able to use its platform to propel its CEO’s preferred candidate to victory, Rad still believes in the project:

Our users care about these issues. It’s a big decision for the US, and other elections are a big decision. We have a responsibility to help our users in every way we can. 
We have a business and we think a lot about Tinder and the social vision there, but we also think about the ways we can contribute to people’s lives.

Rad said gathering information about the election and getting so close to the process has helped the firm make other adjustments for the better. He said:

The tone of the election was insane. It forced us as a team to reflect what was appropriate behaviour and language as a team and as a platform. Locker room talk is unacceptable in the real world and on Tinder. 
A big priority for us is to eliminate locker room talk on Tinder. This election has helped accelerate this and bring more awareness to these issues.

Rad has also directly benefited from Tinder. He told the Web Summit audience he has had a long-term relationship with someone he met via the platform. But he now spends more time on the app using it to get customer feedback and hire smart people. He explained:

I don’t really have time to go out now. I pick to spend my time in the office with the team. I use it to get feedback from our users. I ask a bunch of our users inside the app how can we do better. All the data we have pales in comparison to hearing a story from a user about what we’re doing well and what we’re doing wrong.

It was through this habit that Rad hooked up professionally with Dr Jessica Carbino, now Tinder’s resident sociologist:

I was matched up with Dr Jess three and a half years ago. She was saying how she was graduating from UCLA and getting her PHD in sociology, and was blown away by Tinder and really cares about these topics. 
We didn’t have the sociologist role but I loved what she was saying and how thoughtful she was, and I knew we needed that kind of talent. We’ve made many hires by matches we’ve made through Tinder.

And for those more interested in using Tinder for its core purpose, Rad also revealed his expert tips for getting that right swipe:

Model shots don’t work. People swipe left, people can smell fakeness. Our ability to interpret data and meaning in photos is on unprecedented levels. Group shots might get someone to open your profile, but they’ll look further so they’re not the most effective thing. 
If you have a bio and write about yourself, you’re way more likely to get a quality match and get more matches. We’ve just added the ability to add information like the music you like, that’s a big part of your life and relationship. The more you complete your profile, the more matches you get. It’s absolutely true.

My take
Take it from the man who really does know. And in case you’re wondering, Rad’s music choice is These Are The Days by Van Morrison – remember that in case he ever swipes right on your profile and you’re looking for that hot job at Tinder. 
As for Tinder’s admirable ‘get out the vote’ efforts, they’re commendable, but when nearly 47% of eligible US voters simply couldn’t be bothered to cast a vote it’s clear that outreach needs to go beyond the millennials on a dating app. 
Incidentally, as well as the US election, Tinder also offered the Swipe The Vote feature in the lead-up to the UK referendum and is running it for the French primaries – so get ready for a shock Front National victory, France!
Image credit - Tinder/YouTubeDisclosure - Additional commentary by Stuart Lauchlan Read more on: Collaboration sharing and digital productivityUX and application design 