
I had the opportunity to watch a few webcasts from the Content Summit (a virtual conference from Sweet Fish Media), and there was a lot of good information shared on content marketing. One that caught my attention particularly was with Tracy Eiler, CMO of InsideView, on the topic of content for sales enablement.
Sales enablement is interesting to talk about for a few reasons. First, Sales needs content. Second, Sales needs similar, if not the same, types of tools that Marketing uses to find and build relationships with customers. While we can see both these things are necessary, we can also see that many organizations fall short in providing one or both of these.
Fortunately, this can “easily” change. Here’s a quick definition from Forrester just in case you aren’t completely sure what sales enablement means:
Sales enablement is a strategic, ongoing process that equips all client-facing employees with the ability to consistently and systematically have a valuable conversation with the right set of customer stakeholders at each stage of the customer’s problem-solving life cycle to optimize the return of investment of the selling system.
You have the content, but does Sales know that?
Eiler talked about the challenges her organization faced supporting the needs of the Sales team. She said that making sales easier is a top priority but what they found was that the Sales team didn’t know what content was available and when they did, they didn’t really know how to use it or how it could augment their Sales process.
To make things even harder, unlike Marketing, Sales tends to work on the fly, needing content “just in time.” That makes it harder for them to figure out what content is available and useful, particularly in their particular context at any specific time.
All of this often leads to more requests for content, Eiler said. Content, that very likely is already written or isn’t necessary.
It’s not as simple as just telling the sales team what is available, though, said Eiler. The problem is a little more complex than a simple list of content assets can resolve. She provided a few stats from CSO Insights research, including:

43% of sales reps don’t make their quota
20% of a sales rep’s time is spent on account and content research

Content, she said, can help. You just need a really good plan.
This is what Eiler recommends Marketing does to help with sales enablement.
Identify your content mess
You probably have a ton of content already created and even more in the pipeline. But it’s spread everywhere. You use many tools to discuss ideas, store topics, create and store content. Sometimes you have multiple versions each used by a different person or team and no way to tell who’s using what and where. You may also have a lot of people in your organization authoring content making it very hard to track.
Take the time to figure out what you have, where it’s located, how it’s used or could be used, who owns it, manages it, publishes it, what campaigns and web pages it is used on, and so on.
Look at all the different ways you collaborate with your own team, with Sales, and even other teams that are customer facing across the company. What kind of content and information are they dealing with there?
It’s like that content inventory you need to do when you decide to migrate to a new content management system. You need to know what you have, if it’s any good, if there are any gaps, and how you plan to use it on the new website.
It’s not exactly hard to do, but it can take a bit of work.
Look for a tool to help manage it all
You have your inventory and your pipeline identified. You know where everything is; now you need to bring it together in a central location to manage it. You’ll want to manage it using some kind of tool that not only lists the assets but makes them findable by Sales, Marketing, and other teams.
This, Eiler said, goes beyond content storage.
This tool will let you tag your content appropriately so Sales knows what is there and how it can be used. It will allow you to identify what is for internal use, what is for external use. It will give Sales a way to rate the content and share it with others, so everyone knows what content is working and what isn’t. You will also want this tool to integrate with existing systems, like your CRM and your marketing automation system. Because another silo is a waste of time.
My take
Eiler went on to talk about the process they went through to find and implement a tool, and I would suggest you watch the webcast to learn more about that process and the tool they ultimately selected. For me, there were two important takeaways from her discussion.
First, creating and maintaining a proper content asset inventory is critical. My personal experience – spreadsheets suck. But finding the right tool that works for your particular situation can take a bit of trial and error, and that too can suck.
Second, Marketing does need to work closely with Sales to help them quickly find useful content for the current sales deal they are working on, but also to consistently track what kind of content works best along the purchase journey, adjusting as necessary.
Marketing can’t simply create what it considers great content for Sales because it isn’t involved in the Sales process directly. But Sales also shouldn’t keep throwing content requests over the wall. They need to explain what they need and why, and they need to make an effort to see if what’s already there can work. It’s that lovely give and take that makes a good marriage – and that is what Sales and Marketing are in – a marriage.
Sometimes, we get so tied up in content ideation and creation, that we don’t stop to think about what we’ve already created and how it’s used. We try so hard to come up with innovative and creative ideas and campaigns that we don’t pay attention to the complete picture to see the gaps and overlaps. We add, and we add, but we don’t monitor and measure. That is something that needs to change.
Image credit - Teamwork and cooperation concept © Gajus - Fotolia.com.Read more on: Content marketingDigital and content marketing 