
It would be interesting to know how many organizations are thinking about, or planning to implement a new web content management platform (WCM). I suspect the number is very high. But the decision to move is not simple or straightforward. So here is some advice from two experts in the field to get you on the right path.
The advice of Rob Martinez, Senior Manager at EY, and Will Thayer, Principal Consultant Technologist at Avalon Consulting comes from their presentation at the Gilbane conference, “When and How to Move to a New CMS/ Digital Platform.”
To switch or not to switch, that is the question
Don’t decide to migrate to a new WCM platform just because there’s something new and cool out there you want to get your hands on. You need to have good reasons. Here are a few Martinez offered:

You are using outdated technology that’s no longer supported by the vendor (or support is soon ending).
There is a lack of supporting resources to keep it up and running.
You get significant gains from a feature perspective.

Here are some challenges when switching:

It’s taxing on your staff.
It’s a long-term investment.
You may have years of hidden requirements and processes in the code.

That last one is a scary prospect. It’s rare that an organization implements a WCM system out of the box with no customization. There are always unique requirements or processes that get coded directly into the system. Keep in mind most of the WCMs people want to shift from are either custom built, or built on simple solutions that needed heavy customization to work.
If you decide you do need to switch to a new WCM, then it’s really important that you document the current state and find all those hidden requirements and processes. Martinez says to document both your current state and your future state, along with all your requirements. This way you know what you have today that needs to carry over as well as the new things you want to put in place.
A content strategy is also critical when deciding to move to a new WCM. It’s unlikely you will need to migrate all your content over, so a strategy will help you figure what you have now and what you need in the new WCM.
Picking the right vendor solution
To help you select the right web content management solution, develop a scorecard, said Martinez, which is essentially a list of your requirements (preferably categorized based on priority and phase) and how the product meets them. This will help you understand what you get out of the box, what you might have to custom built and how to base your ROI decision (time to market, cost, development effort, etc.).
But your decision isn’t just about the product itself; you also need to look at vendor viability and fit with your organization. Selecting a new WCM is likely a long-term commitment, so you need to be sure the vendor will be around for awhile and the vendor’s team (business development, development, and support) will work well with your team.
Another aspect to consider is how the product integrates with your other solutions. Although many new web content management solutions come as “suites” or complete packages, you likely already have applications you don’t want to replace that need to share content or data with your WCM.
Don’t roll out the new based on the old
Thayer talked about common missteps when implementing a new web content management system. A big one he said was that many try to roll out the new system based on outdated content structures and processes.
He says when you are planning a migration strategy consider history, current state, and future state. When looking at the history of your WCM try to keep things neutral. Don’t point out people or departments who were demanding, or caused problems, the important thing to note is what challenges existed so you can plan for them going forward.
Thayer suggests to do a SWOT (strengths, weaknesses, opportunities and threats) analysis and prepare a Project Charter that clearly lays out how to do things.
When it comes to deciding what to migrate you need to analyze, disregard and plan for content, processes/functionality, and options.
You don’t want to migrate all your existing content, but you also might not want to migrate all the existing processes and options you currently have. The key is to know what you have, if it’s still needed and if there’s a better way to do it in the new WCM system. It may seem like it takes more time upfront to do this work, but in the end things will go much smoother during migration.
Create a minimum viable product (MVP)
This section deserves an article on its own. The idea of starting with a base product with only the most important things you need has become a popular topic, particularly around startups, but now even within established organizations under pressure to get something out the door quickly.
I was in a couple of sessions at Gilbane where the MVP was discussed, and not everyone likes the idea. An MVP is supposed to contain the must-have features of your solution, and then you make changes to it when it makes sense to do that.
The challenge is deciding what are the “must-haves” and streamlining that down into the absolute “must-haves.” After that, you need to plan carefully next phases and what comes in them. Sometimes organizations start with the minimum and never go any further. Sometimes, there’s no agreement on what the minimum requirements are.
My Take
There are many different web content management solutions available to choose today. Some are pure-play WCM, and some are the newly-named “digital experience platforms” (wait for a new name next year). Digital experience platforms offer a lot more functionality than content management, and while that’s often a good thing, sometimes there’s a desire to move to one just because it’s an all in one solution.
It’s not always the best answer. Understanding your current situation and requirements and knowing where you need to be is the only way to make the decision to switch and decide what type of WCM you need. Don’t cut corners, but don’t take forever to make a decision either. According to Thayer, based on the evolution of the WCM industry, it’s likely you’ll only have your CMS for 4-5 years.
Image credit: website concept hand drawing on blackboard © cacaroot – Fotolia.com
Read more on: Collaboration sharing and digital productivityContent marketingDigital and content marketingGoverning identity privacy and security 