
Lew Cirne, CEO New Relic exemplifies tone at the top
Tone at the top is rarely discussed as a line item in the buyer decision making process. It should be because it is a big deal. Here’s one story that illustrates what I mean.
Just as I was shutting down for the Christmas festivities, a Facebook message came across from someone I know reasonably well in the sense we’ve collaborated loosely on a few projects over the last few years; we share messages on Facebook and have the odd person to person conversation. We have no commercial relationship.
This person is a direct budget holder for a fast growing company in the contingent labor space. The company is undergoing a significant amount of re-engineering as it prepares for business requirements in 2016 and beyond. That’s a lot of risk but risk that’s carefully managed to ensure nothing that works now and will be needed breaks in the future. This is what he said as it relates to my 2015 top 10:
Love that you put Lew C #1. I just wrote the contract to buy the whole stack and put it on everything. The only question is can my team really make it one of the things they do fewer of and better?
Even though we had met briefly in the fall, I had no idea he had a full stack purchase in mind so that was nice to hear. It happens occasionally. I paused for a moment and asked:
Tell me – did my write up of New Relic have any impact on your buy decision?
His reply could have been a simple yes or no. Instead, he said:
Of course. Cause I need supporting evidence to justify my decision. And your stuff isn’t just black and white with shades of “they are a unicorn so buy buy buy”. I came away with a picture in my head with substance as to the “why” this company is the right decision…
From time to time I am asked why we write up so many earnings announcements and executive profile pieces. I have consistently argued that buyers should care about these things because the tone at the top, alongside leadership direction, impact the degree of risk you make in a buying decision.
There’s plenty of nuance behind this topic and you only get to understand what it means by carefully tracking and studying what’s going on at a particular company. The picture is always incomplete and often in flux. Even so, I like to think the diginomica team is pretty good at knowing and articulating the difference between rhetoric and reality.
On the buyer side, I can’t count the number of times I’ve heard consultants say that while company A offered a great deal, the buyer was left wondering if they would be around in 5-10 years’ time and so did not make what would otherwise appear to be a rational buy decision.
In about 80 percent of the deals I see, the final decision is as much influenced by how a buyer feels about the supplier as it is about the technology they are buying. In a shoot out where the functional differences are immaterial, buyers will go with the supplier with which they feel the most comfortable.
In short, the buyer experience is just as important in business to business deals as it is in consumer. It just plays out differently and across different timelines.
We are only one point of influence along a continuum of many twists and turns in the buying decision. But it is good to know that buyers trust our leadership assessment as part of the opinions we form about suppliers. Others may argue this plays to the irrational nature of poor decision making. I disagree.
I recently talked about the need for genuine technology partnerships. Those are informed by a mixture of quantitative and qualitative assessments that includes a question every buyer should ask: “Do I feel good about this company?” Tone at the top is a critical part of the answer to that question.
As we head into 2016, that becomes a greater imperative as businesses start to think about the full stack of technologies they will need to both survive and thrive in the emerging digital economies. Hefting multiple partners across multiple projects is always fraught. The best practitioners understand that when leadership sets the right tone, then it is usually an indicator of commitment. Having a clutch of right thinking companies in the mix makes life so much easier.
Read more on: CRM and customer experience 