
Sameer Patel – CEO Kahuna
With so much depressing news around the practices of some companies – the Tech Leavers survey is but the latest – I wanted to find an antidote to the litany of headline grabbing but ultimately miserable stories.
This will be an occasional series that I’m calling Tone at the Top. I’m a firm believer that it is the leadership of any business that sets its cultural direction and ultimately puts in motion the practices that make it great or downright crap. Hence the title and my search for people and places that fit the bill for being great, not crap.
The format is a tad unusual for us. First, we record a conversation which is lightly edited and put onto Soundcloud. Next we obtain a verbatim transcription for those who don’t have time to listen to a linear ‘feed’ but would like to scan the whole content. Here’s a link to the file but hurry because we’ll be changing the way we provide files soon.
Finally, we produce a story around the content that acts as a precis to the conversation and adds some nuance around the topic. That’s what you see on this page. Call it a triple play if you like. But where to start? It turns out the first choice picked itself.
Regular readers will know that Sameer Patel has been a long time colleague and buddy of mine. You might have picked up on a conversation I had with him last November, not long after he became CEO at Kahuna following a stint at SAP.
The other day, Patel and I ran a Skype call. I wanted to get his take on what it means to run a company that is recognized as a good place to work. In that context, Kahuna was recently recognized as a Best Place to Work by the San Francisco Business Times.
This case is interesting because while Kahuna is very much in start up mode, it wasn’t a mom and pop shop when Patel arrived. It had raised $58 million over four rounds in four years with quality VCs like Sequioa, Tenaya and SoftTech leading rounds. In other words, there was already a culture in place. So what’s Patel’s approach?
He recognizes there is abundant choice in the Bay Area and that top talent is not going to make a decision to join based on a single dimension. He wants Kahuna’s employees to feel there is a sense of purpose:
What is the one thing here that’s going to fulfil you far beyond the money and stock and all the other things you talk about in Silicon Valley? Everyone does this, but it’s the clarity around it and getting people to a place where they feel like, “Yeah, this is where I want to spend the next chapter.”
How to go about it. Is it about setting out the mission, the vision, what?
I think in most companies the leadership team, whatever you want to call it, subconsciously, many times, just assumes that the engineers won’t care about the details in the sense just generally tell them that their job is safe and there’s a place to work here and the people are nice and you’re good to go. I have a huge problem with that…
…You have to level with them on what is the opportunity? Why is this a good idea as a business problem? I don’t believe most companies take the time to do that. They feel like, “Yeah, well, I’ve got some business people who probably get it and they care”. I think that is one of the biggest problems in most of the companies.
Patel is referring to the good old ‘geeks and suits‘ divide that many of us see but which in software companies has the potential to render the engineers as little better than plumbers.Ensuring that everyone is crystal clear as to what the company is doing and why changes are being made is central to that process of transparent management. But there is more and here Patel goes off on an unexpected tangent as he describes what the company did when moving to new premises:
Every employee needs to feel and be sure that the architecture of the place makes them feel like we have not made it yet. There has to be a feel of hunger and that it can’t be completely polished and done and anointed in the way that it’s designed. If you walk in, you see that. You see the edginess to it, but you look up and you’re like, “Oh my god, we didn’t have money to really cover the ceilings”. Yeah, we did. We have better places to spend our money right now and we’ve got to earn our way into that.
Continuing with the theme of transparency, Patel says that while the company could have splurged on a variety of design niceties, he asked the designers to create glass walled offices so that there is nowhere for people to hide and where it is obvious who is meeting with whom.
I have seen this type of design before and it works, in part because it defuses the sense of being left out by some people and goes towards the avoidance of cliques which are incredibly destructive inside organizations. There’s also another benefit. In the design, the company choice to reduce the number of conference rooms it knew it would need by 20%. What happens then?
That forces people when they go into meetings to truly think hard about “is this meeting actually private” or “is it that I just need a corner where, if I keep it in the open and I work in the open, I will foster ideas?”
You have no idea how many times someone will walk by and say, “Hey, I just heard you guys talking about that, I dealt with this”. You start to really consciously think “do I need to shut the door?”
This serves to build trust, which Patel believes is critical to getting the best out of the available resources. Involving people in unfamiliar processes – the fostering of polymath learning – becomes central to the model Patel is working upon:
I’m a huge fan of instituting these big, cross-functional projects where you give someone … they’re from a department or role but they’ve expressed interest in stretching themselves to learn how to work cross-functionally as they’re working through their professional development.
There’s an ownership of, “I may be fantastic at sales” or “I may be fantastic at database architectures”, but someone pulled me out there and said, “Become part of this other process”.
So how does this manifest itself in companies like Kahuna where high bar goals are set but end up being crushed?
I think in the context of getting high performers to really function, this notion of polymaths is super important because all of them are trying … it’s funny, we had a really good Q1 and I was thinking through this. If you looked at the bottom of the model of what we should’ve done in Q1 from a numbers standpoint, it was about 60-odd percent of what we ended up doing.
We did better by 40 percent, and I was telling some of the folks on the sales team, I was like, “If we had made that number that was 60 percent of what we ended up doing, what you proved at that point is you are accountable to Kahuna”. If you went from 60 to the 100 that we ended up doing, that only proves one thing: that you’re accountable to yourself. You won’t get 40 percent more if it’s all about Kahuna. You are coming to work every day competing with yourself, that’s who you’re competing with if you can get to that level.
When you add it all up, the essence of what Patel is saying comes down to this: the purpose of leadership in high performing companies certainly involves leading by example. But it also means that you are constantly trying to ensure that not only does everyone get opportunities to both learn and do new things but also that success is very much a matter of personal ownership and responsibility in the context of a team.

Image credit - © EdwardSamuel - FotoliaRead more on: Future of workTalent management 