
Robert Mills
In February this year, rural lifestyle retailer Tractor Supply Company announced the opening of its 1,400th store, located in Eunice, Louisiana, a community deep in the heart of Cajun country and home to the World Championship Crawfish Etouffee Cook-off.
It’s part of an ambitious expansion plan for Tractor Supply’s bricks-and-mortar operations, which will see the $5.7 billion company open between 110 and 115 stores during 2015 and a further 120 stores per year over following years. The company’s management say they have already identified around 700 possible markets for new stores and are working towards a long-term target of 2,500 stores.
From those projections, it’s easy to imagine that e-commerce might be forced to take something of a back seat – and it’s certainly true that online sales currently make only a tiny contribution to overall revenues right now. The company doesn’t break those figures out, but as Tractor Supply chief merchandising and marketing officer Steve Barbarick explained to financial analysts as recently as June:
It’s still a very immature business.
But it is one that Tractor Supply is determined to grow, which is why the company has recently worked with IBM to revamp its online store and migrate it to the IBM cloud. After all, Tractor Supply has since 1938 been a trusted name for a wide variety of customers in rural and suburban locations – owners of small family farms, weekend gardeners, pet owners, hunters and equestrians – but many live some distance from their nearest store. And the company’s online operations have the potential to become a social hub, where customers can research and review products or find out about in-store events that make a trip into town worthwhile, from power tools demos to pop-up vet clinics. As Tractor Supply CIO Rob Mills explains:
The way we’re thinking about this is in terms of ‘Tractor 24/7’ – giving customers more choice in the relationship they have with us, wherever and whenever they like. Like every other retailer, omni-channel plays an important part in our overall strategy and, while we’re clearly more of a bricks-and-mortar retailer, digital business based on content, commerce and community is still very important to us.
Mills joined Tractor Supply last year, just as management attention was turning to the company’s online operations and how they could be improved. He found a number of problem with the online commerce set-up: while the underlying IBM Websphere Commerce platform was fine, it needed upgrading; it took developers way too long to do any type of work on the site; and there were serious issues around scaling the environment, which was co-located with a third-party hosting company, making it difficult to respond to the seasonal and weather-driven peaks and troughs that are inevitable when your customers spend a lot of their time in the great outdoors.
In collaboration with IBM, Tractor Supply’s Websphere Commerce installation was upgraded and its TractorSupply.com site was redesigned along responsive web lines to display well on a wide variety of devices, and migrated to an Infrastructure-as-a-Service set-up on the IBM Softlayer cloud.
Sowing seeds
Just over a month later, things are going well, says Mills:
We’ve got improved search attribution, making it easier for customers to find products and brands and the location of their nearest store. We’re expanding our fulfilment capabilities: today, we offer ship-to-customer or ship-to-store. Next year, we’ll introduce ‘buy online, pick-up in store’. We’ve reduced the check-out process from 10 steps to four, which is a big reduction in speed, effort, and time for the customer. And we’ve also improved our security stance.
Tractors
Behind the scenes, meanwhile, life is easier for developers introducing new improvements to the site, who are now rolling out new releases every couple of weeks, he says. And because it’s a cloud service, Mills has more confidence that the site will flex to accommodate more visitors when traffic volumes peak:
I feel like we can scale our infrastructure very quickly and very efficiently now, but in a way that means me and my team can focus more on the true customer experience we offer, not on infrastructure.
And, with that in mind, Mills already has a list of priorities, which includes helping the business to build out its online product information (vital when so many customers now research purchases online before visiting stores), closer integration with social sites including Facebook and Pinterest, and new reporting and analysis capabilities that will assist with inventory and demand planning and allow the retailer to dive deeper into customer data and offer more personalised offers and discounts.
The rural lifestyle in the US is more connected than it’s ever been, and Tractor Supply needs to reflect this, he says:
One thing we’ve always prided ourselves on as a business is how knowledgeable our in-store staff are when it comes to both our products and our customers. They know the customer and they can advise them on what products will suit their project. So the challenge for us is taking that knowledge beyond the store, using digital, into the outdoors so the customer can tap into it whenever they need.
Read more on: CRM and customer experienceDigital and content marketinge-commerceRetail e-commerce and the omni-channel 