
Christian Lanng, TradeShift
One of my bugbears when examining the enterprise IT landscape is the perpetuation of long-winded processes that have their roots in a paper-based past. Connected digital technology allows for a transformation in how things get done but this requires imaginative, out-of-the-box thinking.
Procurement is one area that I’ve found to be particularly prone to squander productivity in the pursuit of byzantine procedures that have no place in a modern, digital world. So I’m receptive to the arguments of Christian Lanng, founder and CEO of business network platform Tradeshift, who believes procurement took a wrong turn when it moved off paper into pre-Internet computing, as he told me in a recent phone conversation:
Before computers we had a common platform called paper. All our systems were tuned to that common platform. Then everything became siloed.
He is on a mission to reinvent procurement for a connected, digital age. In our conversation, he explained three ways in which he says Tradeshift is taking a different approach than traditional e-procurement applications.
1. More flexible ways to buy
Procurement is stuck in an outdated catalog model that dates back to pre-Internet days when product and pricing information was distributed on CD-ROM disks (younger readers will be amazed to learn that in those dark days before Wikipedia existed, such disks were also seen as the future of encyclopedias). Today, these standalone catalogs are an anachronism, he told me.
The Internet has completely obliterated that solution. Amazon does not have a product catalog, it has a searchable product database.
Last month, Tradeshift introduced a new, Amazon-like solution that is based on its acquisition of Merchantry earlier this year. The company says Tradeshift Buy provides a searchable, virtual store that makes it possible to buy from any online source while remaining compliant with company policies. It includes both products and services and also has the capability for buyers and sellers to collaboratively design a product ‘on the fly’. This all-in, connected, digital buying platform is a radically different from what’s in the market from other procurement providers, said Lanng.
We’re the only provider right now that has taken this approach rather than the classic catalog approach.
2. Giving people a process they’ll use
Getting people to use an organization’s official buying process is a perennial problem, but Lanng said the solution is to put the buying process where people want to use it.
The real problem is this attempt to take the whole Internet and shrink it inside the procurement system. What if we could take the procurement system out into the Internet?
In line with this objective, the Tradeshift product includes functions such as a browser button that a user can select to read the content of any ecommerce web page showing the product or service they intend to buy. It can also create a one-time virtual credit card that allows them to place the order using approved company payment processes, thus keeping the transaction within the company’s procurement system.
3. Accommodating new buying patterns
The demarcations between products and services, and between direct and indirect purchasing, are becoming fuzzier as buyers and sellers move to more engaged relationships that focus on outcomes rather than individual transactions. This calls for a more collaborative approach to procurement, Lanng told me.
Buying outcomes and services is very different from buying ‘stuff’. It’s highly collaborative.
The line between direct and indirect is blurring. These categories are making less and less sense.
We’re going to view it all as connected to those you’re buying from, and then have different processes depending on what you’re buying for.
We’ve turned the procurement system into much more of a collaboration platform.
Networked business
This collaborative approach to buying and selling is in tune with emerging new network-based business models, as Tradeshift a advisor Maxim Rokhline outlines in a recent post on the company’s blog:
The world is changing because of digitization and connectivity. For business, this means that the Internet is transforming from mainly a ‘sales channel’ to a collaboration framework. The boundaries of the firm — its specialization, its workforce, its production assets — are all being dismantled. The new, organically evolving paradigm reveals business models that are network-based and information-intensive. The best way to think of this is via a simple comparison between Uber and a taxi cab company we’ll call ‘XYZ’. Uber orchestrates value among service providers and service consumers. It generates true information intensity with reputation, location, vehicle, payment, habits and other data. In the meantime, ‘XYZ’ proudly offers great customer service.
Now there’s a choice. You can either introduce best-in-class payments to ‘XYZ’ company or become a real value orchestrator and build a network-based and information-intensive business with payments delightfully amalgamated inside of it.
Procurement platform
To better support this collaborative approach, Tradeshift has built its network as a platform that third parties can build applications on top of. This platform-as-a-service strategy is a further difference from traditional approaches. It has allowed Tradeshift to partner with the likes of Selectica for strategic sourcing, C2FO for cashflow discounting, Quyntess for supply chain management and EcoVadis for supplier sustainability ratings. Lanng told me:
We want to put it all on the platform — payments, logistics, CSR, procurement — into one integrated, collaborative platform for your supply chain.
Tradeshift has a ways to go before it reaches the scale of better known procurement platforms, but it has a good track record of consolidating its presence in a market and then building out. It began with an e-invoicing solution in the Danish market and has since expanded into other global markets. DHL is an important customer that has helped it bring other logistics players onto its platform, while other recent customer wins include Air France-KLM, automotive parts manufacturer SNOP, several European utilities and fashion group Inditex.
Its model of providing a platform that is free to suppliers, while buyers pay for the functionality they use, has spurred rapid growth and a supplier adoption rate ranging from 70 to as much as 97 percent, Lanng told me. It is catching up on traditional procurement providers such as SAP’s Ariba, he said.
Why we really disrupt the model is by building this free network. Ariba is growing 10-15 percent annually. We’re growing 400 percent year-over-year and our network growth is accelerating.
My take
Any vendor that talks the language of inter-enterprise collaboration, value networks and platform-as-a-service is speaking to the future. This is the way the world is evolving as we become more digitally connected.
Having said that, timing is all. Many innovative propositions have failed because they got too far ahead of mainstream adoption. I’d like to probe further into Tradeshift’s customer base to understand how they’re using the platform and what their take is on its highly collaborative and adaptive approach to procurement systems.
But if the world of enterprise procurement is in need of a shake-out, which I firmly believe, then perhaps Tradeshift is the vendor to watch. It is certainly taking an innovative, forward-thinking approach to the procurement process that’s in tune with many of the digital transformation trends we see in enterprise software.
Disclosure: SAP is a diginomica premier partner.
Image credit: Christian Lanng headshot courtesy of Tradeshift.
Read more on: Frictionless enterpriseSpend management 