
The British government has said that “no deal for the UK is better than a bad deal for the UK”. However, what a good Brexit deal looks like, and how we plan to get there, as we begin the process of exiting from the European Union, remains largely unknown.
A report released this week by the Commons International Trade Committee certainly gives us some insight into the challenges that the government faces in negotiating that ‘good deal’.
The short answer is: this is incredibly complex.
Whilst there are few references to digital throughout the report, there is plenty in there on the impact of trading of services between the UK and the EU post-Brexit. Digital, as recently highlighted by TechUK, is largely a services industry – some 96 percent of sector output and 91 percent of sector exports are spread across service activities.
And whilst the UK has a deficit on trade in goods with the EU27 (£89 billion in 2015), it has a surplus on trade in services (£28 billion in 2015). It was disappointing to see the report make such few mentions to the digital sector individually, instead focusing on financial services and law (albeit lessons can likely be taken from both).
But we do know that services aren’t likely to be impacted by tariffs post-Brexit, as tariffs on digital goods/services are generally low and bound by WTO rules. However, this doesn’t mean no problems whatsoever. The International Trade Committee states:
The effect of trading under WTO rules on trade in services is complex to gauge.
This is particularly true given that the UK will have to establish its position as a member of the World Trade Organization in its own right. Some aspects of this may prove to be complex and the Committee called on the Government to report regularly on progress.
Director General of the WTO, Roberto Azevêdo, previously stated during the referendum campaign, that, while “Britain is a member of the WTO and will continue to be a member of the WTO” in the event of a vote for Brexit, its status in that circumstance as “a member with no country-specific commitments” would be unprecedented.
According the report, he has also been quoted to the effect that “the likely complexity of” negotiations to establish the terms of the UK’s WTO membership “made them akin to the tortuous ‘accession’ negotiations countries go through to join the WTO”.
It’s all about regulations
So, whilst we know that the services/digital sector isn’t likely to be impacted by tariffs, there are barriers to trade in services that are likely to emerge from leaving the European Union.
For example, the report explains that UK service providers benefit from being in the EU with the following:

right of establishment (meaning that individuals or companies from one member state must be legally free to deliver services in another member state either temporarily or permanently, while continuing to be regulated by the authorities of their home country); and
mutual recognition of professional qualifications (the licensing of professionals by regulatory bodies is subject to the principle of mutual recognition throughout the Single Market).

There is also the whole issue about the free trade of data across borders that will need to be taken into account. The report states:
In addition, the EU has developed sets of regulations for particular service sectors, including telecommunications, aviation, road-transport and media services. The Digital Single Market (covering digital marketing, e-commerce and telecommunications) aims to keep the EU’s regulatory environment abreast of the fast-moving digital economy.
What will an exit mean for digital? Views vary of course. Whilst pro-Brexit economists told the Committee that “there essentially is no single market in services to leave”, according to the UK Trade Policy Observatory:
The EU Single Market for services is still incomplete but it greatly facilitates the exchange of services amongst members, so Brexit will almost surely be associated with a deterioration in market access conditions for UK providers.
The word “deterioration” will likely have some digital service providers greatly concerned.
The report also adds that it is “notable” that general tradeac in services receives scant attention in the Brexit White Paper. Regarding the Government’s aspirations for the shape of future UK-EU trade in services, it says only: “In our new strategic partnership we will be aiming for the freest possible trade in services between the UK and EU Member States.”
Outcomes
According to the trade report, the Committee received mixed messages about the extent to which the UK should harmonise the regulation of services with the EU as part of a Free Trade Agreement. For example, Mickael Laurans of the Law Society, said that without a solid FTA, trading in legal services will become incredibly difficult. And whilst this isn’t specific to digital, similar challenges could emerge. He said:
A key ask for my organisation was the continuation of the participation of the UK legal services sector in the two EU lawyers directives and the mutual recognition of qualifications directive. If you leave the Single Market, you have to look at 27 different national regimes of regulation, each having different restrictions in terms of market access and national treatment.
There would be member states in which you cannot fly in/fly out. In others you cannot establish or in others you cannot partner with local lawyers.
Dr Federico Ortino, of King’s College London, agreed and said that even FTA agreements outside the EU will not give the UK much of an advantage when it comes to trading services.
You could have the most liberal service industry—unregulated, efficient, whatever you want—but if the receiving states say, “No, you can’t enter”, there is nothing you can do. What you need to be able to export your services is that the host state opens up to your services.
At the moment in the single market, it is not an absolute single market but it is as good as it gets. If you step away from that, even the most advanced FTA with Korea or with Canada just gives you a little bit more than what the WTO provides.
Whereas, Gerard Grech, Chief Executive of TechCityUK, saw a move towards UK-focused regulation as an opportunity, given the UK is a leader in the digital sector in Europe. He said:
A key focus for Government is to continue to make sure that they are creating the right policy and regulatory conditions for the digital tech sector to thrive, which I think a lot of European countries will look to.
My take
We basically know nothing about the government’s plans and it seems that the future negotiating terms as it relates to services/digital are going to be incredibly complex. It’s hard see how the UK is going to end up in a more advantageous position than it has now, within the EU…
Image credit - Images free for commercial use Read more on: Digital government and public servicesRegulation

