
Politicians media via NYT
At the risk of inadvertently landing myself in a bucket of hot water.
Late last week I listened to an entertaining conversation between Jon Reed and Joseph Jaffe. They discussed ZERO ad budgets and brand zealots. During the conversation, Jaffe made the comment that Donald Trump was proving to be the master at garnering ‘earned media.’ I disagree. Coincidentally, the New York Times has got itself into a terrible pickle. It says that Donald Trump has scored heavily on ‘earned media.’ While it is correct to point out that Trump’s freely obtained coverage has dominated the media, he hasn’t earned a penny of that attention. Here is Wikipedia’s definition of earned media.
Earned media often refers specifically to publicity gained through editorial influence, whereas social media refers to publicity gained through grassroots action, particularly on the Internet. The media may include any mass media outlets, such as newspaper, television, radio, and the Internet, and may include a variety of formats, such as news articles or shows, letters to the editor, editorials, and polls on television and the Internet. Critically, earned media cannot be bought or owned, it can only be gained organically, hence the term ‘earned’.
On first pass you might believe that I’ve got this completely wrong. Hang with me on this one.
Whatever you think about the man politically, he’s great entertainment in the mold of Jerry Springer and the networks know that. The more outrageous Trump behaves, the more the networks believe it will drive an audience that advertisers are willing to pay for. That’s it, Nothing more, nothing less. And if you want the evidence, then check this from Deadline Hollywood:
A heavily promoted interview on The O’Reilly Factor with the former Apprentice host and leading Republican POTUS candidate drew 3.79 million viewers and 642,000 adults 25-54. That made The Factor the most watched show on cable last night – topping even The Big Bang Theory repeat’s 3.1 million viewers.


Despite his best efforts, offers of milkshakes and an appeal to Trump to be the “bigger man,” O’Reilly couldn’t convince Trump to change his mind and join his fellow Republicans onstage tonight in Iowa. But it still was a win for O’Reilly and Fox News.


[My emphasis added.] How about this from Entertainment:
Turns out, Fox News didn’t have to worry about its debate ratings without Donald Trump. The cable news network performed just fine in the Nielsens on Thursday night.
[My emphasis added.]
We can get into a debate about whether what Trump stands for taps into the psyche of some voters and so operates as an earned content element but rather, the focus I’ve witnessed, is much more on outrageous behavior with very little resembling politics as I understand the expression. Instead, we can readily see that Trump is a network operator’s dream for driving ad revenues because those are tied to ratings.
On social media, the situation is interesting. My timeline is filled with outrage against what Trump stands for but then that should not surprise given the type of people I choose to associate with. Despite the often well reasoned arguments around why this individual should not be put forward as nominee in the upcoming presidential race, Trump continues to gain ground. That in itself should say something about social media’s impact in the context of the current election circus.
The enterprise perspective
What has any of this got to do the enterprise software? Rather a lot.
I’ll let you into a secret. The enterprise software industry isn’t that much different although I’d argue it is more like the fashion game, which in itself can be viewed as entertainment.
Much of it is about vendors aligning themselves to buzz around topics of perceived interest. That’s how we end up with great words, phrases and acronyms that mean almost nothing to decision makers but sound fabulous when first uttered. Couple that with the famed Gartner Hype Cycle and you can readily understand how enterprise media works and how fashions come and go. Taken one logical step further, when you can add a dose of slapstick or comedy into the mix, preferably with a bit of bad boy imagery you have a potent mix that is hard to resist. That’s why Larry Ellison, CTO Oracle, Marc Benioff, CEO Salesforce and the late Steve Jobs are/were, in part, so newsworthy.
As a media person, you just know that a well known ‘character’ in the industry who chooses to make outrageous comments or claims is going to get acres of attention, regardless of the weight of any argument behind the statement. I’d argue that it is not for any reason other than to work the print or digital media equivalent of the ratings game off the back of entertainment value tied back to page views and ad dollars. This is something Ellison has known for years.
Remember his ‘Last year it was fuchsia, this year it’s puce,’ comment from 2009? At the time he was mocking cloud computing, which is ironic in the context of commentary around Oracle’s latest financial statements. Regardless, Ellison was bang on the money in his description of the industry. And just like fashion, we, the media, quickly forget and move on to the next thing.
The problem for many vendors is that it is increasingly difficult to find ways of ‘earning’ attention in a fashion driven world  We see this at places like Techmeme, which is dominated by coverage of a handful of companies. Anything connected with enterprise is almost always an afterthought or not noted at all. We sometimes struggle with this problem, largely because in any constrained environment, it is easier to cover the perceived popular thing that is in front of you, even if you would prefer to discuss something else.  Where does this go?
It seems in some circles if you can’t earn it then better to buy it and not always in a transparent manner. Check this story from Emma Wollacott on Facebook. If you can’t see it on Facebook then here’s the detail via The Guardian. It seems that some enterprising hack was prepared to ‘cover’ a company in Forbes, provided the company or its PR is willing to fork over £300 for the pleasure. I can only presume that this is not the first time the hack has asked for payment. I argued that Forbes only has itself to blame. For years, it has been co-mingling genuine reporting with advertorial and blatant advertising copy. Is it any surprise that someone found a hole in that model and chose to take advantage of it? What next?
My take
I believe the notion of ‘earned media’ as currently articulated is misleading. Everyone in media is getting paid somehow so let’s get that straight. On the other hand, I do think that vendors don’t take enough advantage of the opportunities to get customers to speak for them. Vendors who can accomplish this have genuinely earned the right to be heard because they have delivered something of value that is meaningful to a buying audience. Vendors know this but for reasons I’ve never fully understood, find it hard to get customers talking. It’s an ongoing problem with which I have personally battled for close on 20 years.
Everything else? With some exceptions – and here I hope we do a better job than most – I’d argue that much of what you will see is little more than playing up the entertainment value of the expression du jour. That’s not to say there is plenty worth reporting and analyzing. Some of the biggest problems that organizations face require careful dissection and analysis. But for as long as media views itself as little more than ratings driven entertainment, the notion of media as ‘earned’ will always seem a tad fuzzy.
Image credit - Featured image via Reddit, post image via NYTDisclosure - Oracle and Salesforce are premier partners at the time of writing. Read more on: Content marketing 