
The past couple of times we’ve taken a look at Starbucks digital prowess, we’ve stepped away from our normal admiration for the firm’s savvy approach to digitization. 
I took a look at how changes to the firm’s loyalty scheme had impacted on the customer experience, while my normally mild-mannered colleague Jon Reed had an unaccustomed full-scale rant at what he saw as the firm’s shortcomings. 
Flash forward to this week and the firm has rolled out some stats designed to show that, as Chief Operating Officer Kevin Johnson puts it in Starbucks-speak, the “digital flywheel” momentum is back on track. He says: 

We have now enabled this digital flywheel to spin even faster with the launch of true one-to-one personalization. While still in the early days, personalized reward offerings have more than doubled customer response rates over previous segmented email campaigns. This translates to increased customer engagement and spend.

 He adds: 

We are enabling these digital experiences to bring joy to our customers while driving business outcomes. These digital flywheel investments are core to elevating our brand experience and building for our future.


I have to say that the only terminology that makes me cringe more than digital flywheel is CEO Howard Schultz’s description of Starbucks core theme as being one of “premiumization”. But Johnson trots out some stats to back up his claim: 

Mobile payment now represents 25% of all transactions, up from 20% a year ago. Customers continue to embrace Mobile Order & Pay, which now represents 6% of transactions, reaching 7% in the month of September. To put this into perspective, approximately 3,300 of our stores are handling 10% of their orders at peak through Mobile Order & Pay. In 600 stores, Mobile Order & Pay represents over 20% of orders at peak, triple the number from last year. 
The data shows that Mobile Order & Pay is making a difference for both our partners and our customers. For customers, Mobile Order & Pay provides a simple, elegant ordering experience, enabling convenience when they want it and rewards them with stars along the way. For partners, Mobile Order & Pay reduces line congestion, enables a more efficient in-store operation.
We are continuously improving the Mobile Order & Pay experience with newly released functionality that presents our personalized offer directly on the front screen of the mobile app and allows the customer to save favorite stores, favorite customized beverages.

As for the Starbucks Rewards loyalty scheme, that’s seen an 18% year-on-year increase in membership, he adds, and is proving very strong in the China Asia Pacific (CAP) expansion for Starbucks: 

With loyalty as a cornerstone, we are extremely pleased with the growth and evolution of our digital ecosystem in CAP. Currently, 13 CAP markets of our 15 CAP markets offer a loyalty program and stored value card. Eleven of those markets accept digital payment. We now have 20 million Starbucks Rewards members in the CAP region, with over $1 billion loaded on the stored value cards in FY 2016. The momentum of our digital platform in the region is particularly evident in China where we now have 12 million members, just under half of whom are active Rewards members. 

That said, there’s still a huge untapped opportunity in the rewards scheme, adds Starbucks Global Chief Strategy Officer Matthew Ryan: 

We know that very few of our customers, relatively speaking, have become members. And that, to us, represents an enormous opportunity moving forward. What we do know is that when we are able to convert somebody into being a member of the program, we see tremendous incrementally as they join the program. 

As for the impact on customers when Starbucks changed the ’t’s and ‘c’s of the loyalty scheme, that’s largely behind the firm now, according to Ryan: 

Over the past few months, we have worked on successfully transitioning our program to a spend-based program, and we are now seeing the uptick in spend per member and engagement that we anticipated from the launch of the program. So we’re completely on track and accelerating in that regard. Our next big opportunity moving forward, especially in the natural window that we have ahead of us in the next two quarters is to take advantage of the traffic we see, the card volume we do to convert even more people into Starbucks Rewards.

The Trump/Clinton factor
Looming on the Starbucks agenda now is the outcome of next week’s Presidential Election, which CEO Schultz believes is likely to have a significant impact on the direction of retail and e-commerce. He says that he’s picking up concern wherever he travels around the world: 

I don’t think we’ve ever witnessed such concern about what could happen in the US as a result of the election…There’s no question, as I speak to other retailers and other merchants both in and out of our sector, that there isn’t one exception where everyone is experiencing, I think, a very unpredictable and erratic chain of events where it’s very, very hard… I think everyone is hoping that post the election, there will be a return to a natural state of affairs in terms of the consumer behavior.

He adds:

There’s no doubt that over the next five years or so, we are going to see a dramatic level of retailers not be able to sustain their level of core business as a traditional bricks-and-mortar retailer, and their omni-channel approach is not going to be sustainable to maintain their cost of their infrastructure. As a result of that, there’s going to be tremendous amount of changes with regard to the retail landscape.
We believe, as we look down that pipe and look at the future, that our ability to maintain our growth in terms of new stores domestically and internationally, coupled with the fact that Starbucks still maintains a very special place in terms of a sense of community, the third place environment, and people looking for and seeking out human contact and a place to go, that as these store closures occur, and they will, that we are going to be in a very unique position five years, 10 years down the road, because there’s going to be a lot less people competing for those customers. I’m not talking about the coffee category; I’m talking overall.
But we are in the very, very early stages of a tremendous change in the bricks-and-mortar footprint of retailers domestically and internationally as a result of the sea change in how people are buying things, and that’s going to have, I think, a negative effect on all of retail. 

He concludes that the only certainty is uncertainty and that the only thing to do is to keep on keeping on: 

I think we got to get through this uncertainty. We’re playing the long game in everything we do and we’re going to continue to do everything we can to win the hearts and minds of our customers.

My take
Away from ghastly corporate speak about ‘premiumization’, what comes across loud and clear from Schultz and his team is the ongoing need to innovate and change, offline as well as online. It’s a philosophy that, occasional bumps in the road aside, has served the firm well. The Starbucks CEO’s grim assessment of the impact of the US Election on retail doesn’t make for encouraging reading, regardless of which side you’re on politically. Whoever wins on Tuesday night, it’s going to be a bumpy ride. 
Image credit - StarbucksRead more on: MobileRetail e-commerce and the omni-channelUser experienceUX and application design 