
TUI Travel Group, the company that owns dozens of travel brands in Europe, including the likes of First Choice and Thomson, has reported stable third quarter earnings for the period to the end of June and has said that it is continuing to focus on the integration of its technology platforms and is targeting a “single view of the customer”.
But the company’s results were also impacted by the tragic terrorist attack in Tunisia earlier this year, which led to 38 people being killed, 33 of which were on TUI holidays. It said that the attack would cost it £20 million this year.
However, TUI reported 18% growth in earnings on last year to €194m for the quarter and reported a group profit of €49.4m for the quarter, compared with a loss of €5.6m in the same period last year.
Chief Executives of TUI Group, Friedrich Joussen and Peter Long, commented:
This quarter was marked by the tragic events in Tunisia at the end of June. Supporting our customers, their families and our colleagues through this sad time remains our highest priority. We are very proud of the commitment and dedication our colleagues have shown throughout this unprecedented situation. Recent weeks have also seen continued economic uncertainty in Greece.
Within our business model there is an inherent assumption that we will face a level of disruption as a result of external events. We are continuing to deliver our growth strategy as the world’s leading tourism business. In spite of the events in Tunisia and Greece, we have continued to deliver strong growth in underlying EBITA.
This demonstrates the resilience of our integrated business model. Tourism earnings growth was driven by Cruise, Hotels & Resorts and a strong performance by the UK.
 Throughout its earnings the company referenced its investments in technology and digital, which is part of its plan for a “One Mainstream Platform”, a project that is focused on using the scale of the business to improve efficiency. It has been restructuring its back office and is consolidating its multiple platforms into one.
TUI also noted that it is implementing a SAP ‘customer platform’ and is hoping to better track its customers across their journey in order to obtain the holy grail of a ‘single view’. It said:
Our platform development is focussed on customer experience, which in turn will drive profitable top-line growth. Our central mobility and online platforms continued to evolve. Our digital assistant app has received 1.8 million downloads to date and will be a key driver of customer engagement at every stage of the journey. Our online platform, implemented now in the UK and Nordics, continues to enhance the online customer experience and drive higher conversion rates.
In addition, we are implementing a SAP-based central customer platform which will collate all information on our customers across their journey, providing a single view of the customer; and we are also implementing our eCRM platform which will support strategic marketing. We have a strong management team with experienced commercial leaders.
By integrating our management team, we are making joined-up decisions across the business, ensuring that we deliver our common goal of achieving profitable top-line growth. The flatter organisation structure announced in May is now firmly in place and working well.
TUI also highlighted that both its direct and online channels performed well over the nine months to the end of June.
Control over distribution continues to be central to our marketing and sales strategy. All source markets are focused on delivering more direct and more online sales. In the 9-month period controlled distribution grew by three percentage points to 70%. Online distribution grew by three percentage points to 41%. Good progress was made across all source markets.
We continue to increase the number of customers booked through our controlled channels, at 69% of Summer bookings to date, up two percentage points on prior year. The online channel accounts for 39% of bookings, up three percentage points. We have also continued to expand our unique concept offering and we continue to expand the level of cross-sell across our markets.
53% of UK customers have booked online for Summer 2015, an increase of two percentage points on prior year, with direct distribution remaining at 93%.
Finally, TUI noted that it is continuing to increase its offering in its core markets, which will be accessed customers via its integrated technology platform. It said:
In order to grow ahead of the market, we are also broadening our offering in existing source markets. This includes long-haul expansion and offering more choice of flight times and durations for our unique holidays. For example, in the UK, long-haul volumes increased by over 20% in the 9-month period, and we have introduced booking optionality for customers to choose different flight times and durations for their holiday by utilising third party flying capacity.
In addition, new source markets will deliver additional growth and increased occupancy for our hotels. These markets will be accessed by our scalable technology platform, which has already been launched in Spain.
Read more on: CRM and customer experience 