
The last thing anyone wants when they move computing to the public cloud is to have it perform badly, or fail entirely. If in-house infrastructure slows down or has a minor outage, people generally take it in their stride, so long as there’s a sensible explanation and steps are taken to prevent it happening again. But if you just moved to the cloud and things go awry, then it’s your judgement on the line for entrusting vital IT assets to a third party.
So it’s understandable that IT tends to overprovision in a cloud setting. The spare capacity acts as a buffer that gives you time to react if things start to go wrong. Perhaps you don’t need quite so much, but you don’t want to risk problems by trimming it back too much.
In any case, no one is going to question the cost, unless it’s massively more than the cost of the in-house alternative. If IT says, this is the cost of reliable performance, who’s going to argue?
Neutralizing overspend
Problem is, the cost of this overprovisioning of cloud resources typically comes to almost a third of the total bill. That’s according to Turbonomic, a vendor that offers a means of neutralizing this overspend, and whose beta customers of its latest release have seen average savings of 30% on their AWS or Azure bills.
Although there are other vendors that offer similar solutions, Turbonomic takes a unique approach that draws its inspiration from supply chain management rather than the IT field. As industry analyst IDC explained recently when it published a survey of innovators in the multicloud management field:
Turbonomic’s platform analyzes real-time workload demand and matches it to available resources across multiple cloud environments using market-based economic queuing analytics.
Put simply, the Turbonomics software analyzes the cloud environment as if it were a marketplace in which application workloads are buyers and infrastructure resources are sellers. It then works out the best match between these marketplace participants, taking into account whatever policies have been set up to govern the transactions, for example data sovereignty or workload separation.
The advantage of the marketplace approach is that it dynamically adjusts to changing demand, which means that it ensures applications receive the resources they need before things start to go wrong — without bringing resources live before they’re needed. Thus the marketplace mechanism determines precisely where to place that fine line between too little and too much resource.
Multi-cloud infrastructure
Formerly known as VMTurbo, the company’s monitoring and automation platform has previously focused on managing private clouds. Its latest release, announced this week, now extends its reach into Amazon Web Services (AWS) and Microsoft Azure public cloud environments, and is able to manage across a multi-cloud infrastructure.
This kind of multi-cloud environment is increasingly common today, but the complexity involved means that the ability to monitor, analyze, and proactively prevent issues from occurring is “beyond human scale,” says the company, creating the need for an automated solution.
As well as managing across existing multi-cloud environments, the platform also includes tools for planning migration of workloads into a public cloud environment.
My take
Enterprises are turning to an increasingly dynamic cloud environment, with workloads being matched to infrastructure resources often for just minutes or seconds. Applications no longer run on defined machines, which means adopting new, automated mechanisms for capacity planning and management.
IT often looks at this as first and foremost a performance and resilience issue. Tools like Turbonomic provide an important wake-up call that different choices can have a substantial financial impact too. IT will have to start paying more attention to the cost dimension alongside the other parameters measured in its performance dashboards.
Image credit - Cloud dollar sign under magnifying glass on blue sky © spacezerocom – Fotolia.comRead more on: Cloud platforms - infrastructure and architectureIT service management 