
Big data is a classic IT buzzword that is both vague and overused, a combination that renders it almost worthless and certainly less descriptive than cloud, which at least describes a unique operating model. Indeed, in an era when the total amount of stored data is measured in billions of terabytes and growing 40% annually, every organization is sitting on big data.
Yet the concept of big data, with its repositories of useful business information, suggests tantalizing uses of unfathomable pools of business records, sensor readings and customer transactions. For example, it’s common for retailers to log and keep every item, on every transaction, from every store, and then combine and correlate it with a myriad of external data — such as weather conditions and nearby events at each location, social media trends, local and national macroeconomic statistics, and any number of internal business, employee or marketing metrics.
Imagine the valuable marketing, buying and process improvements that could be made by filtering, correlating and summarizing all that information? Such is the promise of big data, however it’s one that can’t be realized by technology alone. Indeed, technology is the least important part of data-driven business decisions.
By itself, a vast ocean of data is nothing but expensive noise, both costly to acquire and maintain. It remains noise unless filtered down into concise, understandable nuggets of information that can trigger business epiphanies and insights. These are the ‘ah ha’ moments that spark changes like business process optimization, new product and service creation and investment prioritization — the insights that turn big data into big profits.
The path from data accumulation to business transformation is nicely captured by the big data business model created by EMC’s resident data science guru, Bill Schmarzo.
Schmarzo and his colleagues shared their expertise and walked attendees through a process of data exploitation at a recent EMC World Big Data Vision Workshop based on the consulting sessions he conducts with EMC customers. A key theme is that the process of turning raw data into refined insight is both difficult and doable. Yet organizations shouldn’t expect perfection from the start, as the process of informing data-driven decisions is both imperfect and correctible. Asking increasingly useful questions that lead to more refined and accurate data models, which in turn generate more valuable business results, is the ultimate sign of progress and way to successful data utilization.
Business Maturity Model — the path from data to decisions
Schmarzo has developed a five-phase Big Data Business Maturity Model (right) that illustrates an evolutionary path that begins with bulk data collection and culminates with what he calls business metamorphosis, in which data informs, validates and critiques every business decision and process.
 
Obviously enough, it starts with data collection by monitoring key business processes. Ironically, this is where most organizations begin and end their big data journey, since Schmarzo characterizes the next step as perhaps the most difficult: crossing the “analytics chasm” to transform data into useful business information.
The new economics of storage, where data is no longer a scarce resource, but a cheap, easily accumulated, stored and processed commodity, requires organizations to reassess how they wield data to analyze key business processes and carefully think about the types of previously unanswerable questions that data analysis can solve. This means taking a fresh look at the fundamental elements of business success unshackled from prior limitations on data collection and evaluation; in sum, asking previously unanswerable questions.
In Schmarzo’s view, crossing the data analytics chasm requires organizations to “think like a data scientist”, a process he summarizes in six steps (detailed here and here).

Identify Key Business Initiatives: The activities and results that are strategic to the business, characterized as those critical to business performance, documented, financially measurable, cross-functional, of executive-level importance and that provide strategic, competitive advantage.
Identify Strategic Nouns: The entities directly affected by the above business initiatives such as customers, employees, products, services, stores, marketing campaigns, fleet equipment, inventory, etc.
Brainstorm Strategic Noun Questions: This most important step entails identifying the unknowns you hope to answer through data analysis. In increasing importance, the questions are either descriptive (what happened), predictive (what’s likely to happen) or prescriptive (what should happen, what to do next).
Generate “By Analyses”: Refining the questions to incorporate multivariate correlations using additional data sources. For example, sales and profit margin by product category, store, day/month/quarter, local and individual customer demographics, marketing and promotional spending, etc.
Score the Technique: Identify measures and “by analysis” queries that are correlated or that can be combined to improve the predictive results. Schmarzo uses the FICO credit score as a typical example of a summary measure that combines many elements such as payment history, total outstanding credit balances, savings and net worth.
Close the Loop: Validate that model predictions and recommendations produce the desired results, measure deviations between predictions and post hoc measurements and use to refine questions and improve the model.

From insights to business transformation (aka metamorphosis)
Data insights are first put into practice by optimizing existing business processes, but the real value of data analytics comes through monetization, both via identifying ways to grow current sales and by creating new products and services. An EMC consulting customer, the Pechanga Resort and Casino provided a great example of data-driven monetization at an EMC World presentation where executives from the California resort described their experience going through what they describe as a “big data transformation”.
As part of a major expansion, the resort wanted to both enhance spending by its best customers and prioritize capital investments towards the areas with the greatest ROI. Using data from player’s cards, room registrations, credit applications and other sources, the IT team developed models to predict a player’s lifetime value, gaming profile, target new players, assess the effectiveness of promotional campaigns and comps, optimize game mix and casino floor usage and improve credit decisions. Pechanga’s VP of IT, John Kenefick, said a key goal is to target customers in real time, while they are still at the resort, not after their visit, to both enhance the guest’s current experience and identify and correct problems that might keep them from becoming repeat customers. The value of real-time analytics and decisions is further enhanced through the use of a mobile app, where the resort can locate and communicate with guests as they roam throughout the property. As many retailers have discovered, the combination of instant data analysis and mobile location services can be used in creative new ways for sales, customer support and promotions.
Although reluctant to specify figures, Pechanga executives claim the big data project achieved a positive return within the first few months of implementation.
My take
As data has become exponentially easier to accumulate and cheaper to store businesses not only face data management problems, but data usage challenges. The former is more amenable to automation and technology, however the later will always require hard work and serious thinking about an organization’s key elements of success. As Schmarzo aptly puts it, useful data-driven decisions require information that is strategic, actionable and material, however I contend it also requires executives with the courage, vision and leadership to use the data to change the business, whether through optimization or product/service creation.
Business dominance in the industrial era went to those that were quick to exploit the power and efficiency to factory automation. Likewise, in the information age, organizations that wield data as a strategic asset and inculcate data-driven thinking into the culture and business processes will gain a tremendous competitive advantage.
Image credit - Feature image - Dollars flying into digital globe © fgnopporn - Fotolia.com; big data maturity model by EMCDisclosure - EMC covered most of the author's travel coasts for attending EMC World. Read more on: Analytics planning and data analysisDigital transformation - frictionless enterprise 