
If the rumors of Twitter being on the auction block lead to the obvious conclusion, it would mark the second social networking site to give up its independence this year after Microsoft bought LinkedIn for a reported $26.2 billion in June.
There are loads of social sites but only a few with the reach of LinkedIn, Twitter, and Facebook so sidelining one of them raises issues about the future of the social media space. No doubt the new owners will have grand plans but becoming part of a larger entity is not the same as calling your own shots.
Mergers and acquisitions are part of company life especially in Silicon Valley, but this is different both because of the market served and the uncertainty it brings.
Social media has exhibited a curious and perhaps never before seen tendency in category formation. Under more normal circumstances and once any market gets to a steady state, you will likely see a clear market leader, a number two whose marketplace job is to keep the leader honest, and a third player barely hanging on. But you’d also see these three vendors having similar products.
For example, databases formed such a market and once it began commoditizing, the companies that were not Oracle fell into the arms of waiting suitors, often hardware companies needing something to augment their gear and operating systems offers.
Social media is a bit different. Under this rubric, there are vastly different products that in other times might have been separate categories. LinkedIn, Twitter, and Facebook are about as different as can be. But a consolidation is beginning in social networking, a.k.a. social media, that’s causing a premature shake up. The likely reason is that they all use the same revenue/business model, which is advertising. The fact that they’re all social, albeit all different, doesn’t seem to matter as much.
The advertising model is a mismatch for the product category. Metcalf’s Law states that the value of a network is directly proportional to the number of nodes it has. Which means that the bigger the network the more valuable its connections are and advertisers primarily want bigness—i.e. eyeballs. They need to know that an advertising spend was aimed at the largest possible audience. Not only that but the idea of advertising on multiple networks is not terribly appealing if at all possible—who wants to pay double?
The New York Times story that reported Twitter’s possible acquisition said:
For two years, Twitter has been casting about for ways to attract new users and to become a social media destination on the order of Facebook. While people initially flocked to Twitter, its new-user growth has slowed sharply as people complained about how difficult it was to use the service.
So the most successful vendor in the social networking space is Facebook, which is garnering the lion’s share of advertising revenues. Moreover, the article continues to describe Twitter’s central issue, it wasn’t growing enough to satisfy investors, in fact it had more or less plateaued. The article also mentioned a good-looking balance sheet with $3.6 billion in assets and $1.6 billion in debts. However,
Lack of growth also began to erode advertiser demand, which had remained robust even as Twitter’s overall number of users stagnated at around 313 million people. Advertisers aiming for big audiences tended to choose Facebook, while those looking for younger audiences have the option of Snapchat.
That’s a bit surprising given the serious workout the service has received during this election cycle. But it all points to the advertising model as the flaw. In all of the years of the (brief) life of social networking it’s hard to point to a more successful (or even viable) business model. Advertising just doesn’t scale well thanks to Metcalf’s Law.
Truth be told, there are hundreds of social networks out there and it’s difficult to imagine most of them making money; at this point they may just be vanity sites. There’s Cucumbertown (networking for cooks), DeviantArt (art community), GetGlue (for entertainment) and many more. Few sites have the mega-registered users of Facebook or Twitter and most exist in obscurity, which might be fine for a highly focused niche community for cooks but not very useful for a general purpose one looking to survive through advertising.
The social media marketplace is decidedly retail oriented and in retail it’s all about getting the lowest price; just check Walmart. Social media is free and that’s as low as it gets—at least until they come up with something else—so that’s why the advertising model is central. But advertising is obviously failing if you were expecting a thriving social media market at least. In this we see a recapitulation of the Yahoo-Google war that Google won. There simply wasn’t enough room in the market for two search engines doing about the same thing and, yes there were/are numerous engines still extant that don’t make much money.
Search is different in that we can all work with many but we gravitate to the most familiar one. That’s not the case with social media. Users do very different things with Twitter, Facebook, and LinkedIn and they use them preferentially. You don’t conduct a job search on Twitter and you don’t run for president on LinkedIn. As a result social media is rapidly becoming the thing we all want to use but don’t want to pay for.
My take
Social media will soon look like the database market with most products no longer independent other than the leader. This approach has potential benefits for many parties. For users, they get to continue using the services probably for free. The eventual acquiring parties will then have an attractive loss leader they can use to gather market trend data and attract customers with. Meanwhile the acquirees will be somewhat insulated from profit and loss demands and new synergies with parent companies might make profit growth more possible.
This is all good enough but it pinpoints an important shortcoming in the brave new world of online-everything and free or nearly free services. Advertising is a limited business model and at some point—maybe now—we’ll outgrow it and need to figure out ways to make money that do not include selling eyeballs. This could be good news. Additional for profit models on the Web would potentially make it easier to deliver better quality services without so many ads screaming for attention. If that scenario turns out to be true then it also means there should be funds available to ensure a thriving developer ecosystem that finds new and inventive ways to both monetize and serves a variety of as yet unthought of use cases.
 
Image credit - via TwitterRead more on: Content marketingSocial 