
Martha Lane-Fox
It’s a tale of two peers for Twitter – one a social media high-flyer start-up, the other a member of the UK’s House of Lords. 
First up, the firm snapped up employee and manager feedback start-up Peer late last week. 
The out-of-the-blue news came, appropriately enough, in a tweet from founder George Hu, formerly Chief Operating Officer at Salesforce:

Beyond that, not much is known. Peer’s website appears to have shut down already, with only a holding statement on the homepage. 

What Twitter plans to do with its new acquisition remains to be seen, but Hu says:

Peer only launched last year, pitched as a social tool that would revolutionize corporate feedback by allowing workers to continuously monitor their performance rating.
For his part, Hu is enigmatic about his own future and it’s unclear if he’s moving across with the technology:

One peer who is joining Twitter is Martha Lane-Fox, Baroness of Soho in the House of Lords, better known to non-UK readers as the co-founder of dot com darling LastMinute.com. Lane-Fox will be only the second woman on Twitter’s 10-strong board, beginning at last to address its diversity shortcomings. She’s pretty excited, it seems: 

Twitter’s CEO Jack Dorsey tweeted that other directors would be appointed soon, and they would be: 

ones that will bring diversity and represent the strong communities on Twitter. This matters & is a must.

In recent years, Lane-Fox has worked in the UK government as Digital Champion after being given a peerage by Prime Minister David Cameron. Her DirectGov 2010 and beyond: revolution, not evolution report led to the creation of the UK Government Digital Service (GDS), which in turn has influenced the formation of the US Digital Service and the 18f digital government agency in Washington. 
She is already a board member for Channel 4, Marks and Spencer, and digital skills charity Go ON UK, as well as chair of doteveryone.org.uk, an organization she founded to promote the understanding and use of internet-enabled technologies.
She’s joined on the board by Pepsi-Cola Chief Finance Officer Hugh Johnston, whose unfortunate claim to fame as he takes up his seat on the Twitter board is that he’d never actually, well, tweeted, until the announcement of his appointment:

This lack of tweet-experience didn’t entirely go unnoticed among the Twitterati:


Still, Twitter did get a nice share price boost on the back of rumblings of a tie-up between Twitter and MasterCard, based on comments made by card firm’s President of International Markets Ann Cairns. 
What she actually told CNBC was:

We see companies like Facebook and Twitter occupying a really good space in social media and we are always over in Silicon Valley talking to those companies. 
I think the way we would work with them is just the way we work with the other tech giants, we would figure out what we can do together, where our network could play into their space and connect up. Obvious spaces are if they want to offer payments to their clients.

 There’s nothing more to go on that, but the speculation gave Twitter’s share price a bump of 8%. 
My take
The MasterCard rumors are interesting, but nothing more than that. There’s no immediate indication that a deal is in the works or that any such deal would be exclusive to Twitter. Facebook was also mentioned in the remarks that got everyone hot under the collar. Time will tell.
Martha Lane-Fox is a very good catch for the Twitter board. While many point to the fact that LastMinute.com bled money in a very dot com way while she was associated with the firm, Lane-Fox is a savvy, eloquent and passionate digital champion and a hugely impressive communicator. She should be a major asset to Twitter. 
(Confession time. When I reported on Salesforce appointing former European Commissioner Neelie Kroes to its board, I mentioned that I’d suspected that the firm might appoint a well-connected European political figure, but that I’d had someone else in mind for the role. That someone was in fact the Baroness of Soho herself. Right woman, wrong company!)
Finally, what to say about Peer? Other than congratulations to Hu, the most obvious thing is, ‘George – what took you so long?’ (Not!)
Disclosure - At time of writing, Salesforce is a premier partner of diginomica. Read more on: DiversityHCM and the digital future of workMobileSocial 