
Anyone who follows my Twitter feed knows that my Twitter usage has fallen dramatically over the last year. It’s not dead to me but it is languishing. Ad buyers seem to feel the same way as the company’s results were first leaked, then the share price crashed before trading was halted, only to nose dive once trading resumed. The image right shows the gory details. WTF is going on?
First up the results were leaked early on a day which was already seeing volatility following reports of a ship being seized in the Persian Gulf.
Next, it seems Twitter’s investor relations people hit the release ‘go’ button an hour early on lackluster results, as this Tweet confirms.
Today’s $TWTR earnings release was sourced from Twitter’s Investor Relations website https://t.co/QD6138euja. No leak. No hack.
— Selerity (@Selerity) April 28, 2015
As might be imagined, the markets went nuts with the shares taking a 6% haircut before trading was halted for a while. Once trading resumed, the shares went into freefall before trading back up slightly before the close and finishing around 18% down on the day. As a side note – Twitter’s AR says the release was leaked, which in turn will almost certainly mean someone will suffer a severe career deflection.
We asked @nyse to halt trading once we discovered our Q1 earnings numbers had leaked, and published our results as soon as possible. (1/2) — TwitterIR (@TwitterIR) April 28, 2015
The shares would likely have been pummeled anyway given the extent of the miss. Revenue grew a healthy enough 74% year over year to $436 million. This was below guidance of $440-450 million but well below consensus of $456 million. My take at this point is that the miss was not that bad but you all know my views about The Casino aka Wall Street when it comes to short term thinking. But then if you take out the impact of currency headwinds, Twitter would have been on target. Not that short sellers care about that when they have a chance to make a few bucks.
Adding to the fire, Twitter gave a softer than expected outlook for the rest of the year:
Twitter’s first quarter revenues were affected by a lower-than-expected contribution from its newer direct response products. The Company expects this revenue impact to continue for the remainder of the fiscal year…
In the statement, Dick Costolo, CEO of Twitter said:
“It is still early days for these products, and we have a strong pipeline that we believe will drive increased value for direct response advertisers in the future. We remain confident in our strategy and in Twitter’s long-term opportunity, and our focus remains on creating sustainable shareholder value by executing against our three priorities: strengthening the core, reducing barriers to consumption and delivering new apps and services.”
For the full year, Twitter is now forecasting revenue in the range $21.17-2.27 billion. The Street was thinking $2.37 billion so at the low end, Twitter is ‘off’ 9.5% – a big miss based on analyst predictions.
On the plus side, while the earnings number widened to $162.4 million from $132.3 million year over year, the net loss per share ‘only’ increased from 0.23 to 0.25.
The bigger problem for Twitter management is that while recent attention has been on Twitter’s ability to grow its audience, something that appears to have been addressed well, its product investments are not paying off as expected in higher revenue. This is bound to lead to an element of confusion and concern. Bloomberg reported:
“It calls into question why they didn’t see this coming,” said Victor Anthony, an analyst at Axiom Capital Management, who has a buy rating on Twitter’s stock. “I don’t think anyone ever questioned their ability to generate revenues.”
The investor call, which is underway as this is written will no doubt prove to be fiery on replay. Check out the earnings hashtag #TWTREarnings for questions and commentary from pundits and other interested parties.

Read more on: Social 