
Is this the new battlefront opening up between Facebook and Twitter – see who can lose the most subscribers in a three month period and watch your share price collapse as a result?
Den picked up on the second quarter numbers from Twitter on Friday. What interested me though was the messaging coming from CEO Jack Dorsey and how it contrasts with the same from Facebook CEO Mark Zuckerberg.
Coming in the wake of Facebook’s remarkable achievement of delivering the biggest ever one day drop in Wall Street history, Twitter could only manage a relatively paltry 20% decline on the back of announcing that it’s lost 1 million users over the last quarter.
To be fair to Twitter, a lot of that’s down to a concerted effort to clean house in the wake of recent data privacy and Fake News scandals. That hasn’t been entirely without its own problems – the one way of guaranteeing your account gets locked down is to change your Twitter handle to Elon Musk! It seems that blocking Nazis is hard, blocking tech billionaires is pretty easy…
Add to this purge, the need to deal with GDPR (General Data Protection Regulation) and this decline in user numbers is going to bleed into the rest of the year.Twitter reckons it has “identified and challenged” over 9 million probable spam or automated accounts every week up to the end of May 2018. That’s up from 6.4 million in December 2017. Whether that’s because the platform is coming under more attack from bots et al or whether Twitter is just looking harder for abuse at last is open to question.
But it’s a necessary hit to take, according to Dorsey:
We believe that Twitter’s value as a daily service is enhanced when the conversation on the platform is healthier and people feel safe, freely expressing themselves. During the second quarter, we launched new tools to address behaviors that distort and detract from the public conversation and introduced new measures to handle spam, malicious automation and platform manipulation.
We also acquired Smyte, a technology company that specializes in safety, spam and security issues to help us address these challenges faster. This is important work that complements what we’re doing to connect people with interest and help them discover information. We’ve introduced new machine learning algorithms that organize a conversation around events and make it easier for people to find and follow topics, events and interest.
He adds that the pursuit of ‘health’ on the platform is crucial for future growth, even it means taking painful short term hits:
We do believe that our health work and focus on improving the health of the public conversation on Twitter is a growth factor over the long term. We want to make sure that we’re building this into our DNA. We want to make sure that we’re able to measure it and held accountable to it as well, but one of the big reasons that we’re doing it is when we do focus on removing some of the burden of people reporting or blocking or muting, we do see positive results in our numbers. It’s still early. We have a lot more work to do, especially in applying machine learning and deep learning and newer models to recognize behavior on the network and shut it down early.
Tears to a glass eye
Dorsey insists that these efforts are winning plaudits from existing advertisers who are looking for greater transparency:
Earlier this month, Keith Weed, the Chief Marketing Officer of Unilever, the second largest advertiser in the world, publicly praised our efforts. Keith, who is named by Forbes as one of the world’s most influential CMOs tweeted, pleased to see Twitter taking a big stand against the fake followers polluting the digital ecosystem, great step forward which strengthens the industry and I hope to see more following. We’re making progress and we’ll continue to invest heavily in making Twitter a healthier service, because it’s the right thing to do for Twitter as a platform, for the long term health of our business and for society as a whole.
As with Facebook’s tag team of Zuckerberg and Sandberg last week, Dorsey is inevitably in ‘glass half full’ mode, pitching the unifying and positive potential of Twitter:
A few weeks ago, a reporter tweeted, what app has changed your life the most in the past 10 years. Musa Tariq [Chief Brand Manager at Ford Motor Company] responded, ‘ Twitter, introduced me to my wife, some of my best friends, my mentors, my best hires and colleagues and through it, I learned from people I only could have dreamt of prior to its existence’. That experience like millions of other illustrates unique value of Twitter and shows the important role it plays in everyday life.
And in case that didn’t warm the cockles of your heart, there’s more:
People use Twitter to talk about what’s happening. There were 72,000 tweets per minute at the end of game one of the NBA Finals when JR Smith dribbled out the clock and said taking a shot. Twitter provokes conversation. When Serena Williams tweeted [that] she took her first steps, I was training and missed it. I cried. It prompted an outpouring of support and started a dialog about the challenges working mothers face.
Twitter catalog’s defining moment in history, some of the most memorable moments in the World Cup happened on Twitter, in addition to those on the field with 115 billion impressions during the tournament. We see these types of moments every day that bring us together when we agree and all too often divide us when we don’t, but they inspire us to do better and they provide the context for the actions we’re taking to prioritize the long term health of Twitter over near term metrics.
It’d bring a tear to a glass eye, it really would…
My take
One of the more interesting things that Dorsey said, almost in passing, was:
We do believe that Twitter is more of an interest network than a social network. People come to it to figure out what’s going on with a particular topic, with a particular event, a particular interest, find a community of conversation around it and engage in it.
That’s great as a basic principle, but as events have proved, it’s been all too easy to abuse and to render toxic a platform that does indeed have the potential to be unifying and empowering. While some of Dorsey’s ‘mom, pop and apple pie’ rhetoric sticks in the craw, the recognition that there’s a need for a big clean-up is an important one.
The trick now – and a very difficult one to pull off – is to keep ahead of the bots and the abusers without becoming so restrictive as to eradicate one of the great foundations of Twitter and other social media platforms. Dorsey to his credit does recognise that this is an ongoing work-in-progress:
I do believe that we can move at a much more rapid pace. And we’re doing a bunch of moves right now that are more course-grained to address and acknowledge a bunch of the things that we’ve seen for quite some time, but we’re unable to fully meet. But then it will be steady state and [we] will continue to push that work as fast as possible, but I am seeing a really good discipline and the pace of innovation continues to rise.
I may yet come to regret saying this, but at this point I kinda feel Dorsey ‘gets it’ more than his counterpart over at Facebook. But only time will tell…
Image credit - Pinterest Read more on: Data privacyDigital and content marketingGoverning identity privacy and securityIdentityRegulationSocial 