
With less than three months to go before the U.S. midterm elections, the knives are out in force on social media, with Twitter being the latest object of partisan wrath.  California Rep. Kevin McCarthy, House majority leader, and presumptive future Speaker, angrily tweeted last week:
Another day, another example of conservatives being censored on social media. @jack easy fix: explain to Congress what is going on. #StopTheBias cc @IngrahamAngle
1:06 PM – Aug 17, 2018
McCarthy was complaining that his retweet of Fox News “personality” Laura Ingraham had been censored and showed up in his feed as “This tweet is not available because it contains potentially sensitive content.”
The backlash to McCarthy’s complaint was immediate and brutal with dozens of Twitter users pointing out that his sensitive media filters were turned on. He was threatening to hold Congressional hearings to determine why he was censoring himself.
Undeterred (and apparently unembarrassed), McCarthy fired off a letter to House Energy and Commerce Committee Chairman Greg Walden that read in part:
I am especially concerned by revelations that some social media companies are filtering the information that their users can see. These filtering and censorship practices have targeted conservatives disproportionately. The ultimate effect of these practices has been to limit productive dialogue about issues of national importance, and to deepen distrust and division between Americans of different beliefs.
Recently we learned that Twitter limited the visibility of certain conservative accounts, so that some of their tweets did not appear in searches and their accounts were more difficult to find through the search feature. This ‘shadow ban’ made it harder for users to get information about certain public officials for even to learn that their social media presence existed. Twitter ultimately implemented a change to stop penalizing conservatives, but serious questions remain about how and why the company filters content on its platform.
Shadow banning, also known as ghost banning, toading and being “sent to Coventry’ in Old English. has been around for a long time as a moderation tool on forums and message boards to keep trolls, abusers and chronic troublemakers out of the conversation without alerting them that they’ve been suspended from the public view. Those same people can continue posting as usual but their posts are hidden from the rest of the community. Although not widely known, many corporate-owned platforms adopt policies that include shadow banning. We call that good practice when undertaken responsibly.
Vice added fuel to the fire on July 25 when it reported that Twitter was “limiting the visibility of prominent Republicans in search results.” It turned out to be a bug in the algorithm Twitter used to rank users’ online behavior and was fixed in 24 hours. But that didn’t stop President Trump from tweeting about it a week later:
Twitter “SHADOW BANNING” prominent Republicans. Not good. We will look into this discriminatory and illegal practice at once! Many complaints.  7:46 AM – Jul 26, 2018
In a blog post, Twitter explained why its approach is not shadow banning but an effective way to create “healthy conversations.”
We do not shadow ban. You are always able to see the tweets from accounts you follow (although you may have to do more work to find them, like go directly to their profile). And we certainly don’t shadow ban based on political viewpoints or ideology.
We do rank tweets and search results. We do this because Twitter is most useful when it’s immediately relevant. These ranking models take many signals into consideration to best organize tweets for timely relevance. We must also address bad-faith actors who intend to manipulate or detract from healthy conversation.
Later in the post, the company explains how they determine who is a “bad-faith actor.”

Specific account properties that indicate authenticity (e.g. whether you have a confirmed email address, how recently your account was created, whether you uploaded a profile image, etc)
What actions you take on Twitter (e.g. who you follow, who you retweet, etc)
How other accounts interact with you (e.g. who mutes you, who follows you, who retweets you, who blocks you, etc)

My take
The notion that Conservative voices are being censored by ‘liberal’ Silicon Valley CEOs to hurt Trump and the Republicans in November is too juicy a conspiracy theory to not continue gaining traction. Promoted relentlessly by Fox News and other Conservative media outlets, it is quickly developing into a major Republican talking point in the upcoming elections.  Nothing fires up a partisan base more than being convinced that their opinions are being disrespected or ignored.
No matter how many times they deny that conservative tweets and posts are being censored, look for beleaguered Twitter CEO Jack Dorsey and a steady stream other big-name Silicon Valley types to be summoned before Congressional committees and put through the wringer over the next two and half months.
From here until the election, it’s all theater.  The truth is that in America right now, politicians don’t really care what the truth is.
The broader issue for social media in the corporate world is not lost on me.
We have seen plenty of internal protests by workforces fires up by a variety of perceived corporate misdeeds. Advocates for the voice of the individual have long held that change in corporations will be a bottoms-up affair. The problem as I see it is when the fine lines between legitimate questioning and outright attacks become so blurred that it becomes difficult, nay impossible to discern reality from fiction.
But then I am mindful of a Tweet from Jeff Nolan who said:

When I get 20k views on a ⁦@Quora⁩ answer with this many upvotes, I can typically expect an email telling me they are sending my answer to x number of people. Not this one, Silicon Valley does not like being being called out. https://t.co/UNoMewYB79
— Jeff Nolan (@jeffnolan) August 21, 2018

No. 10 on his list?
Politics. Listen carefully, if you are a liberal progressive you are free to talk about your politics to anyone and everyone, but if you are a conservative you better keep your vile, racist and hateful thoughts to yourself. So on this basis, discussing politics in the workplace is not tolerated.
The Quora post has more than 25,300 views and 123 upvotes at the time of writing. Go figure
Image credit - Teamwork © Photocreo Bednarek - Fotolia.comRead more on: Social 