
For those interested in techie factoids, Twitter turned 10 years old over the weekend. I remember back in the day people telling me about it and thinking: ‘This is a horrible time sink, I’m steering clear.’ And then it got interesting as people I knew from the numerous blogs I was following at the time started to REALLY get into it. Conversations flowed, many of them rich and diverse, sometimes flame wars erupted and then just as quickly die down. That was 2007 according to my Twitter birth certificate. And Twitter remained pretty interesting until about 3 years ago when it started to get stuffed with adverts. About a year ago, it seemed to me that the ad to content ratio ballooned and today, the noise compared to signal is kinda too much. A lot of other things went pear shaped along the way. Right now it is hard to imagine that Twitter as we know it will be around in 10 years’ time but then you never know.
When Twitter first emerged, it was very much like IRC (anyone remember that?) but taken to a new level and with a cute 140 character constraint that forced people into brevity. It was a great way to discover new people which, in the early years, was almost certain to mean people with whom you have an affinity because so few people (relative to today) were using Twitter. In those very early days, if you had 1,000 followers you were something of a rock star.
Today, diginomica with a modest 2,498 followers ranks 207,104 in the world. But then Katy Perry leads the field with 84.8 million followers so there’s a bit of competition from all the celebs who were coaxed into building massive followings against which brands can advertise. Check out the top 100 to see what I mean.
In the early days, Twitter was developer friendly to the point where directories emerged with hundreds and then thousands of Twitter apps, all designed to augment the Twitter experience in some way or another. Sadly, that number is dwindling as Twitter progressively shuts down access to its API but also as companies aligned to Twitter have realized it is very hard to make money off a free to use service unless you are adding a huge amount of value add. One of my favorites, NutshellMail by Constant Contact is closing its doors, tomorrow.
The monetization issue is a reflection of Twitter’s initial problem. Twitter was born at the height of a period where building something and just throwing it out to see what sticks was deemed more important than building a solution with the purpose of including a sustainable business model. At that same time, it was thought that most social applications could be monetized via advertising. It’s not an unfair assumption but it brings unintended consequences with it. One of those has been that Twitter has become a dumping ground for random promotional content.
I said from the get go that without a sensible monetization strategy then Twitter could not survive. I could not have foresaw the billions that would be thrown into the company or the way it uses stock options to conserve cash. Ten years on and Twitter has yet to make a profit despite having recorded $2.2 billion in revenue for 2015. 90% of that revenue comes from advertising. 10% comes from providing access to its firehose of data to services that use Twitter data as part of a broader solution that captures statistics from the various social graphs. We use some of those services and I can tell you – they don’t come cheap. It’s not hard to ramp $1,000 or $1,500 a month on Twitter related services.
By way of comparison, the chart below pits Twitter against Facebook 10 years in. You can see immediately that Twitter’s problem is one of scale. The revenue it earns from users is higher than that of Facebook but it doesn’t have the bulk to turn in a profit at its current levels of spend. More worrying to investors is that its user count is flatlining for all practical purposes. It follows that Twitter’s ability to ramp revenue based upon that all important number is stuck. Many reasons can be posited but the most frequent one I hear is that the hashtag doesn’t make sense to many ordinary people and in any event, how do you parse hashtags that may only be meaningful to their creator?

You will find more statistics at Statista
Twitter has had its fair share of management reshuffles and that doesn’t make for the layout and execution of a solid long term strategy. My concern is what happens next? What is the next big thing that Twitter can do to overcome (if at all) the Facebook juggernaut? How will Twitter recoup the $2 billion of losses it is carrying? In January, we heard that Twitter planned on removing the 140 character limit on Tweets. Now we hear that’s off the table. We also hear that Twitter is trying to sweeten the stock option pot as it seeks to hang on to its best talent. That following a major re-org in the middle of last year and a more recent executive reshuffle.
Whatever happens next, my once affectionate love affair with Twitter has subsided into something more akin to an awkward friendship. I still enjoy the brevity that 140 characters brings and find some of the statistical information we get very useful but as a rich source of conversation? Nah. It’s not doing it for me. Which reminds me, I’d best check via Comun.it who are the 90 people (or bots) I need to drop from my follow list 😉
Bonus points; for those who like interesting factoids – here’s a succinct 10 years of Twitter.
Image credit - Birth certificate via twbirthday.com (you can get one too), graphic via Statista.Read more on: Social 