

Telcos and carriers get a rough ride among my peers bit I’d like to give a shout out to T-Mobile USA customer experience. Once you’ve read this story you’ll understand why they’re ranked no.1 for customer satisfaction from data gathered by Nielsen.
While I was in the U.S., T-Mobile was my contracted cell and data carrier. As a data guzzler, T-Mobile offered the best data deal by some distance. Colleagues who are on Verizon or AT&T wondered about country coverage but I never experienced a problem. In short, T-Mobile met my needs at a price I was prepared to pay. But it is the post sale service that really matters.
Post sales experience
When my iPhone went AWOL in Florida they got me back up and running in less than 30 minutes with a replacement phone.
As I was preparing to leave the country I contacted T-Mobile, explained what was happening and asked to terminate the service. Not a problem, no hard sales but an offer to suspend the line for when (or in my case if) I return to the U.S.
When there was a subsequent billing query, their chat bot system resolved it relatively easily. It wasn’t a perfect experience but good enough.
When things go wrong
The customer experience (CX) icing on the cake came when I had to get T-Mobile to unlock my iPhone. Unlike other carriers, T-Mobile maintains a lock to its network, the unlock for which requires that you meet a bunch of arcane criteria. It is possible to bypass T-Mobile, handing the job off to a third party for the princely sum of $129.99. Not bad for something that can be achieved for free. I opted for the free service, which is identical to the paid for service.
Again, this was no problem. Once I’d explained the circumstances and the customer service rep had checked I met the criteria, she explained what would happen. In short – you have to wait for a confirmatory email from T-Mobile which can take up to 24 hours and then Apple require 24 hours to remote unlock your phone.
In my case it didn’t work. I waited the 24 hours from receiving the email only to get the message the phone remained locked. Waiting another two days made no difference so I call up again. This time, the service agent walked me through the phone reset routine. She did so in an unhurried and professional manner but to no avail.
She then escalated the call to discover the problem to be told that T-Mobile was experiencing sporadic delays from Apple and that while her system said the phone is unlocked, she acknowledged that a delay at my end could mean a mis-match in information. I was asked to wait another 24 hours but was told I’d get a courtesy call back at a time of my convenience to see if the unlock had worked.
At this point, bear in mind the service person has been working with me remotely for a good 45 minutes, has remained cheerful throughout, and demonstrated a level of knowledge I’d normally associate with the Apple Genius bar. She even went so far as to call me to ensure that her international outbound dialing system works to my U.K. phone.
The following morning and the phone was magically unlocked. Still, a technical supervisor from T-Mobile called me up at the agreed time to check status.
CX really matters
In our advisory sessions we constantly school people that it is the post sales service that matters as an integral part of CX. Remember also that at this point in time, T-Mobile isn’t making a penny off me. In short, customer service at T-Mobile doesn’t stop when you walk away from the account. It fulfills an interpretation of an adage I’ve often used over the years: ‘Send them away to bring them back.’
When that’s executed in a pleasant, helpful and cheerful manner then you can bet that when (or if) I return to the U.S. then T-Mobile will get my business with no consideration of an alternative.
As consumers, we often complain about telco providers but when I look at the whole of my T-Mobile experience, I have to rate it as world class.
It helps that T-Mobile service center people know enough about me to be immediately helpful but as we are fond of saying, technology is an enabler. It requires care and forethought to make that work for the customer in the context of well designed processes at every step of the customer experience. And when the provider goes beyond the end of the relationship and remains both helpful and courteous when things go wrong, then they’ve tapped into something visceral and which lives long in the memory.
Anyone have other similar experiences? Of so then please share them – we love great CX stories.
Image credit - T-mobileRead more on: CRM and customer experienceCustomer service managementUse cases 