
We have been vocal about Uber and not always complimentary. But after roughly six months’ of on-off usage in the US and I understand why it is so popular with business travelers.
I am often dependent upon some form of taxi service. The airport run is my most common use case.
While it is a mercifully short drive to the local airport there is no easy direct access by public transport. There are smartphone applications with which to order a taxi but they are unreliable and at best, only provide a note that a cab has accepted the call. There is usually a line of cabs at the airport so getting back is rarely a case of waiting in line. The taxi fare is reasonably predictable but with tip it’s a $44 round trip. Most of the taxi drivers I’ve come across are barely civil and it’s a devils own job to get them to open the trunk, let alone help with luggage when hefting suitcases. Then there’s the issue of getting a receipt. Most just tear off a piece of paper and expect me to fill in the details. Uber is a totally different experience.
Here’s how Uber stacks up against the usual taxi experience.

Each time I take an Uber I ask the driver how long he/she has been working for the service. With one exception, I’ve yet to come across one that has been working more than four months. All seem to be working for Uber as a means to provide a supplementary income. The attraction appears to be the relatively predictable income stream with airport runs being the most popular. Some say it is a good way to fill in otherwise dead time, others that helps with the household budget.
That relatively short period of experience seems to translate into a freshness, friendliness and helpfulness I don’t get from taxi drivers.
The one exception was an Uber SUV driver who previously worked for a limo service company and holds a professional taxi license.
While the media jumps on any reported bad experience with Uber, I have only ever had one driver get it wrong and even then was able to course correct without penalty to me.
The curious thing is that while Uber drivers are almost always 100% dependent upon GPS, I nearly always have to tell the taxi equivalent exactly where I need dropping off. With one exception, none have known where my return address is located. That would not be so bad if it wasn’t for the fact that the drop off address is close to a well known city landmark.
UberX fares are an order of magnitude less than I expect to pay using a taxi service. The receipt note above (see image top right) shows cost that is a full 50% less than I would pay for a taxi AND I have a good proof for expense claim purposes. Taking an UberX from another airport reaped a full 60% saving. The one occasion when I needed to take an Uber SUV, the cost was still less than it would have been had I ordered two taxis.
The US airports in California appear to becoming more Uber friendly after a rocky start. Uber for its part, provides help for those unfamiliar with the way it works at different airports.
Remember I mentioned no lines for taxis at the airport? Uber must be doing something right because on my most recent trip, there were five people lined up waiting for their Uber ride. The taxis weren’t going anywhere.
Is it all sweetness and light? Not quite. Uber offers a car pool service in selected cities as a way of pegging back costs in an otherwise congested city. The deal is that you will only share with one other person but you are dependent upon the pool driver finding another passenger. That can be difficult at peak times and I chose to cancel on the one occasion I tried to use that service  in San Francisco. Interestingly, the taxi I used, while much more expensive for the relatively short trip was a better experience than anticipated. The driver was unexpectedly helpful and did his best to get me to my destination in good time.
I’ve not used Uber during peak times when surge pricing applies although I have seen how Uber advises potential customers. Despite the public clamor about this ‘feature’ I am not convinced that US customers care. Super Bowl 2016 may be months away but TV news reports of enterprising home owners touting overnight accommodation running $2,200 for Super Bowl weekend hardly fazed anyone. Local hotels are sold out at $700 a pop. Public parking at $30 when Taylor Swift was in town drew plenty of takers. Surge pricing? You bet but nobody cares.
There’s been plenty of talk about how Uber bilks its drivers but one told me that a busy weekend can mean as much as $300 a night in earnings. If we’re talking about a second job for most then that must be welcome additional income.
Uber has many battles to overcome, not least the latest ruling regarding a key employee status lawsuit. That may not matter in the long run. If Uber is successful with other initiatives like longer distance car pooling and, longer term, driverless rides, then it may end up far more popular – and successful – than it is today.
Read more on: Future of work 