
When Uber announced that it had hired David Plouffe back in August last year, I wrote that it was a clear sign that the company was beginning to recognise that it had to mix business and politics in order to convince the courts of its business model. For those of you that don’t know, Plouffe ran Obama’s very successful 2008 election campaign.
Knowing that, it’s easy to see that Plouffe was brought on board to convince (or spin, depending on your position) regulatory bodies and public opinion that Uber’s business model makes sense and to help limit exposure to any legal challenges.
Uber has faced regulatory problems across a number of regions and for a number of reasons – but most notably, it is fighting battles over whether or not its drivers are full Uber employees or whether they are contractors. Obviously Uber wants to keep the drivers as contractors because this then limits how much it has to put into benefits and employee protection.
A recent ruling in California, for example, found that a San Francisco-based driver was indeed an employee. Uber is appealing the decision, but the Labor Commission said:
Defendants hold themselves out as nothing more than a neutral technological platform, designed simply to enable drivers and passengers to transact the business of transportation. The reality, however, is that Defendants are involved in every aspect of the operation.
 However, as part of Dreamforce week here in San Francisco, Salesforce organised an ‘Innovation Tour’ for journalists attending the event and took us to some of the company’s highest profile customers in the area. One of the stops was UberHQ and we got the chance to grill Plouffe on his views about the future direction of the company.
On relation to the legal challenges over whether or not Uber should reclassify its drivers as W-2 employees, and if that were to happen what the impact would be on the company’s business model, Plouffe is very confident that lawmakers will see sense and leave the situation alone. Plouffe believes that because Uber is very hands off with its drivers, common sense tells us that they’re not full employees. He said:
We are very confident in our business model and we are very confident in the legal case that’s going on in the US. We are very confident. Let’s just look at the facts – we do not dictate the schedule at all, we don’t dictate how many hours you drive at all, we don’t dictate when you drive, you can bring your own car, you’re not driving in uniform.
On just a common sense test of control, we are very confident. Here in the US half our drivers drive less than ten hours a week, people don’t even consider that part-time. That’s just grabbing an hour here and there. It’s a legal process and will take many years to work itself through, but we are very confident. We are not going to speculate about [the impact on our business model] because we are very confident about the result, just based on the facts about how people are using the platform.
In case you missed that, he’s very confident.
Uber also faces a lot of criticism over its safety controls, given that pretty much anyone can sign up and start using the platform. Some question whether or not it’s safe for passengers to be getting in cars with people that haven’t gone through rigorous checks and years of training – but Uber points to its ratings system as evidence of its commitment to safety. Plouffe added:
On safety, that’s one of the reasons we grow. People feel safer using us than other options. Why? There’s no anonymity. You know the driver. You know the licence plate. You can share your ETA and your route with friends and family members. The entire route is GPS tracked. We want to bring more innovations to safety – but the truth is that safety was always a core principle from the very beginning. It’s core to the experience.
However, he did acknowledge that Uber’s position in the economy is a work in progress. He said:
But there’s no doubt that we are learning as we go along about the best way to work with government. But the debate over Uber has moved a lot. Just 14 months ago there wasn’t a single place in the United States that had passed regulations around ride sharing. Not a single one. Now you have over 60.
We are eager to continue to work with governments, we have made a lot of regulatory progress here in the US. That’s what is required. How does Uber, or a competitor of Uber’s, fit into 40 year old transportation law? It’s not going to be a very satisfying or productive conversation. What’s required is for states and countries to say let’s create a new set of laws that enables more competition in the transportation sector.
Helping cities and wages
Plouffe used his time with us to also make a pitch for why he believes Uber has a critical role to play in the global economy and in the infrastructure of cities. His main arguments go that whilst cities around the world are growing in population size at an unprecedented rate, the capital to invest in new transport networks is minimal. As a result, Uber believes that ride-sharing at scale has a part to play. Plouffe said:

The government wants UK brokers to play a role
We think it’s going to be a big part of helping build the cities of the future. We are in 330 cities now and a lot of the world’s cities we still need to go into, because they’re big cities that have mobility challenges.
Every city is dealing with congestion challenges, which will only get worse over the next 10 to 15 years. Most cities do not have the room or the money to build new transportation systems. The math is the math, you got what you got and a lot more people are coming in. The only way you are going to be able to deal with that is for less people to be buying cars, for families to drop from two cars to one car and to reduce the number of cars on the road. We think that ride sharing can be an important part of that.
Equally, he believes that Uber can help solve the problem of stagnant wages and low income growth. Plouffe added:
Post-recession, most countries are beginning to recover, jobless rates are inching down. But what’s not changed is income growth. In a lot of the western world you’ve seen income stagnation for a very long time. People aren’t getting wage growth. So think about it – you can get in your car for eight to ten hours and fit that into the rest of your life. Going from a family income of $48,000 to $60,000 by driving ten hours a week is nothing short of a small miracle. It makes all the difference for people. The income opportunity has to be good, obviously. But it’s the flexibility that really speaks to people.
There are 20,000 drivers in London, 45,000 in LA, 25,000 in Chicago. The scale here I don’t think is properly appreciated. There is no other company in the world that has been responsible for that much work over the last two or three years.
My take
Plouffe is a very convincing guy – but then again, that’s what he’s built a career on. A big part of me agrees with him, in that there seems to be a huge amount of demand from people to use Uber to make some extra money. I regularly ask Uber drivers if they enjoy working on the platform and I don’t hear too many negative points. People like the flexibility and control.
Having said that, I don’t think people should trade flexibility for protection and employee rights. That’s not to say that traditional labor laws should be imposed on Uber, but perhaps we need a real rethink about what labor laws should look like in this sharing economy. What those labor laws would look like, I’m not so sure. But there should ultimately be some protection for drivers, whilst not limiting Uber’s potential to make money.
Read more on: Future of workRegulation 