
Disruptive companies don’t often get a smooth ride. Digital disruptors in particular have a knack for rubbing incumbent companies up the wrong way, for getting on the wrong side of regulators and for pissing off the media. I think it’s safe to say that Uber has done all of these things very successfully.
It can’t be denied that Uber’s customer experience is excellent. It has made getting a cab in busy cities both easy and affordable. Something that just wasn’t the case in places like London. However, with that has come a wave of wrath from the traditional black cab industry in the UK capital, which argues that Uber is sidestepping a bunch of laws via its innovative technology.
Equally, the company has got a particularly bad name in the press after a number of rather worrying stories emerged about its ruthless culture.
All of which has resulted in Uber having to spend a lot of time defending itself. And promoting itself. And lobbying for more flexible regulatory environments.
We wrote recently about how Uber, Transport for London and London black cabs have entered a very public spat over new proposed regulations that would see 5 minute wait times imposed on Uber passengers and drivers, in the hope that this will give the incumbents a better chance to compete.
Jo Bertram, Uber’s regional manager for the UKI and Nordics, took the stage at CBI’s annual conference in London this week to explain to business leaders why Uber is a good thing and something that should be embraced across the capital. Bertram was very diplomatic in her approach, repeating on a number of times that there was room for black cabs to compete too. She said:
It’s interesting here in London the difference between using black taxis and using private hire. Hailo has done phenomenally well with the black taxis. What we were able to do here in London is to use the private hire model, because we keep them busier. Black taxis are often doing street hails as well, private cabs don’t have that privilege. They don’t do the knowledge.
Because we keep the drivers busier, we use the technology to mean they do more trips in an hour, which can then bring down the price for commuters.
Regulation, regulation, regulation
 However, Bertram wasn’t willing to accept that further regulations should be placed on Uber. Rather, she believes, that regulations should be taken away from black cabs. Oh and she doesn’t really think Uber’s the problem anyway – it’s technology. She said:
What we would argue, to level the playing field, which absolutely does need to be levelled, you should reduce or revive the regulations for black cabs, rather than impose additional barriers for Uber and other companies like that.
I understand that black cabs are an icon of London and we all want to keep that. But essentially that’s not about Uber, that’s about technology. That’s about satellite navigation taking away some, although probably not all, the competitive advantage that black cab drivers have with the knowledge.
Still, if I want to get to a meeting in Soho straight after this, I’m probably best to get in a black taxi to find the best possible way. But satellite navigation is not going away.
Bertram added that Uber has been good at being flexible enough to negotiate the minefield that is city-by-city regulation. However, she adds that the cities that have gained the most are the ones that have deregulated for the so-called ‘sharing economy’ and that the current regulations are too old for the smartphone era. She said:
One interesting thing about the regulations in the transport sector is that they’re not only country by country, but they’re actually here in the UK city by city. Navigating those and being able to have a flexible enough model to work around them has been critical for Uber.
Here in the UK the regulatory regime that we are operating has existed like this for decades. It was written prior to the advent of smartphones and Google Maps. And we’ve been able to innovate using those technologies.
The other thing is that the speed of growth of these companies. Uber has been in London just three years. We now have 20,000 drivers, a couple million customers and we have done well over 20 million trips. So it comes out of nowhere and that can of course be uncomfortable for some of the incumbents.
The cities that have seen the most benefits from companies like Uber and competitors, are the ones that have embraced us and worked with companies in the sharing economy like Uber and Airbnb to figure out forward looking regulations that allow all those competitors to co-exist.
We’re good, honest
Finally, Bertram wanted to highlight that one of Uber’s greatest success is that it is in fact a trusted source of transport, despite all the negative attention it receives. She said that the company’s rating system – which is common to the sharing economy and digital products – means that Uber is a particularly safe service to use. She said:
I think trust is really important, I think that’s what Uber and Airbnb have succeeded in. The fact that after every single trip in Uber the customer is asked to rate the driver [his has] brought transparency and accountability.
A huge amount of our marketing is word of mouth. You won’t see big above the line marketing campaigns or adverts. A majority of our riders and the partners working on our Uber app come through referrals from someone else that’s already used the service.
However, she did concede that more could be done to highlight the company’s successes in an attempt to remove the negative stigma the company has. She said:
At Uber we certainly acknowledge that we need to do a better job of telling our stories. For every one of those negative comments there are hundreds of inspiring stories, particularly on the driver side. Of drivers that have benefitted from the flexibility it brings, it is allowing them to see their family, or build their business, it’s helping to serve under-served neighbourhoods.
We have grown so quickly we are used to being an underdog and we’ve done as good as job as we’ve wanted to of getting out the benefits that Uber can bring.
Read more on: CRM and customer experience 