
Once again, Uber finds itself at the centre of a very public dispute over how the technology company operates in cities and how it is impacting age-old taxi industries that are feeling the heat from its convenience and cheap prices. In this case, Transport for London has launched a public consultation that could see some new regulations introduced that Uber says will “mean an end” to the Uber we “know and love today”.
Transport for London is claiming that no decisions have been made, nothing has been finalised and the rules will cover all private hire vehicles in the capital, not just Uber drivers. Uber is running a very successful campaign to rally support from its users. Whilst the Licensed Taxi Drivers Association has gone on the attack.
Uber isn’t a stranger to controversy and is facing legal and regulatory challenges the world over. Some countries and cities have seemed to accept the app that allows for passengers and drivers to find each other using their smartphones and pay without the hassle of cash, whilst others are fighting to protect jobs and industries that have served their cities for decades.
The user experience of Uber is generally very good and it is even making headway in the business passenger space. However, the driver’s experience is often mixed depending on who you talk to. Some claim that it allows them to set their own schedule and earn extra income by putting in a few driving hours a week, whilst others complain that their wages are going down and their hours are going up as more and more Uber drivers enter the market.
Either way, this is serious digital disruption. Regulators are under pressure and are having to make decisions that could set the tone for years to come.
 Garrett Emmerson, Transport for London’s Chief Operating Officer for Surface Transport, said:
We are launching a public consultation in order to inform and improve the regulations that govern the Capital’s private hire trade. In recent years the private hire industry has grown exponentially and technology has also developed rapidly.
The consultation sets out a number of ways that standards across the industry could be raised, ensuring Londoners can continue to benefit from the service provided by licensed private hire vehicles. No final decisions have been made and we’re keen to hear a range of views from the trade and from Londoners too.
A leaked copy of the rules for the consultation include the following:

A mandatory five minute wait time before a driver can pick a passenger up
A specific requirement for drivers to pass an English language test
A fare must be specified prior to the booking being accepted
A fixed landline must be available at all times

Whilst Transport for London says that these regulations would apply to all private hire vehicles, which they would, it’s obvious that these are being proposed in an attempt to level the playing field between Uber and black cabs.
In response, Uber has called on its users (via Twitter and an email campaign) to sign a petition that urges TfL to not introduce the changes to regulation. The email says:
Transport for London (TfL) will tonight publish proposed new rules for apps like  Uber. If adopted, they will mean an end to the  Uber you know and love today.  There will be a mandatory five minute wait time,  even if a car is available just around the corner. You won’t even be able to see the nearest cars when you open the app.
TfL needs to hear from you: riders should come first.
And the proposed rules threaten drivers’ livelihoods by forcing them to drive for just one operator. These rules make no sense.
We understand that black cab drivers are feeling the pressure from services like  Uber. But the answer is to level the playing field by reducing today’s burdensome black cab regulations – not to introduce rules that will be bad for riders, drivers and London.
Uber said last night that it had received 10,000 signatures in under an hour.
The Licensed Taxi Drivers Association, meanwhile, has made pleas on Twitter for users to share their Uber horror stories using the hashtag #saveuber. The Twitter feed is a stream of pictures of cars that have been in accidents. LTDA also said:

Uber have started incredibly well funded social media campaign to prevent changes to ensure public safety all Twitter users must fight back!
— The LTDA (@TheLTDA) September 29, 2015

My take
It’s a tough one. As an Uber user the regulations being introduced would be an inconvenience to me and they would likely make my journeys using the service more expensive. That being said, I do think Uber walks a fine line when it comes to operating within the UK’s regulatory environment. It’s getting away with it because its service is super efficient, convenient and cheap.
I’m not sure that it’s as black and white as ‘Uber is bad and black cabs are good’, or vice versa. But this is an industry that has been disrupted and the regulatory environment is playing catch up. It’s certainly not fair that it’s not a level playing field and the black cabs should be given the chance to compete.
Whether that means more or less regulation, will remain to be seen.
Uncategorized 