
I visit London two or three times a year. Each time I make a point of riding a black cab or two. I never use Uber. I avoid public transport which I consider the human equivalent of being shoveled into a moving sardine can.
The iconic black cab provides a unique form of transport dating back 400 years and which, until Uber showed up, ruled the streets of London. The last two years has seen a massive change. Uber is swamping the streets with drivers, crushing the black cab trade and taking down the mini cab trade as well. How do I know this?
When I first started using Uber in 2013, I would ask black cab drivers how that service impacts their business. I still ask the exact same question and have done so pretty much every six months. Here’s how it has gone:
Early 2013 – no/little impact, everyone was still reeling from the lack of trade that came out of the 2012 Olympics.
Mid-2013 – we see them occasionally, no real impact although the late night trade isn’t what it used to be.
Early 2014 – no change from six months prior.
Mid-2014 – there is some impact but black cab drivers are more concerned about the impact of bottlenecks arising out of CrossRail activity in the center and which will continue for years to come.
Early 2015 – no change from the previous six months although some additional impact in central hotspots such as Kings Cross and Paddington railway stations.
Mid-2015 – Uber is definitely having an impact but experience varies across London. Some drivers report having to change shifts and/or extend their work day to maintain revenue.
End 2015 – Uber is now crushing it. London is licensing hundreds of Uber drivers per week while licensing almost no black cab drivers. One cabbie told me that after 11 years as a black cab driver he is looking to convert to an HGV Class 1 in 2016 and give up his cab. I didn’t have the heart to tell him what Google has planned.
While these answers are random and hardly scientific, they serve to paint a broad picture that at least partially reflects what we see reported in local media. But there is more.
One driver said that Uber has taken more than 30 percent of his business this year and that he now has to work 14 hours a day to keep up with what he was earning in 2013, not 2014. He doesn’t anticipate making up the losses in what should be the busiest time of the year. Another said that ‘many’ mini cab firms have gone out of business altogether and that in neighborhoods surrounding the central part of London, residents are complaining that Uber drivers are parking up for ‘siesta.’
As a consumer, I like Uber. I don’t know anyone who doesn’t like Uber although experience varies from city to city. Convenient, relatively inexpensive, comfortable and mostly cheerful. All of these describe the critical service elements that Uber has used to build a service on top of a commodity.
If I was a black cab driver, I’d be deeply concerned, even though I have consistently found black cab drivers offer all the convenience of Uber – and arguably more when things like luggage are taken into account – but at a price which often seems exorbitant. Earning the black cab license through The Knowledge takes an average three years. Understandably, drivers want to monetize that. Google Maps, augmented by Waze blew that up to a great extent but not completely.
Black cab drivers know how to avoid bottlenecks and can offer alternative routes that Google/Waze will struggle to compete against. This is true in any city but especially so in London where the complexities of the street system make the black cab driver’s knowledge invaluable at busy times. Until the day Google/Waze are on par with human knowledge. As a services consumer, I want to feel the driver really knows what he’s doing and is not wholly relying on technology that I don’t quite trust 100% of the time. That’s why I use black cabs in London rather than Uber.
But then there is a sense of the black cab driver being left behind anyway. I hear the income protection arguments but cannot sympathize about what was a virtual monopoly until technology caught up. When I ask if any of the drivers have heard of Waze, few have. Fewer still realize the threat Waze represents.
But then one cabbie made this observation:
Cameron (UK prime minister) and Boris (mayor of London) think we’re Luddites. It’s convenient for them to license as many Uber drivers as possible because then the unemployment numbers go down. What happens when Uber has driven all the cabs out of London? Prices will go up and people will complain. Prices will have to go up anyway because Uber will want more and more from the driver.
I do not know whether such predictions are correct but then I don’t live in London. Like millions of others, I am passing through the best way I can. But then I can’t fault the logic of a colleague who was making her way home to the outskirts of the city the other evening who said:
With Uber at least I know when I’ll get my ride and more or less what it will cost. It’s still hit and miss with the black cab and shockingly expensive.
Each city where Uber tips up has its own tale to tell but I was particularly struck by the expression ‘Luddite.’ While today’s parlance might indicate someone who denies technology advances and specifically those that are built around software, I’m keenly aware that during the British Industrial Revolution, the term was used for those who ended up criminalized for their sometimes violent opposition to the industrial technology advances of the day. It was as much a social revolution as an industrial one with ripple effects across generations that tested social mobility in ways the country had not seen in hundreds of years. I wonder if the same is happening today.
Today’s equivalent comes in the form of peaceful protest – at least in London – of the kind the city saw in September. But I wonder how long that will last. Hearing variations on the same theme from drivers the last few days certainly brings home the extent to which the black cab business feels it is threatened.
Uber serves as a proxy for many industries experiencing business model disruption, but does that necessarily mean the incumbent is a Luddite? When used in the pejorative sense I guess the answer must be ‘yes’ and especially when you listen to drivers who are ignorant of the technologies underpinning the Uber model.
It is easy for people like me to say that. Relatively few people seriously study technology impact. Fewer still have a clear sense of where that impact will most likely be felt or which strategies provide a solid response to either sustaining or pivoting business models.
But as this year comes to a close, I believe that what we saw in 2015 is the tip of an iceberg that will loom much larger in 2016.
Image credit: via Eden project, featured image via Belfast Vibe
Read more on: CRM and customer experience 