
Robin Beveridge
This week’s news that the Redcar steelworks is set to close with the loss of 2,200 jobs has dealt a huge blow to local families in this once-thriving town in the North East of England.
The region already suffers from the UK’s highest unemployment, with a jobless rate of around 8.6%, compared to the national average of 5.4%.
Children in the area are bound to be affected: a number of them appeared this week on Newsround, the BBC’s popular current affairs programme for kids, to talk about their concerns. Said one child:
I’m really worried because I don’t know what going to happen for Christmas and I don’t know what’s going to happen to my dad – like he might get kicked out of his apartment.
The North East Child Poverty Commission will be tracking the situation carefully – and sharing its findings openly with local policymakers, educators, charities, journalists and concerned members of the public.
Based in Durham, the Commission aims to provide reliable, accessible and up-to-date information about the causes and consequences of child poverty in a region where one in four kids already live below the poverty line.
It’s thanks to the work of Datakind UK that some of that data is now published in the form of data maps on the North East Child Poverty Commission’s website. Datakind is a charity that works with other charities and non-profit organisations to address their big data challenges by getting them together with volunteer data scientists at ‘Data Dive’ weekends.
It was at one of these events that Robin Beveridge, the then child poverty coordinator at the North East Child Poverty Commission, met with Eric Hannell, a DataKind UK data ambassador and senior product consultant at Tableau Software.
Together, and with the help of other data ambassadors, they got to work on devising a way to present the data that the North East Child Poverty Commission holds in ways that would be simple to understand and analyze.
Ease of use was key, Beveridge stresses:
I always had in my mind’s eye a local government officer within Sunderland City Council. Sunderland has some areas of very high child poverty and employs officers with many different responsibilities, only one of which is addressing child poverty.
They don’t have the time or understanding of data to dive into a spreadsheet with 20,000 cells in it, in order to pull out the data that they need. They want to go to one place, where the issues are easy to see. It struck me as crucial to start with one core user in mind and then work out from there.
The goal was complicated, however, by the sheer wealth of government-published data available to the Commission.
There’s the HBAI (Households Below Average Income) published annually by the Department of Work and Pensions and based on a sample survey – but that offers insight only at a regional, not very local, level.
Then there’s a whole raft of data on health and educational outcomes (how many school-leavers attain 5 GSCEs, for example), which is available at a local authority level and again published annually.
Finally, there’s the Children in Low Income Families measure, which is published by HMRC and based on tax credit detail. This provides a very fine level of detail, focusing on children in families that are dependent on tax credits and/or income support and who receive below 60% of the median income – those, in effect, living below the poverty line.
Time-constrained
The time constraints of the Data Dive weekend made it necessary to pick just one of these data sources and Beveridge settled on that final metric: the HMRC’s Children in Low Income Families measure. By the end of the Data Dive weekend, he had a prototype by which the Commission could feed data into Tableau Public, the company’s free software that enables anyone to connect to a spreadsheet or file and create interactive data visualisation for publication on the web.
After that weekend began a seven-month effort, again with the assistance of Tableau’s Hannell, to get the Commission to the point where it was happy to publish the resulting data maps on its website. Says Beveridge:
So what we’ve got now is a very user-friendly way to map changes in that measure, year on year, so you can look at how it changes at a very fine level indeed – right down to LSOA [Lowest Super Output Area], which is effectively a group of streets. Users can see on a map what the level of child poverty is in that small area at the latest date and how it’s changed from any year you choose, typically over the last five years. They can pinpoint areas where there’s been an increase in poverty and say, ‘OK, we need to understand better what’s happening here – and how we’re targeting responses to child poverty in that very local area.’
But what about those other government metrics – does the Commission still have ambitions to use that in its publicly available visualisations? Beveridge has since moved on from the Commission to do consulting work for other charities and non-profits in the region, but he doesn’t rule out that happening – if the Commission can get access to the resources needed, he says:
What I wanted to do was generate an overlay of health, education and poverty data, so users could identify areas where, for example, a fall in educational attainment or child health might be linked to a rise in child poverty. That remains an aspiration – but there’s a limit to what you can ask or expect people to contribute for nothing.
The Commission, after all, is a micro-organisation: just one part-time member of staff. In order to take its data ambitions further, it would need more help from data specialists or more budget to outsource the work. Or, he suggests, a national organisation might want to pick up the project and develop it to produce nationwide maps showing the wider spread of child poverty.
Either way, he’s rightfully proud of what’s been achieved so far and grateful to Datakind UK and Tableau for their help along the way. His successor at the commission, Dr Deborah Harrison, agrees, saying:
The solution makes it easier to see child poverty ‘hotspots’, for example, where child poverty levels are particularly high or where they have increased over time. Our goal is for local authorities to use this tool to enhance their existing knowledge of local child poverty levels, helping them to target their responses quickly and accurately.
Read more on: Analytics planning and data analysisCloud platforms - infrastructure and architectureMobileSocialThird sector and non-profitsUse cases

