
Elizabeth Denham
With both the new General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) less than a year away and Brexit negotiations now underway, the UK’s data protection authority has published a five year international strategy to help organisations around the world cope with the changes.
Among the objectives and challenges outlined in the International Strategy 2017-2021 document, three jump out:

A need to ensure that the UK remains an effective and influential data protection authority at European level both before and after the Brexit process.
A higher recognition of the relevance of the UK’s Information Commissioner’s Office (ICO) in an increasingly globalised world.
A need to tackle the question of legal protection uncertainty when transferring information to and from Europe, with the much-crticised US-EU Privacy Shield arrangement as the main case in point.

Inevitably, Brexit informs most of the considerations in the strategy document:
As the UK prepares to leave the EU, the formal relationship between the ICO and EU data protection authorities will change. Our relationship with our EU partners will remain highly important, including with the European Data Protection Board (EDPB) which will operate from May 2018 and on which the ICO will remain active and engaged until the UK’s exit.
In overseeing the enforcement of the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) from 2018, and issuing guidance, the EDPB will be a highly influential global player in setting the direction for data protection and privacy standards…Our strategy presumes that GDPR will also be assumed into UK law before exit to ensure there is continuity and certainty about UK law afterwards.
On the subject of international data flows, a concern for cloud and digital tech companies around the world, the ICO strategy is:
We will seek to explore the concept of the UK as a ‘global data protection gateway’ – a country with a high standard of data protection law which is effectively interoperable with different legal systems that protect international flows of personal data…We will support the development of mechanisms to support better interoperability between the UK’s data protection laws and other systems such as the APEC Cross Border Privacy Rules (CBPR).
Information commissioner Elizabeth Denham says that the UK’s data regulation track record should be acknowledged and fostered:
We have a powerful voice and it is heard around the world, but we are excellent listeners too. That is our strength. This blueprint for how we’ll deliver on our international objectives was informed by experts from all over the world who challenged our perceived priorities and advised on what our next steps should be.
In search of adequacy
For the UK tech industry, trade association techUK welcomed the new strategy document, with CEO Antony Walker commenting:
As EU Member States, including the UK, prepare to implement GDPR it is right that the UK continues to engage at this level and the ICO has a crucial role to play in providing expert advice to UK Government and EU bodies.
The ICO is right to say that global data flows are central to the digital economy. Since the UK’s vote to leave the EU, techUK has been calling for a secure and robust legal basis for cross border data transfers, ideally based on an adequacy finding. International data flows underpin our ability to trade in services and goods. Without an adequacy decision small businesses will be hit by significant costs, legal uncertainties and red tape that will hamper their ability to do business across the EU on equal terms.
This is an issue that would negatively impact businesses in the UK and the EU27. Addressing data flows must be a priority for both the UK and the EU in the Brexit negotiations and techUK is pleased to see that the ICO is determined to play a supportive role. techUK looks forward to working with the ICO on this and many other important issues as good data use governance becomes ever more important for the UK economy.
That last point about the wider economic importance of tackling post-Brexit data regulation concerns is picked up in the publication of two case studies from techUK to illustrate the potential damage to business that a lack of an adequacy findings in both cases would cause. techUK notes:
The ability to transfer data is not only a tech sector issue. It will impact all parts of the UK economy. The failure to achieve a secure legal basis to transfer data, ideally based on adequacy, will have the most profound effect on SMEs. It will affect small and scaling businesses hoping to access the European market. Organisations that employ EU citizens will be implicated. Companies that utilise online services delivered from Europe will all be caught.
While there are other mechanisms to transfer personal data under current and incoming EU data protection law, such as Binding Corporate Rules and Standard Contractual Clauses, the only option which is legally secure and imposes no extra costs or administrative burdens on businesses is adequacy.
This needs to be a part of the Brexit negotiations, it concludes:
In order to support a post-Brexit Global Britain based on modern Industrial and Digital strategies, the government must ensure that all businesses can continue to seamlessly transfer data to and from the EU. Achieving an adequacy finding that enables this to happen must be a priority as the government begins negotiations.
My take
As with so much of the next 18 months of Brexit wrangling, the devil’s going to be in the details. But that needs to be tackled head on. With that in mind, the ICO’s strategy document is a welcome first step.
Image credit - ICO Read more on: Data privacyDigital government and public servicesRegulation

