
Continuing with a look at the digital commitments from the various political parties in the forthcoming General Election in the UK, a look at what there is – and it’s not much in some cases – in the UKIP, Green Party and Plaid Cymru manifestos.
UKIP
While the SNP canned its manifesto launch on Wednesday in the wake of the terrorist atrocity in Manchester, UKIP broke with the campaign suspension agreed by the parties in order to publish its own manifesto. There’s no specific reference to digital strategy, with the focus heavily on policies around immigration and the banning of flying the European Union flag. But the party that was at the forefront of the Brexit campaign did have some policies that have a bearing on a digital economy for the UK.
Of most note to public sector suppliers is a commitment to reforming the way government contracts are awarded. UKIP takes a typically anti-EU stance here:
Local, regional and national governments have immense spending power totalling around £230 billion. While in the EU, they are required to offer contracts right across Europe, which has made it harder for British businesses to compete, and forced them to jump through expensive bureaucratic hoops. Brexit offers the perfect opportunity to open up government order books to smaller businesses, and encourage local, regional and national procurement strategies that will deliver better value for taxpayers.
To that end, UKIP proposes an “urgent independent review of public sector procurement”, with the aim of opening public sector contracts up to small and medium-sized businesses employing less than 250 people. Recommendations coming out of this review would be put in place immediately after the UK formally leaves the EU. All public sector bodies would be required to list contracts worth over £10,000 on the government’s ‘Contracts Finder’ website, to help more small firms access public sector procurement wins.
Across the private sector, UKIP would force employers to advertise jobs to UK citizens before they offer them overseas, statiing
It is the government’s duty to get our own unemployed off benefits and into the workplace, and improve prospects for our own people, rather than facilitate the continued importation of foreign workers.
With freedom of movement in question post-Brexit and the consequent skills access problems that might occur, UKIP proposes a new visa system. From a work visa perspective, highly skilled workers with a job offer sponsored by companies paying them a minimum of £30,000 per annum will take priority. Anyone on a legitimate work visa would be able to apply for British citizenship after five years:
provided they have worked, paid tax here, and maintained their medical insurance throughout that
time. We will revoke the British citizenship of those who have obtained it by fraud or deception and remove them from the country.
UKIP says it would allow “law-abiding EU citizens living in the UK before Article 50 was triggered” the right to stay in the UK indefinitely, so long as the same concession is given to UK citizens living overseas within the EU. The party says:
UKIP’s immigration policies will bring to Britain the brightest, the best, and those with the talents our economy most needs. They are fair, equitable, and similar to those operating in numerous other countries worldwide, such as Australia, New Zealand, and the USA. They will benefit Britain, and redress the imbalance that has caused so much frustration, for so long.
Still on skills, there is a plan to abolish university tuition fees for undergraduate science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) students, so long as they work in the UK and pay tax for five years after graduation.
Elsewhere there is a commitment to extend the remit of the current cross- government Internet Safety Strategy and to consider whether new legislation is required to address the problem of online abuse.
The Green Party
The Green Party manifesto has the lowest number of digital commitments of the parties to date. It pledges to protect freedom of movement and to push for remaining within the EU Single Market. It would automatically give EU citizens leave to remain in the UK post-Brexit and “seek reciprocal arrangements” from the EU for UK citizens abroad.
Other digital commitments include tackling privacy online:
We think the internet should be free of state and corporate surveillance, with our rights and freedoms protected.
The Greens also want to end the sale of personal data, such as health or tax records, for commercial or other ends. And there’s a reference to supporting the roll out of high speed broadband, but no detail on whether there would be a Universal Speed Obligation or how this would be funded/enforced.
Plaid Cymru.
The Plaid Cymru manifesto is built around the concept of ‘defending’ Wales. As such, it’s inevitably centred on what’s in the Welsh self-interest and fairly lacking in broader digital themes.
From a public sector perspective, there’s a pledge to:
Ensure that £4.3 billion in public sector contracts are spent in Wales and we will introduce a real, independently verified, Living Wage…[and create][ 50,000 new, well-paid jobs from public sector contracts, each paying a genuine living wage.
The party will also use the break from EU procurement rules to spend the public purse closer to home:
Far too much public money is being spent buying goods and services from non-Welsh contractors. Huge multi- national companies are doing work that could be done by local companies.
On broadband, there’s a a commitment to improvoing coverage and ramping up speeds:
Swathes of the country are suffering from broadband and mobile not-spots making business untenable in rural Wales. We commit to making ultra-fast broadband available to all of Wales and rolling out 5G mobile signal nationwide.
On skills and immigration, it proposes:
a Welsh Migration Advisory Service so that we can have a system that suits Wales’s needs. Welsh-specific visas are necessary to plug skills gaps…A logical immigration policy that works for Wales, where students and job creators can come, but wages aren’t undercut and communities are protected.
The UKIP manifesto is here. 
The Green Party manifesto is here. 
The Plaid Cymru manifesto is here.
Image credit - Freeimages.com Read more on: Digital government and public services

