
 
Whatever your political leaning, it cannot be denied that the surprise result from the UK general election – whereby the Conservatives won enough seats to have a majority government – gives the Government Digital Service (GDS) some stability.
Although everyone I spoke to in recent months at GDS had said that they weren’t worried about a potential change in leadership, it is safe to assume that those working in theWhitehall department would have at the very least held some concerns about what their role would have been under a Labour-led government.
However, the Tories are in again; this time without the constraints of the Liberal Democrats. And from a technology standpoint, there appears to be an all-round sigh of relief in terms of what the result means for the digital agenda.
GDS has made good progress across a number of areas over the past five years and I think the industry is keen to see what can be achieved over the next five years without any significant level of disruption or change in direction.
For example, Andy Walker, deputy-CEO of techUK, a member organisation for technology companies operating in the UK, commented on the Conservative’s win with a positive outlook. He said:

The future of the UK depends on a strong, tech enabled economy and tech companies will be encouraged by signs of political certainty provided by today’s outcome.
The Conservative party has demonstrated a solid track record on tech and the digital economy across the UK. The new government must look to build on those achievements to make the UK a world leader in the next wave of the digital revolution.

Whilst, Georgina O’Toole, director at analyst house TechMarketView, agreed that consistency will be good for digital in Whitehall. She said:

Based on the forecasts, no-one could have predicted that we would be sat here on the verge of a Conservative majority in this General Election. Regardless of what you think of the result, for the suppliers to the public sector software and IT services market, the fact that it brings early certainty will be welcomed.
Without a majority Government, we would have seen many weeks of uncertainty and likely delays in decisions around major Government projects.

Okay, so we have got certainty. But this also means that GDS won’t have many excuses come the next general election in five years time – by that point having had 10 years to make significant headway in turning around the disastrous practices of IT and procurement in Whitehall in days gone by. Of course things will never be perfect, but people will be expecting significant progress.
As a result, when I heard the news of the election outcome, I began thinking about the things that I would like to see made a top priority by GDS over the course of the next five years. This isn’t a definitive list and I would be very keen to get other people’s contributions, so please do leave a comment at the bottom of the story if you think that there’s something else that should have been included.
Government-as-a-platform
Over the past five years, when referring to new digital services, GDS has largely focused on its exemplar projects. Twenty-five carefully picked digital projects that would showcase the potential of how Whitehall could take advantage of modern web-based technologies. At present 15 of these are live, five are in beta and another five are still in development.
Some have criticised the department for not having completed all of the exemplar services by its self-imposed deadline of March 2015, but as long as the projects are due for completion fairly soon and are good, this is less of a concern for me. I’ve never been a fan of compromising on quality to hit a deadline.
But the bigger and more important agenda is government-as-a-platform (GaaP). The creation of common goods and services that can be used as building blocks across government to introduce a coherent architecture and save on costs is GDS’ main priority – why build 400 websites, all using their own stacks, when we can have one central government CMS and website such as GOV.UK? The exemplar services have been described to me as “low hanging fruit” in terms of digital transformation and that if Whitehall really wants to change how things are done, GaaP needs to happen.
Some steps have already been taken to get the ball rolling, such as GOV.UK and the creation of a new identity authentication service – Verify. However, we are soon going to need a detailed strategy on what services GDS will target first, how each of those will be built and what the estimated cost savings will be as a result.
It was recently suggested that all of this talk of austerity and public sector cuts would be unnecessary if we could just introduce some efficiencies off the back of getting GaaP right. That’s enough motivation for me.
Data governance/sharing
Whilst we had some debate in the industry around GaaP prior to the general election, it seems that no-one is yet willing to bring up the problem of data governance and/or sharing. And it’s hardly surprising given the sensitivities around the topic and the challenges in getting the public’s buy-in.
However, for GaaP to be successful, we also need to think about how we are going to be managing and using public data. One of the arguments for GaaP is that it could allow policy makers to quickly create new services, in an agile way, without having to invest in a whole new stack of technologies. But to do that, and to be truly innovative, there is an argument for sharing data across departments and for new data governance structures to be introduced.
GDS leader Mike Bracken has just been given the role of Chief Data Officer, so it will be interesting to see what the approach to this will be and how it will be handled. Getting this piece wrong could seriously scupper the whole project.
Francis Maude’s successor
It was revealed earlier this year that Cabinet Office Minister Francis Maude, whom has spearheaded much of the political changes needed to drive the digital agenda, and has been a staunch advocate and protector of GDS since day one, would not be standing for re-election. There would be a new Cabinet Office Minister.
And whilst this may seem arbitrary to some, Maude’s presence has had a lot to do with the success of GDS to date. Regardless of what you think of his approach, it can’t be denied that Maude has done everything in his power to drive GDS through Whitehall. And as can been seen from the growth of the department over the past few years, it is now an extremely powerful entity.
I have spoken to people working at GDS that have said that they value Maude’s political shrewdness and his commercial savvy – a combination that is rare in senior politicians.
Therefore, finding a suitable replacement for the position of Cabinet Office Minister is incredibly important. They are big shoes to fill and getting it wrong could make a huge difference to progress.
The big contracts
Much of the government’s rhetoric around digital, introducing SMEs into the supply chain and reforming procurement of technology services in Whitehall has yet to make any sort of significant impact because of the huge outsourcing and managed services contracts that departments are tied into. It is generally agreed in GDS that these huge contracts don’t deliver the continuous value that they should, they cost too much and aren’t flexible enough to respond to the rapid technology changes happening in the market.
Therefore, it is thought that the more favourable approach would be shorter, more agile contracts, let to smaller companies; and perhaps some services should even be brought in-house, delivered across common services and platforms.
But none of this will be possible if departments can’t transition out of their existing agreements. And many of these contracts are due for renewal over the next 12 to 18 months. HMRC’s multi-year, multi-million pound Aspire contract is the focus of everyone’s attention, as many are keen to see if the department can figure out a way to successfully move away from the complex deal, without screwing up the country’s revenue and customs systems.
It has been suggested to me that Aspire could go either way.
I’ve also been told that it is likely that moving away from these contracts could actually take another 10 years, but we need to see some progress over this government. If we can’t get out of these contracts, GaaP is pointless.
Culture and skills
Culture and skills aren’t the same problem, but they do go hand in hand. There are ongoing conflicts across government departments between those that have grown attached to, and perhaps have interests in, doing things the way they have always been done. Driving change against this ongoing resistance isn’t easy.
Which is why bringing in the right skills and people that can make this change possible is incredibly important to not only successful digital projects, but creating a different culture across Whitehall. As we have seen with other projects in the UK, such as the G-Cloud, most of their initial success has come down to the fact that they had strong people working on them, who were advocates of change and who were not afraid to ruffle a few feathers to deliver something innovative and new.
We need more of that.
G-Cloud and DSF
The G-Cloud and the Digital Services Framework (DSF) are two of the main procurement tools that GDS wants departments to use on their digital projects. The G-Cloud for common cloud products and services, DSF for skills to deliver agile, highly customised digital projects.
The G-Cloud is significantly more successful than DSF at present, with hundreds of millions of pounds spent through the framework over the past couple of years. DSF has had huge problems, which diginomica has been covering for a number of months, but is due an overhaul and GDS chiefs have said that its third iteration will make a number of fixes.
And although G-Cloud has been successful, it too has some problems. The main being that most of the spend is being made on agile services and skills, as opposed to cloud products. It has been argued that this may be as a result of teams needing skills to transition away from old technology stacks towards a cloud-based environment, and that spend on SaaS, PaaS and IaaS will go up when this happens. However, if that doesn’t happen, the government’s commitment to a ‘cloud first’ policy may be brought into question.
GDS also needs to do more to be an advocate of G-Cloud across government and work to better ‘market’ and communicate its benefits.
Both of these frameworks need to be refined and pushed harder by the GDS team in order for them to reach their full potential.
SMEs
The Tory’s manifesto indicated that it would like to see government spend with small and medium businesses increase to a third of overall spend. At present the target is set at 25% – which the government claims it has hit.
However, there have been a number of criticisms thrown at the Cabinet Office and the Crown Commercial Service, as a lot of the SME spend to date is ‘indirect spend’ and is actually being handed down to SMEs via a big supplier through their supply chain. And whilst some say that this is still good for SMEs, the critics claim that the SMEs’ prices are being squeezed and that the value that they could deliver to government isn’t being seen as a result.
If the government thinks that working with SMEs is really a good idea, it needs to focus more on how it can get spend directly into their hands. Tools like the G-Cloud go some way to support this agenda, but more could be done and should be a focus for GDS going forward.
Universal Credit
At the moment Universal Credit has got all the signs and indications of being another huge government IT disaster project, where millions and millions of pounds could end up down the drain. However, the policy, which aims to merge a number of existing welfare payments into a single payment, has cross-party political support and could well benefit claimants.
But if the Department for Work and Pensions doesn’t get its new digital version of the system right – which is being developed alongside the original flawed system – it could be a big headache for GDS.
GDS is probably at a safe enough distance from the project not to receive all of the blame if it went wrong, but any projects of a digital nature that fail could result in a mark against the department’s credibility and successes to date. GDS needs to do what it can to make sure that Universal Credit is a success.
My take
As mentioned previously, this is definitely not the definitive list and I expect I’ll be adding to it over the coming days as more springs to mind. But these are the areas that need a lot of focus and for progress to be made – especially on the GaaP and data governance front. Get those right and it will be a slam dunk for GDS.
[mailmunch-form id=”14637″]
Read more on: Digital government and public services

