
The UK government has been considering for some time how it can better align policy making with digital delivery.
The idea being that instead of policy makers coming up with ideas, which are theoretical in approach and tested via consultation with a select few, and have multi-year pipelines; policy will be closely linked to service delivery, where services are created, tested and even destroyed at negligible cost through the use of ‘platforms’.
That’s the theory anyway. And a movement gaining momentum inside of Whitehall is One Team Government – which has its ‘unconference’ event today (meaning there is no pre-set agenda) – which focuses on bringing together policymakers, service designers and digital professionals to work in a multi-disciplinary way, in order to provide better services to citizens.
Some ideas around this have been touted by the Government Digital Service and other digital stakeholders in recent years, but for some reason hasn’t attracted the same attention as some of the more ‘sexy’ proposals put out by GDS.
That being said, I believe this is fundamental to the future success of creating a truly digital government going forward. A lot of what is wrong with government technology projects is that policy makers and digital delivery teams are so far removed – once the policy is decided, it’s handed over the wall without much consideration for how it will be delivered in practice, and then there is little room for change or improvement (e.g. Universal Credit).
This isn’t anyone’s fault, it’s just the way government has worked for decades. However, with new digital tools, there isn’t any reason that policy makers, designers and digital delivery teams can’t all work together as one team.
This blog post by James Reeve, a senior policy advisor at the Department for Education, explains the thinking behind this well. He speaks about building trust between policy and delivery, by introducing “over-communication” and co-location, in order to make government a more experienced and intelligent customer.
And this is a government priority, according to the recent Transformation Strategy, which states that by 2020 the government will:
Develop the right skills and culture among our people and leaders, and bring together policy and delivery to enable services to be delivered in a learning and iterative environment, focused on outcomes for citizens.
A manifesto
However, none of this is easy. Changing the way that people work, especially within a rigid institution that has operated in silos for generations, which feels tied to the way that government has historically delivered services, is going to be incredibly hard.
This has implications for politics too. If you’re creating and testing policy iteratively through the use of digital tools, where small changes rather than big ideas are the way to successful services – what does this mean for Ministers that traditionally create a name for themselves with big budget policies?
As with anything to do with government, there will be a lot of political resistance behind this, despite the benefits that could be delivered to citizens.
That being said, Paul Maltby, the government’s director of data projects, communities and local government, has published a prototype of a One Team Government manifesto, for what digital policy making could look like in practice. You can take a look at the full manifesto here and it’s also been published to GitHub.
The manifesto centres around six key principles:
1. Be curious, practical, reforming
2. Have a deep regard for the citizen experience of a policy or service
3. Harness the power of boundless horizontal communication
4. Embrace the tools and working practices of the internet era
5. Use data to inform decisions
6. Pursue an iterative, agile approach to delivery
The manifesto calls on digital policy makers to “mess around with data, code and digital tools”, and states that it is “not okay to be ignorant about how our modern world functions”. It adds that “ it is a category error to think of digital as merely a new add-on, something to be considered after core policy work has happened”.
Importantly, the manifesto also urges digital policy makers to think about the ‘wider system – acknowledging that citizens and service users don’t experience government as an individual piece of legislation, service or department. Again, this is the greatest challenge for Whitehall, which has traditionally operates in silos, and may need to rethink the fundamental structures of how it delivers services (e.g. data sharing, cross government collaboration).
The principles also state that government should draw upon the success built by others and that digital policy makers should only start from scratch when there is no other choice (e.g. making use of open source code that has been made available by others).
One point within the manifesto I particularly like is that digital policy makers “reject a presumption of multi-year policy cycles, and the notion of a simple linear direction from ministers through policy and then on to delivery”. It adds that they should “aim for more than policy work to be just informed by digital delivery” and should instead “aim for them to become seamless”.
Maltby concludes his blog by stating:
The policy profession still enjoys a privileged position in government at the side of Ministers, but there is a chance that this pre-eminence may come under threat from digital disruption in the coming decade. Rather than leading to a tension or competition between two differing perspectives, the nascent bottom-up One Team Government movement in the UK civil service show that there is appetite from many in and around government for these worlds start to flow together in a more seamless way, and in parts even merge.
The pace of digital change can be unsettling, but it is incumbent upon all civil servants to be better informed about the changes going on…The best way for policy officials to learn to be more digital is to just go and work with the large and growing community of digital colleagues in and around government.
He adds:
Saying we know what policy is when we see it just isn’t enough any more for the credibility and self-respect of policy officials. We should be embracing the digital side of policy and offering the policy profession’s unique insights into these new systems and ways of working from a position of strength. It is time for us to move more confidently out from the shadows (where even our basic ‘how to’ guides on policy are hidden behind password protected firewalls) to create a more open, forward looking and collaborative culture and set of skills. Engaging in the One Team Government community and events is just the start.
My take
As noted above, this policy-delivery discussion often doesn’t get the attention it deserves (possibly because it requires everyone in government to get behind the idea). And it’s hard. This isn’t going to be easy. However, I believe that it’s critically important to the future of digital government, because it speaks to the fundamentals of how services should be delivered. It’s not just about delivery, it’s about the people forming the ideas too – and the citizens they’re serving.
It’s somewhat comforting to note that this is attracting attention at the highest levels of government. Just this morning Sir Jeremy Heywood, the head of the UK Civil Service, tweeted the following:

Important #oneteamgov event today bringing together reformers across policy & digital roles. This is the future of the @UKCivilService
— Sir Jeremy Heywood (@HeadUKCivServ) June 29, 2017

Image credit - Image sourced via authorRead more on: Digital government and public services

