
The Cabinet Office in the UK has just announced that for every £3 spent on government contracts, it wants £1 of that to go to SMEs by 2020. The release describes it as a “big opportunity” for small business in the UK and Cabinet Office Minister Matt Hancock is urging small businesses to get “stuck in”.
And to a large extent, it’s a good target. SMEs in the UK will no doubt be happy about the government making it easier for them to bid for business and it’s certainly a good thing that Whitehall is making this part of its agenda.
However, there are a few things to remember here. Firstly, the government already spends 0.78p out of every £3 with SMEs (26% according to the latest figures). So what it hopes to do is increase the amount spent with smaller businesses by 0.22p for every pound over the next four and a bit years. That equates to between an additional 0.5p and 0.6p for every pound spent every year, up until 2020.
When you put it in those terms, it sounds less impressive. However, it is worth remembering that over the past five years or so the government has made it a priority to get that money through the supply chain into the hands of SMEs, by both setting targets and introducing new procurement mechanisms.
It’s not something to be sniffed at.
 For example, the government has just launched a new contract finders website, which it claims has much better search functionality and covers future public sector contracts above £10,000 in central government and above £25,000 in the wider public sector.
New legislation that has come into force this week also means that:

everyone in the supply chain must comply with 30 day payment terms, including suppliers and sub-contractors
public bodies must publish an annual late payment report, making their accountability more transparent
the bidding process is simpler across the wider public sector – complex forms, such as Pre-Qualification
Questionnaires, are now abolished for low value contracts
the procurement process for public sector contracts will be quicker

This is all very sensible. In years gone by the public sector procurement process has made it incredibly prohibitive for smaller companies without the know-how or budget to bid for government business. Equally, the new payment terms are incredibly important and helpful for smaller companies that may not have the equity to sustain long periods without regular cashflow.
I’ve heard horror stories about government departments taking months and months to pay their suppliers.
Cabinet Office Minister, Matt Hancock
Each government department and the Crown Commercial Service will now also make sure that it meets this target by setting out individual plans and targets for spending with small and medium-sized business over the next five years.
Minister for the Cabinet Office Matt Hancock said:
This is such an amazing opportunity for the country’s diverse and innovative small businesses, and today I urge them to get stuck in. From computers to uniforms – there are so many opportunities for small businesses to work with us, and I want to see more of them providing value for money for the taxpayer and benefiting from our spending.
John Manzoni, Chief Executive of the Civil Service said:
Further opening up our marketplace to small businesses is good economic sense all round – making it easier for them to access and win government business opportunities, whilst encouraging increased competition and market innovation to deliver best value for the taxpayer.
However, it’s worth noting that this announcement comes at a very convenient time for the Cabinet Office, given that its digital plans are under heavy scrutiny. After Government Digital Service director Mike Bracken announced he would be stepping down from his position, the future of government-as-a-platform and the role of big suppliers working with government has been brought into question.
Many fear that we are headed back to a time when big suppliers ruled the roost and project failures were a plenty. But these are just fears at the moment and there is little evidence to suggest that the digital agenda is off track. However, the Cabinet Office in particular will be keen to highlight it hasn’t taken its foot off the gas.
Equally, it’s worth noting a very important line in the release, which says the new SME mandate will mean “an extra £3 billion per year (in 2013 and 2014 terms) going to small and medium-sized firms directly or through the supply chain”.
In other words, the government isn’t committing to handing money directly to SMEs, but has said that the money may get there via big suppliers that work with smaller businesses via their supply chain. This is something I’ve highlighted a number of times before.
Whilst the government has increased direct spend with SMEs from around 6% to 10% over the last four years, this 10% figure appears to be stagnating (according to the latest figures).
And whilst money is money at the end of the day, I’m very aware that a lot of SMEs don’t like working with the big suppliers as part of the supply chain because they get their margins squeezed even further and they can’t bring the value that they could to government departments if they were dealing with them directly.
But more importantly, from my perspective, if the money is mostly still going through big suppliers, this means that the government isn’t actually changing its practices to become more agile and innovative.
It allows government departments to say they’re spending with SMEs as part of their contracts, but it also means that they can carry on working with the same big suppliers that they always have worked with.
Hardly the digital change that we need. And that’s not to say that SMES = digital. Not at all. But I think government departments should be working on their commercial and procurement capabilities to have the ability to have a number of smaller, more agile contracts that allow it to bring the value where it needs to.
We all know that the big outsourcing contracts that still remain in many of the government departments have become stale and outdated. But, it’s easier to hand over to one supplier and place the onus of responsibility on them. But maybe as government departments move away from their outsourcing agreements (if that’s still happening), things will change…
My take
It’s an announcement that is hard to criticise too much, as at least it allows government to take some steps in the right direction. However, those talking up the spend figures should also remember that this doesn’t equate to change driven throughout government.
Read more on: Digital government and public services

