
Paul Maltby, Director of Data for UK Government
Following the results of the Chancellor’s spending review a couple of weeks ago, which allocated a surprise £450 million to the UK’s Government Digital Service (GDS) to progress with digital transformation across Whitehall, we can start to once again consider the potential structural changes that may impact departments and services as a result of government-as-a-platform thinking.
A huge part of this, as we have previously argued, relies on government rethinking how it uses data across departments. The current silos and limitations with regards to analysis aren’t going to get the UK very far if it wants to take advantage of one of its greatest digital assets – data.
But of course this is a prickly subject for many, given the privacy concerns that come with sharing public data and the fear associated with not only a ‘big brother’ government, but the increasing number of data breaches we see in the private sector.
Which is why Paul Maltby, director of data for the UK government, has a huge task on his hands. But he also arguably has one of the most critical roles in this – and to date has been flying somewhat under the radar.
However, that’s not that surprising considering he is only a couple of months into the job and has been awaiting the results of the spending review. But it was good to get some insight into his thinking when he attended a parliamentary committee this week to provide evidence on the challenges around the ‘big data dilemma’.
 First things first – it was good to get a reaction from someone inside GDS and close to the platform strategy about the £450m windfall. Maltby said:
We were pleased to receive that. This means that for GDS we can continue to fund the core of GDS as a function within Cabinet Office. But it also means that its there to fund a number of different programmes. Essentially GDS is now covering three broad areas, around technology, digital and data.
It means that we will be able to take forward the proposition around digital platform services, the idea of services are used as common pieces within a broader digital landscape. For me the important part is that we are able to take forward a government data programme, which is a new thing for GDS. We will be able to make better use of data, introducing data science at more scale.
We are able to start improving the government’s data infrastructure, which means we will be able to use data for digital services, but also for analytics.
Need
Maltby was asked how the UK currently compares in its data capabilities to back in 2010. He said that where the government has improved is that it has now got data leaders, which have been nominated across departments. Maltby was pleased that this is the first time the UK has “truly brought together, at a comprehensive level, leadership on data across government”.
He added that this means that ‘data’ can now be an agenda and leadership in Whitehall is in one place, in one programme and has some intent.
When asked if he thought whether or not this means we should seen an an acceleration of the data agenda – he responded “absolutely”.
But what is now needed? Maltby said that the way that citizens are enjoying services in their everyday lives, powered by data analytics and the way that data works, needs to be brought to government.
Maltby estimated that in the ‘non-secret’ parts of government, that there are about 100 analysts that could confidently be labelled as data scientists. There are a further couple of hundred within the government’s science community of interest. However, Maltby said more are needed:
But clearly in a world where we have several thousands analysts across government, this is the start of a process, rather than the end of it. What’s the optimum amount and at what pace? I don’t know the answer to that, but it’s certainly more and quicker.
He highlighted that the Office for National Statistics is recruiting people currently and is also training up existing analysts. Maltby said, however, that there are barriers.
We are getting on with it, but there are barriers. Such as, have analysts got access to machines to use the tools? That’s been a barrier.
Retention. We have seen a small number of data scientists within GDS, but they’ve gone on to brighter and bigger things. And I see that’s great news, because that means we are doing something right. We can show a pathway through. But we need to think about that at a more structural level.
We are not having much difficulty in recruiting to be honest. We have just been through a process to recruit 31 data scientists into government, typically for people earlier on in their career. Affording people later on in their career is somewhat difficult.
Maltby said that there is no reason analysts that are currently employed for government can’t be trained up – he said that “it’s about curiosity and having the right tools”.
Future
Maltby spoke about the creation of canonical registers of data, which I’ve written about previously. These registers are likely to be used as the “fundamental platform” to enable a data platform and the data economy outside and Maltby said that it is something that GDS is “currently building with departments”.
Registers would be used as a ‘true source’ of data for a certain item of data – e.g. company names, or car registration details. This information could then be pulled separately from a number of sources into a database via an API for one off use cases, with authentication by users. For information, read this.
However, Maltby also spoke about the future of data in government, where GDS’ mission is to embed good digital practice and analytics across all of the public sector, rather than hold that knowledge at the centre. Having said this, Maltby was then asked what the future role of GDS is, if it has successfully embedded the skills across the public sector. He explained that there’s always likely to be a need for a function at the centre that is leading the way on cutting edge technology and thinking.
There’s always a cutting edge here. How do we test and bring in those new developments? It may be that people get great at doing visualisations, so we will be pushing on how do you bring in machine learning? They get great at machine learning, it’s then how do you bring in the best of artificial intelligence tools within that space? It’s a very fast moving agenda.
The idea is not to do all this stuff in the centre, that’s not the ambition. The idea is to spread this knowledge, this capability and this skill set very broadly indeed.
Read more on: Data privacyDigital government and public services

