
Credit: Tom Evans
It’s been a long time coming, but Prime Minister Theresa May is due to use her first regional Cabinet meeting today to launch proposals for a “modern Industrial Strategy’ to help support the British economy in a post-Brexit world.
For months Labour MPs have been lamenting how long it has taken for the strategy to appear, but it is thought that we will have a lot more detail about the government’s plans by this afternoon.
From the announcement released this weekend, there appears to be a significant emphasis on the role of technology and digital industries, as well as potential changes to government procurement.
However, that being said, until we get the full strategy, it is difficult to get a clear idea of the strength of the plans.
The Prime Minister’s office said that at the heart of the strategy will be an offer to businesses to strike new ‘Sector Deals’, in which the government will be prepared to offer a range of support, including addressing regulatory barriers to innovation and growth.
Prime Minister Theresa May said:
The Modern Industrial Strategy will back Britain for the long term: creating the conditions where successful businesses can emerge and grow, and backing them to invest in the long-term future of our country.
It will be underpinned by a new approach to government, not just stepping back but stepping up to a new, active role that backs business and ensures more people in all corners of the country share in the benefits of its success.
The announcement this weekend states that the strategy will set out technologies where Britain has strengths in research and development, which could be supported through a new Industrial Strategy Challenge Fund.
It identifies these technologies as: smart energy technologies; robotics and artificial intelligence; and 5G mobile network technology. It’s unclear at present how much money has been allocated to the Industrial Strategy Challenge Fund, but it falls under £4.7 billion of additional R&D funding announced by the Prime Minister in November.
Commenting on the launch of the strategy, Business & Energy Secretary Greg Clark said:
This is an important step in building a modern, dynamic industrial strategy that will improve living standards and drive economic growth across the whole country. A modern British Industrial Strategy must – build on the UK’s strengths and extend excellence into the future; close the gap between the the UK’s most productive companies, industries, places and people and the rest; and ensure we are one of the most competitive places in the world to start and grow a business.
We are inviting businesses and workers to contribute to this vision to help us create a high-skilled economy where every place can meet its potential.
What we know
The announcement also outlined some work on early ‘sector deals’, but details of these deals are still thin on the ground. However, for example, it seems discussions are taking place with Juergen Maier, CEO of Siemens UK, on “industrial digitalisation”.
The government said that it is prepared to work with “any sector which can organise behind strong leadership to address shared challenges and opportunities”.
According to the Prime Minister, the Industrial Strategy will set out a plan to improve living standards and economic growth by “increasing productivity and driving growth across the whole country”.
The paper will focus on ten strategic pillars to underpin a new government approach. These include:
1. Investing in science, research and innovation. The government wants to become a more “innovative economy”.
2. Developing skills, ensuring that everyone has the basic skills needed in a modern economic. A new system of technical education will be built, boosting STEM skills and digital skills.
3. Upgrading infrastructure. The government said it must ‘upgrade its standards of performance on digital’, as well as transport, energy etc.
4. Supporting businesses to start and grow, ensuring access to finance and management skills.
5. Improving procurement. The report will state that the government must use strategic procurement to drive innovation and enable the development of UK supply chains.
6. Encourage trade and inward investment policy.
7. Delivering affordable energy and clean growth.
8. Cultivating world-leading sectors.
9. Driving growth across the whole country, whether that means investing in key infrastructure projects, increasing skill levels, or backing local innovation.
10. Creating the right institutions to bring together sectors and places.
On hearing the news, Labour MP and shadow minister for Industrial Strategy, Chi Onwurah, tweeted:

Its good Govt have finally managed to publish something on #IndustrialStrategy – but will it mobilise the whole economy for everyone?
— chi onwurah (@ChiOnwurah) January 23, 2017
My take
It’s good that we are finally getting some details on what the government has planned for its industrial strategy. It’s encouraging to see mentions of digital skills, tech sector deals and improvements to government procurement.
That being said, there are so few details at the moment that until we get our hands on the strategy itself, it’s too hard to say whether it is worthwhile or not. And if we’re being honest, these are all things that the government always talks about.
However, what we need is action on the ground and money invested. For example, what tough changes are going to be made to government procurement? I want to hear specifics and I want to see measurable targets.
Theresa May is expected to provide more information later today, so we will update accordingly.

Image credit - Credit: Tom EvansRead more on: CentralDigital government and public services

