
Jeremy Corbyn
The leader of one of the UK’s two man political parties – and a potential Prime Minister – has called for a tech tax to be imposed on the likes of Facebook and Netflix, to pay to fund the BBC in a digital age.
Jeremy Corbyn, the leader of the left-wing Labour Party, used a speech to the Alternative MacTaggart Lecture at the Edinburgh TV Festival to call for radical thinking to build “a free and democratic media for the digital age”, warning that without such moves, “a few tech giants and unaccountable billionaires will control huge swathes of our public space and debate”.
For non-UK readers, the BBC is funded by a mandatory licence fee, currently £150.50 per annum. Additional cable and online services, such as Sky and Netflix, are available as subscription services over and above this standard licence fee which is intended to support public service broadcasting. Advertising-funded free-to-air channels are also available.
Critics of the licence fee argue that in an age of Netflix and the availability of hundreds of channels, this mandatory ‘TV tax’ is outdated and that it’s unfair to other broadcasters that the BBC should benefit from it.
Corbyn pitched his speech as being delivered in order to open up debate and that the ideas within it are intended to secure a future for public service broadcasting in an age of media upheaval:
We can build a free, vibrant, democratic and financially sustainable media in the digital age. We just need to harness the technology, empower the best instincts of media workers, wherever possible put the public in control and take on the power of unaccountable billionaires who claim they are setting us free but in reality are holding us back from achieving what we can all achieve together.
But at the core of the speech is a push to tax the digital disruptors:
One solution to funding public interest media could be by tapping up the digital monopolies that profit from every search, share and like we make. A strong, self-confident government could negotiate with these tech giants to create a fund, run entirely independently, to support public interest media. Google and news publishers in France and Belgium were able to agree a settlement. If we can’t do something similar here, but on a more ambitious scale, we’ll need to look at the option of a windfall tax on the digital monopolies to create a public interest media fund.
As for the licence fee model, Corbyn talks up the concept of a digital upgrade:
The licence fee itself is another potential area for modernisation. Originally, it was charged on radio sets. Then, as the technology developed, it became a radio and TV licence fee and finally just the TV licence fee. In the digital age, we should consider whether a digital licence fee could be a fairer and more effective way to fund the BBC.
A digital licence fee, supplementing the existing licence fee, collected from tech giants and Internet Service Providers, which extract huge wealth from our shared digital space, could allow a democratised and more plural BBC to compete far more effectively with the private multinational digital giants like Netflix, Amazon, Google and Facebook. This could also help reduce the cost of the licence fee for poorer households.
BBC or BDC?
In one surprising demand, Corbyn backed the idea of a British Digital Corporation (BDC), a sort of sister organization to the existing BBC or, taking an alternative angle, a body that might be thought of as a state-owned Facebook or Netflix:
A BDC could use all of our best minds, the latest technology and our existing public assets not only to deliver information and entertainment to rival Netflix and Amazon but also to harness data for the public good.
A BDC could develop new technology for online decision making and audience-led commissioning of programmes and even a public social media platform with real privacy and public control over the data that is making Facebook and others so rich.
The BDC could work with other institutions that the next Labour government will set up like our National Investment Bank, National Transformation Fund, Strategic Investment Board, Regional Development Banks and our public utilities to create new ways for public engagement, oversight and control of key levers of our economy.
It could become the access point for public knowledge, information and content currently held in the BBC archives, the British Library and the British Museum. Imagine an expanded Iplayer giving universal access to licence fee payers for a product that could rival Netflix and Amazon. It would probably sell pretty well overseas as well.
My take
Corbyn positioned this speech as opening shots in a debate. From that perspective, there are some interesting areas to discuss. The BBC, as we’ve argued before, may well be one of the UK’s national treasures and as far as I’m concerned the licence fee remains a bargain.
But it’s a different age and there’s a need to confront changing realities. The licence fee worked as a simple model when it was only for radios and then for TVs. In an era where content is consumed on multiple platforms, the future shape of the licence has to be open to serious scrutiny.
The UK Government itself has been posturing (essentially utterly ineffectually) about threatening social media firms with a tech tax for some time. Just recently, Chancellor of the Exchequer Phillip Hammond was saber-rattling around this after Amazon managed to pay even less tax than previously in the UK.
So from that perspective, Corbyn’s (very) vague tax plans aren’t anything out of the ordinary. His proposal to allocate additional revenues to the BBC rather than to line the pockets of the Treasury is different though. That said, I’m with Anthony Walker, CEO of trade association techUK, who notes:
It is good to see Mr. Corbyn engaging on these issues, however we need better ideas than just another proposal to tax tech companies.
The BBC itself has been calling for action to combat the rise of the disruptor generation of competitors. Earlier this year, the BBC Director General Tony Hall warned that the likes of Facebook, Amazon and Netflix would “skilfully mine every ounce of personal data to drive growth and profit”.
But while the Corporation might therefore be expected to welcome proposals to prop up its own model by taking revenue from its digital rivals, it’s going to be unhappy with other aspects of Corbyn’s proposals, such as allowing licence fee payers to elect the broadcaster’s board of directors or to force it to disclose the ‘social class’ breakdown of its staff. That extra money would come with an unwelcome price tag.
Others will be concerned at the idea of a state-owned, state-run social media platform – what could possibly go wrong there!?!? – or as someone on Twitter put it, nationalising Facebook?
As for Facebook, Netflix et al, what’s their reaction likely to be? Netflix, for example, has an ambitious international expansion strategy, but could it pull back on the UK and re-focus efforts on markets where it’s not expected to hand over funding to one of its biggest rivals? The current US administration may be no great fan of Amazon, but a left-wing UK Government seeking to tax US tech firms more to prop up a state broadcaster can pretty much be guaranteed to elicit an early morning Twitter storm from the White House.
Image credit - TwitterRead more on: Digital and content marketingRegulationSocial 