
A critical aspect of life post-Brexit will be how attractive the UK can make itself for inward investment, not least in the tech sector. The UK has been the traditional first port of call for ‘land-and-expand’ US international drives, a tactic used by firms from Oracle through NetSuite to Salesforce to name a few. 
But post-Brexit, will that remain the case? Already there’s talk of the Netherlands inheriting the mantle. Nearly 90% of Dutch citizens speak English, there are good transport links and it’s at the heart of the European Union (EU). We’ve already seen the likes of NetSuite expanding its footprint there.
So the challenge for the UK Treasury is how to keep the UK on the radar for investment. I’ve noted before that the Irish government has done very well in attracting cloud computing firms to open up shop in the Republic, wooed by a highly beneficial corporation tax of 12.5%. 
It’s notable that the UK finance minister, Chancellor of the Exchequer George Osborne has this week suggested he may slash the UK rate to 15%, which would be lower than most of continental Europe. By comparison, the Netherlands rate starts at 20% and goes up to 25%, Germany starts at around 30%, while France kicks off at 15% for companies turning in profits of less than €38,000, but rises to 36% if you make €3.5 million. 
But whatever happens, of equal importance is the general health of the digital economy as well as the fiscal economy. That’s why the first reading the Digital Economy Bill in the UK legislature yesterday matters so much. Culture Secretary, John Whittingdale said:

We want to make the UK a world leader in digital provision – a place where technology continually transforms the economy, society and government. The Digital Economy Bill will put in place the foundations for the digital future and help us meet this ambition.

Devilish detail
Hmm, perhaps, perhaps. But of course the devil’s in the detail – and in the priorities. There’s a big focus on online porn and protecting children from exposure, for example. While tackling this as a social issue may be a laudable enough ambition and certainly captures the mainstream media headlines, it should scarcely be one of the four main priorities identified on the Gov.UK website, alongside cutting spam marketing.

The other three priorities are to: 

empower consumers and provide better connectivity so that everyone has access to broadband wherever they live.
build a better infrastructure fit for the digital future.
enable better public services using digital technologies.

What really matters now is getting UK Digital’s house in order in terms of infrastructure and tech climate to make it an attractive post-Brexit business environment. To that end, there are welcome ambitions, such as a new Broadband Universal Service Obligation (USO) for the United Kingdom and giving all citizens the legal right to request a 10Mbps broadband. 
But again, the question is how to enforce this? I know from my own personal hell with BT that you can request all you like, but the customer-hating behemoth that owns most of the UK’s national telco infrastructure is just going to ignore you 99% of the time. 
What is more encouraging is that the Bill sets out to reform the Electronic Communications Code in a bid to open up the market and give communications service providers more scope to build and install networks.
The Bill will be debated in the House of Commons at the second reading stage and is expected to move to the upper chamber of The House of Lords in the fall. Royal assent, which is needed to make the bill into law, is then expected in the spring of 2017, by which time Brexit negotiations between the UK and the EU will almost certainly be underway. 
The TechUK plan
The UK tech industry’s national trade association TechUK has already published its own 5 point plan. I quote this in full as I can find little to disagree with here. 
Access to the Single Market must be the primary objective of any UK negotiation 

Access to the single market allows tech firms to compete for business on equal terms across Europe, generating jobs and growth and is a key factor in the UK’s ability to attract foreign investment. Maintaining access to the single market must be the number one objective of any new relationship with Europe.

Retaining and attracting talent is vital to the success and growth of UK tech 

The UK tech sector has thrived on its ability to attract the best skills and entrepreneurial talent from across Europe. These people have been integral to UK tech’s success. If the UK can no longer benefit from free movement then a new ‘smart immigration’ policy needs to be put in place that prioritises the needs to the UK’s fast growing and high value tech sector. This isn’t just about getting the bureaucracy right. These people must also feel that they are welcome and valued in the UK.

Work should start now on securing international data flows and data protection

Tech businesses are data driven and depend upon the ability to move data across national borders. Any changes in the UK’s relationship with Europe must not impede the ability of data to flow freely to and from the EU. New European data protection laws are likely to enter into force before the UK leaves the EU. Urgent consideration should be given to the relative merits of maintaining, adapting or completely re-legislating the UK’s data protection laws. It seems likely that the UK may have to strike some form of agreement similar to the EU US Privacy Shield in order to ensure cross border data flows. Amendments may be required to the UK Investigatory Powers Bill. Work needs to start now in full partnership with industry to develop solutions that position the UK as a global data leader.

Government must take every opportunity to do business as usual and listen hard to tech on issues such as digital infrastructure 

To address immediate concerns about the impact of the referendum, Government must demonstrate that uncertainty does not have to mean paralysis. There are many policy and funding decisions that should not be delayed by the EU Referendum outcome. For example, reforms to planning rules and wayleaves that would dramatically reduce costs and delays in rural communications infrastructure deployments should now be fast tracked. Meanwhile Government must listen again and be willing to compromise on big initiatives such as the Apprenticeship Levy. Strong and legitimate business concerns must be addressed if the Levy is to succeed. Now is not the time to make the business environment any more difficult for tech businesses.

Work with business now on a new Digital Strategy for this new world

A new Digital Strategy was expected to be published shortly and now needs to be re-written. Government should do this in collaboration with tech businesses. The Government should publish the existing strategy now as a draft and seek inputs from business about how it can be made fit for purpose for the challenges and opportunities ahead. The UK has one chance to get this right. The approach must be strategic and comprehensive, looking at the whole of the UK’s tech ecosystem. It will fail if it is a collection of headline grabbing gimmicks.

My take 
The Digital Economy Bill has its ‘heart’ in the right place, but as noted above, the devil is in the detail. The Brexit vote makes it all the more urgent to ensure that the UK’s digital economy is as appealing as possible for outside investors. 
Chancellor Osborne’s proposed corporation tax cut is a welcome development. Given that a key objective of the EU is the alignment of economic policies and regulatory practices, the republic’s, entirely legal, 12.5% corporation tax has given it a massive commercial advantage. Outside of the EU, the gloves need to come off in HM Treasury. 
TechUK’s five point plan meanwhile is pragmatic and sound. Let’s hope that the association can exploit its relationships and contacts in the political establishment to shape the debate in the coming months. 
Image credit - FreeImages.com Disclosure - At time of writing, Oracle, NetSuite and Salesforce are premier partners of diginomica. Read more on: Digital government and public services

