
MPs on the Transport Select Committee have criticised both rail companies and the government for the poor customer experience facing customers using the rail network across the UK, in a new report out this week.
Whilst most of the report focuses on the abysmal service provided by Southern Railway, which has been making headlines for unbelievable delays and strike action, there was also criticism placed on the poor ticketing systems that have been in place for the best part of three decades.
The Chair of the Transport Select Committee, Louise Ellman MP, commented:
Passengers must be furious – and rightly so. While the number of passenger journeys on the railway has more than doubled over the last two decades, the size of the physical network has barely increased at all. Passengers now contribute more than 70% of the industry’s real income, but in too many places, passengers are badly served by train operating companies.
The MP’s report largely took aim at the complexity of rail ticketing in the UK, which it notes often sees a “baffling range of different rail tickets available and the sometimes incomprehensible jargon used to describe them”.
Much of the problems lie in passengers being able to find the information they need at machine terminals or online, which is amplified by the lack of availability of a smart ticketing system.
It notes that this has been known to be an issue since at least 2006, when the Transport Committee at the time said that the level of complexity in unregulated fares was an “insult to the passenger”.
Since then there have been numerous calls to action at frequent intervals over the past decade.
The report notes:
Particular bugbears include use of ambiguous terms such as “London Terminals” and “Any Permitted” in relation to destinations and routes; “split-ticketing”, by which cross-country journeys can often be made more cheaply by purchasing a series of tickets between intermediate stations on the journey; and ticket vending machines that do not always offer the full range of ticketing information or the cheapest available fares.
Barriers
The report highlighted the main barriers restricting rail companies from providing an enhanced system to passengers, most of which are the result of fragmentation or a lack of standardisation in the industry.
It found that there is:
• limitations of some of the hardware;
• a reliance on ticket vending machine suppliers for software updates;
• limitations of industry data and systems; and
• the need to agree common definitions and approaches across the industry.
The report states:
Unfairness, complexity and a lack of transparency in the rail ticketing system have been apparent for at least a decade.
We recommend that the Department and the ORR publish a joint strategy to address each of these problems, or take enforcement action against TOCs who fail to comply with relevant codes of practice, rail licence conditions, franchise agreements or consumer law.
We recommend that the joint strategy be published by April 2017, and that it include a clear timetable for full implementation across the rail network.
Smart tickets
A typical day on the rail network
Having done a quick online search, I found that I have been writing about the government’s smart ticket ambitions since at least 2012. For years we have heard promises and proclamations about the need for smart ticketing systems across the rail network, to not only improve the customer experience but to reduce costs.
However, I have seen very little evidence of this outside of London. The Oyster Card and contactless payments on the Transport for London network have been very successful. But that is largely because it is a ubiquitous network that is owned by one organisation.
The smart ticketing I’ve used outside of London often involves someone standing at the ticketing gate checking the ticket on my phone – actually slower than a paper ticket.
The report highlights how fragmentation outside of the London area is a problem. It reads:
There was wide-ranging support for a move away from the paper ticket. Significant steps have been taken, but the Department acknowledged that progress towards smart ticketing across the network has been slow.
The key challenge to the more widespread introduction of smart systems appeared to be lack of coordination and integration between TOCs (Train Operating Companies). Numerous TOCs had introduced smart-ticketing—including, Abellio Greater Anglia, Arriva Trains Wales, C2C, Chiltern Railways, East Midlands Trains, Govia Thameslink Railway, Grand Central, Hull Trains, London Midland, Merseyrail, ScotRail, South West Trains, and Virgin Trains—but there did not appear to be a great deal of coordination, and there was no industry-wide preferred solution.
In oral evidence to the committee, Jacqueline Starr, the Rail Delivery Group’s newly appointed managing director of customer experience, told MPs that within the last few weeks agreement across the group has been reached for a smart ticketing plan “with a very clear timeline, very clear deliverables and clear sponsorship from the TOC community”.
She added that the allocation of initial funding to deliver the first phase had been received. The MPs welcomed this news, but added:
We recommend the RDG immediately publish details of its smart-ticketing plan, including a clear timetable for delivery. This must not be further postponed; we expect to see an implementation timetable for which TOCs can be held publicly to account.
My take
Anyone in the UK that uses the rail network regularly will know that trains are overcrowded, overpriced and that the general customer experience isn’t brilliant. I’m not holding my breath for any huge improvements in the coming months and years.
Image credit - London Train Tube station Blur people movement in rush hour, at © alice_photoRead more on: Digital government and public services

