
During a presentation to TechUK members last week, the UK government’s commercial director of technology Sarah Hurrell gave us some insight into the challenges that the Crown Commercial Service faces in balancing the need to attract innovative suppliers to bid for frameworks and the need to drive down margins for her customers – government departments.
Over the past five years we have noticed a distinct change in rhetoric from central government technology leaders, where conversation has moved on from the early days of trashing the large suppliers for ripping off government buyers towards a more co-operative approach to procurement.
So much of the early discussions centred around the “oligopoly” and how most technology contracts were criminally overpriced. However, now it seems that the Crown Commercial Service – the government body charged with simplifying IT buying and driving a better deal for the public sector – is beginning to deliver a more nuanced message.
During Hurrell’s TechUK presentation on the Crown Commercial Service’s 2016 strategy, one vendor asked her if she felt that the organisation had “swung the model too far”, referring specifically to a lot on the Technology Products framework, which gave a guideline that suppliers shouldn’t be making more than 1% margin on its software licenses.
Hurrell responded by saying that striking the balance isn’t always easy. She said:
We have done some things differently. This sometimes leads to ‘damned if we do, damned if we don’t’. I had the best FOI I had to answer to, which was: do you think you are making people go bust with these low margins?
When I landed I used to get ‘you’re paying 20% margins you muppets’ and now I’m getting ‘you’re screwing the margins down too much’. Part of what we are trying to do is through market engagement get that about right. But if we get a lot of people bidding, then we are probably not doing too bad on the percentage points. There is that element that people vote with their feet. If it isn’t economic they don’t bid in the first place.
However, Hurrell’s colleague, Kelvin Lee, who heads up the framework in question, suggested that perhaps the 1% margin wouldn’t be there for the next iteration. He said:
I believe it was a guideline. You didn’t have to put in a margin of 1% to be awarded a place. There are other suppliers on the framework that have a much higher margin. We would never mandate that. I think the software market has changed slightly. When I came in the framework was going live so I didn’t have much say. I think it was a fair shout. I think probably now, making the decision for Technology Products 2, something is going to have to change.
 Hurrell then went on to agree that the Crown Commercial Service couldn’t continue to drive down prices, as this could end up alienating suppliers. She added:
Generally part of the victim of our success is that we might have to make some changes in next iterations. I can see the same thing happening in network services space, we have commoditised it and the prices have been driven down. We can’t expect to keep screwing the prices down because it will get to the point where it isn’t economic for you.
I am not going to have any sympathy for you if it’s a case of I’m going to have to buy the smaller yacht, rather than the bigger yacht. But if it gets to a point where you feel like you don’t want to bid, tell us.
Earlier on in Hurrell’s presentation she also highlighted that part of her strategy and one of her key priorities is maximising the Crown’s buying power. She hinted to practices of the past and said:
The Crown spends a lot of money and we need to make sure that that’s recognised. Sometimes people try to divide and conquer us and behave in a way that’s not particularly good for the taxpayer and we will do our best to challenge that. So just as a open and transparent view of what really annoys me, because at the end of the day we really are trying to deliver a service.
I’m not saying that I don’t want you to make healthy profits, we want you to make healthy profits. If you don’t make healthy profits, you go bust and that’s not good for us. We want you to make a healthy profits, not a stupid one.
Spending review
As the surprise results of the Chancellor’s recent spending review begin to sink in – where technology and digital unexpectedly received hundreds of millions of pounds of investment – it’s interesting to hear the reaction of those that are charged with delivering the change and outcomes set out by George Osborne.
Hurrell will likely play a central role in this, given she is directly involved with a significant amount of technology buying in government. Her response during the TechUK event was that departments are going to have to look to the use of technology to achieve the savings required, which could mean good things for the supplier community. She said:
The spending review was done as a collegiate process involving the departments, the Crown Commercial Service and HMT. What that meant was that there was a joint bottom-up view about what the spending outputs should be. And now there is the joint commitment to deliver against those. The exact flavour of what that will be will be evolving over the rest of the parliament.
The difference is that there is a real commitment from CCS and the departments to make those spending review numbers work. That’s the official answer. The unofficial answer from myself is I think that a lot of departments will make their spending review work by technology. I think the salami slicing days have gone and we are now more into a more creative solution to get to these spending review outputs.
I think for the tech community there is more opportunity than previously.
However, elsewhere during Hurrell’s presentation, she hinted that there is only so much CCS and others working from the centre can do to help departments, because ultimately they are in charge of their own destiny. She said:
We do have a lot intelligent customers, but we have a few that aren’t so intelligent. But part of
British Government’s Commercial Director, Sarah Hurrell
our job is to help people buy sensibly. If we have people that are asking to buy something that is going to cost three arms and a leg and they don’t need the extra arms and legs, we are really happy to go and have that conversation with them so that they do the right thing with taxpayer money.
But at the end of the day it’s typically their budget, so if they want to do that thing they will go ahead and do that anyway.
Working with GDS
Finally, it’s worth pointing out that Hurrell made direct reference to the strong working relationship between herself, her team and her colleagues at the Government Digital Service. CCS has come under fire in the past for its old school approach to digital design and bore the brunt of criticism for the failed Digital Services Framework. However, Hurrell believes that the two departments are working well together and that their priorities are aligned. She said:
I spend probably 80-90% of my time either working with GDS or alongside GDS on the stuff that we do, to make sure that we are completely aligned on the stuff that we do. We will always have slightly different views because that’s the nature of procurement compared to a CTO-type community. But they should be healthy views in the same direction.
And I do believe that we do have a phenomenally good relationship there that is driving good outcomes for the tax payer.
Read more on: Digital government and public services

