
Oracle customers are giving cloud technologies the swerve and choosing instead to stick with the mature and proven on-premise applications that already lie at the heart of their ERP application strategies.
That, at least, is the message from Rimini Street – and the latest sign that the company’s battles with Oracle are far from over, despite a court ruling last month that it should pay Oracle $50 million in damages arising from a lawsuit that rumbled on for years and revolved around copyright infringement.
The award made by the court was a good deal less than the $245.9 million that Oracle was seeking but, at the same time, substantially more than the $10 million maximum that Rimini claimed it should have to pay.
Whichever way you look at it, Rimini Street effectively lost the case – but company president Sebastian Grady is determined to spin it as a positive result. Speaking to Diginomica at Gartner’s CIO Symposium in Barcelona last week, he said:
The verdict is a big win for customers and the market. Wilful misconduct, punitive damages – [Oracle] didn’t get any of that. All of this was considered innocent infringement by the jury.
What he means by this is that the third-party maintenance model that Rimini Street uses, along with countless other systems integrators, was never under question. What was deemed more worthy of scrutiny – and what resulted in the damages verdict – was the method that Rimini Street used to download and store Oracle software. The company has since changed this method, says Grady.
So it’s all onwards and upwards and business-as-usual for Rimini Street, by Grady’s account – and the release of its controversial second annual survey of 443 current Oracle licensees worldwide suggests a company that is anything but chastened by its recent experiences.
The survey report, for example, highlights respondents’ reasons for not moving to Oracle’s Fusion and other cloud applications. ‘High maintenance and licensing costs’ is the reason given by 62% of respondents, while 60% say they can see ‘no business case’ for doing so. The report also states:
Another top reason for not migrating to Oracle Cloud/Fusion applications is they provide no incremental value over existing applications.
 Of course, these response play rather conveniently to Rimini Street’s key marketing messages: that customers are fed up with paying annual maintenance fees for at best minimal support and that vendors like Oracle regularly hold them to ransom and try to force change on them that they don’t want or need.
There’s some truth in all this. At around 22% of original licence fees, annual maintenance bills from Oracle and SAP – the two companies that Rimini Street has chosen to focus its third-party support business on – seem punitive to many.
And Rimini Street’s promise to cut that bill by half for every customer it serves is certainly attractive to some. In its third quarter results, released ahead of the Oracle verdict, Rimini Street reported it has 1,146 customers, having added 80 in that quarter alone. Revenues were up 38% quarter over quarter, it said. In its last fiscal year, they were up 42% year on year. Says Grady:
Some customers are getting so fed up with the fees and the constant upgrade cycle. They’re always on a treadmill and they’re always paying these vendors… But CEOs and CFOs are not standing for it anymore. They won’t tolerate it and that’s why you see high CIO turnover. The question [for CIOs] is: are you going to side with the vendors – the cartel – or are you going to do the right thing for your company?
Sebastian Grady, Rimini Street
Today, most companies could comfortably wait for “around a five year window” before they make the move to the cloud, he insists. But if that’s true, we ask, what kind of company will Rimini Street be in 2020? Interestingly, Grady doesn’t rule out a move in that direction for the firm:
If the whole world goes SaaS, if the whole world goes cloud, then we’ll just follow the bouncing ball… Our split for cloud support, over time, might become bigger if the market moves that way, but right now, we’ve got our hands full.
I think [in 2020] we’ll be supporting whatever the hot software is that people are using. But it might still be what we’re looking at today. Remember: this is 30 to 40-year old software and who’s to say it can’t go another 30 to 40 years? And vendors might be forced to come out with new versions of on-premise – but if everyone moves to the cloud, then we’ll support the cloud.
Well, maybe. For now Grady and Rimini Street are pushing the same message to enterprise applications customers: stand up and be counted. And it does seem to be resonating. Grady, really warming to his theme, sends out this rallying call:
We’re trying to right wrongs here. We’re part of the resistance. We’re not just sitting back and accepting all this. We’re telling customers: ‘You need to look at every vendor who’s telling you that you need to change for the sake of change and then you need to say ‘No’ and put yourselves back in the driving seat. Because today, you’re just sitting there, taking it.’
Disclosure: At the time of writing Rimini Street, Oracle and SAP are diginomica partners.
Read more on: Cloud ERP financials and supply chain 