
Most companies whose stock price has outpaced that of their overall industry by 14 percentage points in the last year don’t find themselves in the crosshairs of shareholders, Wall Street analysts, and the technology media. But such is the fate of Intel, a company besieged by questions about its executive leadership, manufacturing prowess, and product roadmap.
It was fitting then that a collection of financial and technology analysts and reporters recently gathered under ashen skies at Intel’s headquarters in Santa Clara for a day-long series of executive presentations intended to clarify its all-important data center strategy and allay fears that a company known for its technology prowess, corporate integrity, and industry leadership had not lost its way.
Unlike prior briefings which segregated financial and technology analysts into separate event streams, Intel’s Data-Centric Innovation Summit attempted to combine enough business reasoning to satisfy Wall Street and product details to mollify the tech commentariat married with a strategic roadmap that tied it all together into a seemingly rational narrative.
Intel didn’t completely pull off such a hat trick, but I admire the attempt. The more significant question is whether it all made sense or was merely an attempt to shift the conversation away from speeds, feeds, benchmarks and nanometers. These are the quantitative areas where Intel’s products have been under fire from new competitors like NVIDIA, rejuvenated old rivals like AMD, a host of AI-focused upstarts and unlikely corners like the cloud-operators themselves. And, analysts recall that Intel pretty much missed the shift to mobile so are naturally wary of prognostications by the chip giant.
Intel’s data-centric strategy
Intel’s latest strategy, as evidenced by the event’s title, is all about data: processing it (CPUs), moving it (networking), storing it (SSDs and alternatives) and analyzing it (AI).
While Intel doesn’t get credit for originality, since “data is the new oil” bromides are now part of every tech company’s lexicon, data provides a legitimate theme for tying Intel’s disparate data center technologies into a coherent portfolio. The strategy isn’t brand new and dates from the era of disgraced former CEO Brian Krzanich. Here’s how he put it at Intel’s last shareholder meeting,
Our strategy is that it’s really pretty simple that data is going to become the fuel of most of the technology revolutions that we see and it’s really driving where technology is centered around and our strategy is to provide the technology foundation for this data-centric world.
Intel’s post-PC strategy, version 2 differs markedly from that of just two years ago with nary a mention of data as the nexus of its business plans. Here’s 2016 Krzanich with the pre-data-centric strategy,
Our strategy itself is about transforming Intel from a PC company to a company that powers the cloud and billions of smart, connected computing devices.
Then the focus was on the trendy topics of the time, namely the cloud and IoT, with a sop to FPGAs to justify Intel’s then-recent Altera acquisition. Today, these have all been subsumed into a broader narrative of data: sources of it means of storing it and things that process it.
Intel gets no points for originality since such a data-centric strategy is de rigueur among technology companies these days, for example, see my recent column on how big data specialist Hortonworks uses the theme to position itself for future success.
Nevertheless, Intel executives have now translated the move from PC- to data-centrism into some concrete estimates of the business and revenue opportunities ahead.
Add data and stir
Intel EVP Navin Shenoy, head of its Data Center Group (DCG) which is the company’s current and future growth driver, summarized the data-centric business case in the event’s opening keynote. After some perfunctory slideware reprising the well-worn theme of today’s data deluge, Shenoy translated data into dollars, namely the market opportunities for Intel across the gamut of data processing, storage, movement, and analysis. Here’s how he put it in a contemporaneously written editorial detailing the “expansive view of Intel’s total addressable market (TAM)” and discussing the opportunities in data analysis.
Achieving this, however, requires a combination of technologies working in concert – everything including computer vision, edge computing, mapping, the cloud and artificial intelligence (AI). This, in turn, requires a significant shift in the way we as an industry view computing and data-centric technology. We need to look at data holistically, including how we move data faster, store more of it and process everything from the cloud to the edge.
Here Shenoy provides Wall Street an eye-popping 25 percent addition to the financial opportunity ahead,
This end-to-end approach is core to Intel’s strategy and when we look at it through this lens – helping customers move, store and process data – the market opportunity is enormous. In fact, we’ve revised our TAM from $160 billion in 2021 to $200 billion in 2022 for our data-centric businesses. This is the biggest opportunity in the history of the company.
Shenoy’s presentation broke the $200 billion number out into categories roughly aligned with Intel’s business units I’ve summarized here.
Shenoy detailed the catalysts for growth in each segment, namely:

Data Center: Continued expansion of cloud services providers buying processors, AI accelerators and networking equipment
Non-volatile memory: More cloud-driven growth for NAND along with demand from a new category of massive in-memory database systems enabled by Intel’s recently announced Optane persistent non-volatile memory products.
Networking: Another category benefitting from the insatiable demand for switching capacity by the hyper-scale cloud operators, but also from a secular upswing from carriers from the wireless transition to 5G. 5G wireless and IoT data generation will also result in more computing capacity moving to the network edge in cellular base stations, office buildings and remote industrial and retail locations.
IoT: A catch-all category that includes ADAS (Advanced driver assistance systems) for autonomous vehicles and various industrial and retail systems with connected devices that are just entering periods of high growth.
FPGA: New software abstraction layers like Intel’s nGraph deep learning compiler will broaden the use as AI accelerators in the data center, many of which will use FPGAs. The market will also benefit from increased use of FPGAs in smart NIC products, in for other network accelerators (security, transcoding) and various IoT and 5G applications.

Intel pulls a clever sleight of hand by highlighting the “available market” while eschewing any discussion of its expected market share, namely how much of the spending will flow to Intel and improve its overall growth rate.
It’s akin to an independent game developer telling VCs that its mobile app targets a $130 billion gaming market without mentioning that only half of it goes to mobile games and where even taking 1 percent share from huge established vendors is a monumental challenge.
AI is the word
If there are two words guaranteed to get the attention of tech investors and commentators they are “AI” and “blockchain.” While Intel didn’t succumb to cryptocurrency fever it did seek to capitalize on the AI hype by announcing several features and technologies targeting a market now dominated by NVIDIA.
Judging by the news reports after the event, the biggest headline was Shenoy revealing Intel’s estimate that AI-related workloads were responsible for $1 billion in revenue last year.
Executives didn’t provide meaningful details on how they arrived at the number other than “talking to customers.” While it’s a mere 1.6 percent of Intel’s total 2017 revenue, if true, the $1 billion number is greater than NVIDIA’s $830 million in 2017 data center revenue and represents an interesting milestone.
I’ll have more to say about the technical details of things like the nGraph compiler, new AI toolkits, updates to the Nervana processor and deep learning boost processor instructions next week.
My take
DCG has been Intel’s growth engine for a decade and has benefitted handsomely from the exploding demand from cloud vendors as they furiously build capacity to handle new customers and services.
Much of the cloud equipment spending has percolated through to Intel by virtue of its virtual monopoly on processors, with approximately 90 percent of servers by revenue using Xeon processors. However, like nature, capitalism abhors a competitive vacuum and Intel is now beset on many fronts, including:

AMD’s renaissance yielding a compelling, and in some ways superior, x86 server CPU that’s garnering interest by cloud vendors and enterprise IT.
NVIDIA’s pioneering of GPU accelerated computing leading to a re-birth of AI in the form of deep learning and a resulting explosion in AI applications that has stoked demand for GPUs.
The viability of alternative processor architectures like ARM for scale-out workloads, POWER for scale-up databases and specialty AI accelerators like Google’s TPU and emerging products from a bevy of startups.
Intel’s repeated stumbles in perfecting the next-generation 10nm processor technology that has turned its manufacturing, which was once a strength, into a liability.

Creeping delays in Intel’s 10nm server part, code-named Ice Lake and now not expected until 2020 coupled with the company’s repeated and inconsistent attempts at explaining its 10nm production ramp have caused Intel to lose credibility with many technical and financial analysts.
While Shenoy and other executives did their best to redirect the discussion away from manufacturing problems to talking points about expanding markets and Intel’s broad portfolio, it’s telling that the very first question during a Q&A session with Shenoy went right at the 10nm imbroglio.
Sadly, his answer that customers don’t ask him about process nodes was evasive and unsatisfying. It’s no surprise then that two days after Intel’s Summit, Goldman Sachs downgraded the stock to “sell” due to the 10nm delays. Goldman’s analyst wrote that,
We see Intel’s struggles with 10nm process technology having ramifications in terms of its competitive position across a broad set of products. While the 10nm push is well-publicized at this point, we believe Intel’s manufacturing issues could potentially be deeper-rooted than what most think and could have a sustained impact on market share and/or spending levels as Intel competes with a growing/stronger TSMC ecosystem.
The potential for “sustained impact on market share” is already manifest. With competitors using foundries that are now a generation ahead in process technology, Intel’s manufacturing stumbles risk (and in some cases already are) putting its products at a tangible disadvantage in price-performance. Fixing its process technology problems must be one of Intel’s highest priorities.
Execution issues aside, Intel managed to present a compelling case for how it can exploit its enormous dominance of the processor market to expand into areas that are both faster-growing and where it doesn’t have a dominant market position. Shenoy makes the closing argument in his editorial,
The proliferation of the cloud beyond hyperscale and into the network and out to the edge, the impending transition to 5G, and the growth of AI and analytics have driven a profound shift in the market, creating massive amounts of largely untapped data.
Intel is in the midst of a business transition from a near-complete reliance on building general purpose processors based on a 40-year-old instruction set into a broad-based supplier of hardware and supporting software components to every segment of IT infrastructure.
The strategy is conceptually solid, however, it is full of business risk as Intel becomes less reliant on a single high-margin product while simultaneously attempting to establish credible positions in multiple markets with established competitors.
Furthermore, these new business initiatives are all happening while the company searches for a new CEO.
The real difficulty Intel faces is that its current strategy runs the risk of being so broad that it becomes impossible to focus in all areas. Intel’s repeated stumbles in handling delivery of the 10nm part have left the market jittery while allowing competitors to steal a march. Is it, therefore, a surprise that Intel faces hostile murmurings on Wall Street and skepticism among industry analysts? I think not.
Nevertheless, it will be interesting to see how Intel performs this high wire act. Even so, I wouldn’t want to be one of the executives traversing it or competing for attention inside a company that many think has lost its way.
Image credit - via the authorRead more on: Cloud platforms - infrastructure and architecture 