
Some still think of the cloud as a benign fog of code, up there in the ether and somehow uniting all humanity. But the reality is ‘the’ cloud is built on land, primarily in the US, under national laws regarding data hosting, transfer, and security. 
But it really is time to get real and stop saying, ‘My data’s in the cloud’ and start saying, ‘My data’s in an industrial park in Wisconsin’. If that occurs, the cloud debate will become more sensible and transparent overnight, and businesses will begin asking the right questions. The evidence is that needs to happen urgently.
This point is particularly relevant to Unified Communications and Collaboration (UC&C), as organizations swap out on-premise systems and move their comms into ‘the’ cloud, with solutions coalescing around the business desire of enhanced enterprise collaboration. 
Donald McLaughlin is Director of Collaboration, UK & Ireland, for Cisco – a portfolio that includes WebEx for web conferencing, and the video acquisitions from Tandberg. He says:

People understand that there are some significant security implications, and I think that there’s an obligation on all the cloud providers to recognise them and build our products to cater for that. The analogy I’d use is I should probably lose some weight and do some exercise, and I might make a decision to do that, but it doesn’t mean I can run a marathon tomorrow. I need to plan that and work out what I need to do to get there. Businesses are the same. 
The obligation we have as a large IT company is to make sure that we protect people’s investment, but also give them a journey to get there and make sure we get there as smoothly as possible.

Peter Quinlan, Tata Communications’ Vice President of Product Strategy and Management, UCaaS Services, agrees that it’s “hugely important” to think about the real meaning of cloud hosting, transfer, and security, and its local – rather than global – implications. He says:

As the regulatory environment emerges country by country, it becomes even more important. It takes a lot of heavy infrastructure to keep the cloud ‘afloat’. The cloud is cables, it’s servers, it’s data centers. The cloud is actually a lot of technological infrastructure and it’s pretty complicated. So ultimately people are going to have to look for partners that can help them address those challenges. It’s not something that you can build on your own.

Steve Kokinos, CEO of cloud UC&C specialist Fuze, adds: 

IT people need to care about these things a lot. It’s about understanding quality, security, and data privacy. All of those things need to be addressed by the cloud provider, and by IT departments, at enterprise level. But from an end-user standpoint, they don’t care how any of it works, only that they’re getting the experience they want.

The user experience is an important consideration once you start thinking about the cloud as hardware built on land rather than code floating in an imaginary ether. Tata’s Quinlan explains:

We operate among the world’s largest cable footprints, we have 44 data centers around the world, so we build a global cloud application fabric. And where regulatory requirements or customer privacy requirements or policies demand, we’ll put servers in locally. But you have to think about how that affects real-time collaboration and how that collaboration experience is going to perform, and how those data centers are connected to the major applications. 
We bring those applications on net and look at how the data is managed and how the collaboration traffic is managed. We also look at off net. We’re probably one of the largest IP transit providers, carrying about 20 per cent of the world’s internet traffic. We look at how UC traffic peers with other ISPs. We look at how that’s managed.
So as organizations start to get into this game, they definitely do need help. It’s not just the regulatory perspective, but if they’re going to capture the return on their investment in collaboration, how do the applications perform? And do they give a suitable user experience, on a global basis, both inside and outside the company? 
It’s not something that you want to try to address as an enterprise on a standalone basis, because you’re increasingly connected into a global economy, supplier ecosystem, and customer ecosystem. But you’ve got partners and cloud applications to help you do it.

Regulations
The regulatory environment is increasingly complex too, as arguments rage between the US and Europe: more evidence that the cloud data war is being fought on land, not in the air. 
The US and Europe have very different ideas about data sovereignty, hosting, transfer, privacy, and security; Safe Harbor is legally unsafe, Europe’s General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) is incoming, and the European Commission is forcing US providers onto the back foot over issues such as privacy and the Right to be Forgotten. Add into the mix the possible exit of the UK from Europe and the immediate future for IT leaders, data managers, and responsible owners could be seen as a nightmare. 
Andrew Sinclair is General Manager, Skype for Business Product Marketing at Microsoft, a position that gives him oversight of both the business and consumer portfolio and the ways in which they’re coming together. He says: 

This is a critical question. The cloud has reached a level of maturity where everyone really has to think about data sovereignty, security, and privacy. And for smaller companies, that’s a real challenge and the way we help is by building that into the infrastructure, that compliance – what I call the ‘alphabet soup’ of compliance, making sure we have data centres in the right places.
We’re already giving our customers the ability to host their data and to locate their platform [in the right place]. It’s not just our collaboration suite that does this, but across Azure too. So as companies are building their own applications on Azure, you still have to think about compliance, data sovereignty, privacy, and security, and these things have to be part of a strategy and part of the culture of the company.

Encryption is part of this, and it’s a political hot potato – in the UK, where the government is critical of it and IT suppliers have little choice but to comply with Whitehall’s surveillance plans, and in the US, where the FBI has paid $1.4 million to a hacker to break the iPhone’s security. 
However, it’s clear that most IT suppliers don’t agree with surveillance programmes in which they find themselves in the front line of enforcement. In a sense, governments are not only declaring war on terrorists and abusers, but also on IT companies’ business models and product security. 
Many of those suppliers are now actively pushing customers towards encrypted services, suggesting that they’re only paying lip service to government aims. How will this play out in the cloud/UC&C space? Microsoft’s Sinclair says: 

That’s going to be very difficult for all involved. It’s going to be difficult for users, for the IT industry, and for government. And I don’t have the answer.  On the one hand, we want to be able to comply with government and to protect users. For example, online grooming: we don’t want to allow that, but on the other hand you don’t want to open the data up to anybody. 
We’re just going to have to see how this plays out. There will be a lot of consultation within the industry, with governments, and with users. We’re going to have to work out where the happy medium is. I certainly don’t know where it is. But my hope is that there’s a solution that works for everyone and we’ll iterate our way towards it.

Tata’s Sinclair is equally nonplussed and diplomatic, as the IT sector often is when faced with ideologues and mandarins. He says:

It has yet to play out. We’re in the early days of this, in the trade-offs between liberty and security, but that’s inevitable in an organized society.  I’m an American by birth, but I live in Singapore. I compare their stances on gun control and they’re very different, but both are nice places to live. You can set that needle in different places. And on that continuum, you will see societies making their own decisions based on their respective values. 
The technology will need to be able to adapt, and we’ll have a lot of bumps along the way. There’s a lot of things that have yet to play out. That’s probably common for each unique technological transition. We have to think about how we’re going to govern these things and integrate them into our laws and our societies […] and I think that that’s a good thing.

But a world in which Cisco might have to make its products less secure would be a nightmare for the company, wouldn’t it, not to mention for the infrastructure of the internet? Cisco’s McLaughlin remains upbeat. He says:

The technology’s mature enough that we’ll find a way around all these thorny issues over time. We have to understand what the issues might be and have a good dialogue with government to make sure that we can try to get round it, so I think that we’re smart enough to find a solution as a world. And I think we will do. 
It’s about having a sensible dialogue to get the balance right, as there are so many benefits to be gained from cloud-based deployments of technology. […] That’s where all the innovation’s taking place, that’s where there’s a vibrant developer community, and a lot of extremely smart people. 
We will find a solution to these problems.

My take
This debate is at least revealing the fault-lines – and just how deep they may become. Customer organizations can’t go it alone, say suppliers. And yet those same suppliers are manifestly in the dark about how to navigate the political complexities of the modern world they’ve helped create. The fantasy of ‘the cloud’ is at least beginning to dissipate, and we can finally see that it hid some pretty stark realities.

Disclosure - Chris Middleton spoke to the interviewees at UC EXPO in London.Read more on: Best of archivesCollaboration sharing and digital productivityData privacyRegulationSecurity 