
Gabriela Rusu
The 15,000-strong workforce of Uniqa Insurance Group comprises a pretty diverse bunch of people. They are scattered across 15 markets across Central and Eastern Europe, each with their own languages, cultures and other regional distinctions. 
Many employees joined the company through acquisition, as Uniqa bought up insurers in countries such as Romania and Ukraine. 
In the past, internal communications has been a headache, admits Gabriela Rusu, head of group communications, involving long, convoluted group-email threads, multiple unconnected intranets and expensive in-person meetings:

There are always topics under discussion at Uniqa that should be of interest to most or all of our international operations – the progress of group projects, the introduction of more efficient working practices, proposed changes to our business model or the launch of new products. But with email, which was previously the most commonly used way to communicate on these topics, you never knew who had received your email, who had taken the time to read it and who wanted to respond to the information provided in it.

This was a big source of frustration, so it was with some relief that Rusu was able to introduce a new interactive intranet – dubbed UNIQAspace – at an annual company meeting of 100 of its topic executives this Spring. 
Based on technology from Jive Software, this makes it easier for those execs to interact with employees through blogs and videos. Employees, in turn, can comment, ask questions and share and discuss company news with their colleagues, via Web and mobile access to the portal. 
Most importantly, Uniqa’s human resources and corporate communications teams get real-time impact metrics that help them to monitor the reach of those messages and how well they’re received, says Rusu:

That was our first big win with this tool, I would say. We are now able to see not only that our main messages are seen by everyone but also the general response to them. We can assess the general mood or sentiment around a topic, which is really important feedback on strategic initiatives that we want to implement across our international operations. It also helps us to refine how we communicate these big group ideas.

But as the tool has been rolled out, Jive’s collaboration capabilities have become increasingly important, too, taking UNIQAspace beyond its initial internal comms role, she adds:

We started with the horizontal approach, with group messages for the whole community, but now we have smaller environments on Jive for teams of people working on particular topics across many countries, for example, and for country-specific communications. For example, I’m a marketer, so all my marketing people belong to a group in which we share best practices, news on campaigns, and advice to each other on marketing strategies. But on top of that, this group also creates projects in Jive, with milestones, assigned tasks and so on, with whole projects managed end-to-end on the platform.

While group communications are conducted in English – the company’s common language – country-specific groups can communicate in their own languages. A small team of internal comms people at head office in Vienna are responsible for managing the tool’s uptake and development and oversee an editorial calendar of group messages – but it’s been important to Uniqa that these new groups grow in ways that best suit and are most useful to the employees themselves. 
After all, you have to consider convenience and enjoyment in a roll-out like this, says Rusu:

We try to have a blend of company content and entertainment. For example, around the Euro 2016 football tournament, we ran a competition for employees to predict the winners, with small prizes to be won.

But that of course has required the instigation of a strict code of conduct around its use. Rusu explains: 

We’re an insurance company – we’re pretty risk averse! A code of conduct was one of the first things we did. And basically, for us, the most important thing is security of customer data. The basic rule is that we do not publish customer data at all on UNIQAspace – it’s a complete no-go. Beyond that, all employees are aware that they have an identity on the platform, nobody’s anonymous and that they must take responsibility for what they write. They also sign up for terms and conditions before they can start using it.

Today, there are two or three different ‘push’ channels on UNIQAspace for internal communications and some 10 professional groups working together in their own mini-environments on the platform:

This staggered approach has worked well for us and I think it’s a smarter way of introducing a new piece of technology like this. It’s more organic – people use UNIQAspace because they want to, because they’ve heard good things about it from their colleagues, but not because they’ve been asked to use it by managers. That’s been our focus all along – making the platform’s use desirable, rather than obligatory.


Image credit - UniqaRead more on: Collaboration sharing and digital productivityDigital enterprise in the real world 