
The UK government’s welfare reform project, Universal Credit, is said to have some ‘serious design flaws’ and has ‘veered off track’, according to think tank The Resolution Foundation.
This is following a number of setbacks for the IT project, millions of pounds of software already written off and a controversial approach to the roll-out.
A report by The Resolution Foundation urges new Work and Pensions Secretary Stephen Crabb to “reclaim Universal Credit” from the Treasury, following the departure of former Secretary Iain Duncan Smith.
Iain Duncan Smith was the original champion of Universal Credit and a vocal supporter of the changes it would introduce, but recently resigned from the Cabinet because of the government’s approach to welfare reforms.
Universal Credit will merge six current benefits into one single payment, which the government hopes will better incentivise people to return to work when unemployed and will also result in close to £7 billion worth of savings a year.
It is these savings that has allowed the government to persist with the project, despite a number of set-backs to the roll-out.
For example, the government has had to write off over £100 million of IT assets built by the original suppliers and admit that it isn’t entirely fit for purpose. At present just over 450,000 claimants are using this system, despite the original plan being that millions would be using Universal Credit by 2014.
Most of these claimants are single people who don’t own a home – or to put it another way, the simplest type of claims being made.
Not only this, but a new digital version of the system is now being built in-house, which will replace the current system that is slowly being rolled out across the country. This twin-track approach is highly controversial, given the amount of money that was spent on the original system (which will eventually be made redundant).
At present only a few London boroughs are testing the digital system and it isn’t thought that Universal Credit will be fully implemented until 2021.
Which makes the report today from The Resolution Foundation particularly worrying. It claims that there are serious design flaws with the system, as a result of recent changes forced by the government’s desire to secure further savings in the welfare budget.
The report
 The Resolution Foundation said that it has long supported the introduction of Universal Credit, given its potential to simplify the welfare system, boost work incentives and support living standards. However, it believes that the recent changes to the system have taking it “too far from its original purpose”.
It believes that as the full digital version of the system begins to be rolled out further this month, these flaws must be addressed. The think tank said:
The Foundation says that UC now has serious design flaws that must be resolved before the rollout is complete. It warns that unless changes are made, UC risks being reduced to little more than a very complicated vehicle for cutting the benefits bill.
The reform programme, which was first introduced in limited form in 2013, is entering a landmark phase. The roll-out of the full service begins this month, with claimants in Bath and Newcastle among the first to receive it. According to current government timetables, UC is expected to be fully rolled-out by the end of 2021, by which time almost half of all families with children will be entitled to it.
The report considers how the reform – viewed alongside plans to boost take home pay via the new National Living Wage and increases in the Personal Tax Allowance – compares with the current system of tax credits and other benefits when it comes to the returns to entering and progressing in work.
The Resolution Foundation believes that in absolute terms the new system reduces the returns to work for many families. It found that the new system particularly reduces work incentives for single parents and second earners in couples.
It said that with around two in every three poor children now living in working families, Universal Credit should focus on boosting incomes by encouraging entry into work among second earners and by supporting pay progression for all recipients.
This speaks to the fundamental challenge that has always faced Universal Credit’s design team – people and the labour economy are extremely complex. Building in for all the nuances and changes in behaviour, combined with the complex make-up of families across the UK, all into one single payment is a huge ask.
A plan
The think tank has put forward a three point plan for the Department for Work and Pensions to “reclaim the policy from the Treasury”. These are:
Focus on those most likely to respond to financial incentives to work. The report says that raising work allowances for single parents and second earners is the most effective way to boost employment.
Offer more practical support to boost in-work progression. The report calls for a more radical focus on boosting claimants’ earnings, not the narrow focus of in-work conditionality on securing a full-time job on the wage floor. This task has taken on added importance with weak incentives and the introduction of the National Living Wage which, despite providing a welcome boost to earnings, will significantly increase the number of people on the wage floor.
Address practical concerns about UC’s interaction with people’s lives. Despite merging six working-age benefits into one, UC retains lots of complexity. The Foundation argues that interactions with the system could be improved by allowing Housing Benefit to be paid directly to landlords and streamlining reporting requirements for the self-employed and parents with childcare costs.
The last point in particular speaks to the design of the system itself.
My take
This system and roll-out has been shrouded in secrecy and plagued with problems since the very early days. We are now about five years in an actually not a great deal closer to understanding whether or not it will be a success – and are unlikely to know until we near the completion date of 2021.
A lot of money has been thrown at this – the end figure will be close to £16 billion, if nothing else goes wrong – and a lot is riding on it. This stuff is critical to many families and people across the country, who are relying on the government’s financial support to make ends meet.
I’ve heard good things about the digital team working on the new system within DWP. But as I noted, this is incredibly complex and hard to get right. As the roll-out for the digital system is extended, we will get a better idea about its successfulness.
Image credit - Images sourced from DWP websiteRead more on: Digital government and public services

