
Millennial hierarchy of needs
I learned an important life lesson this week at our annual all-hands #evilplans meeting. Millennials see the world differently from my generation. They also think differently. It’s important to understand what that means in the context of businesses endeavoring to become ‘digital first.’
History matters
Wind the clock back to 1983. This was when I specified and bought my first enterprise capable system. It was a stand alone, portable  accounting system built specifically for practicing accountants.
Its USP was that it was visual in look and you could see calculation results in real time. It used the spreadsheet metaphor but without the spreadsheet’s programmatic baggage. Best of all, data entry was lightning fast because it used the same entry principles as a desk side adding machine.
The system was a massive step forward from the Wang 2200 systems we hand balled, coaxed and cajoled at the time. And…it was a green screen system. We made a shit ton of money off the incremental efficiencies that thing delivered and the more so when it became a networked solution in the late 80s. But…
You had to be a tad geeky to get any of it to work well. I nailed network cables to walls, wrote IP tables and had to become a Novell CNE in order to keep the whole edifice going. I (badly) built sort of working Paradox and Dataease applications. Spend a few years doing that and technology IS the start and end point of any solution to a problem. A lot of the time it worked as far as was necessary to make money off the back of the technology.
So when SAP R/3 swung into view around 1991-92, along with the whole Business Process Re-engineering (BPR) fad consulting opportunity, it wasn’t a stretch for me to grok what was happening. Problem>Tech>Solution: done.
Looking back it was a perfect fit to the Mushroom Management method of operation with which I had worked and was familiar for more than 20 years. Users? Forget ’em – they can be trained once we’ve got everything in.
That approach was a miserable failure but one many consultants happily repeated as we continued to worship the tech gods.
In fairness, we lived at a time of compute constraints. Any advance, uptick in productivity or glimmer of fresh insight (however small) often meant significant benefit because relatively few businesses had moved or could afford to move beyond pen and paper. Those of us who were early in the game and saw the opportunities became the 80s and 90s equivalent of Masters of the Universe. At least we thought so.
Outcomes before technology
About this time last year, I learned an important lesson. Think about outcomes and not the technology. What does that mean? So often we hear that business wants outcomes that, in turn are technology enabled. That’s very comfortable for millennials and genX/boomers because it appeals to both elements of the problem. Very few people talk about how you get there or make it work.
I needed to learn this lesson because whenever I hear about a problem, my mind immediately jumps towards thinking about technical choices and, while that might work well, it is not guaranteed. A case in point: I love Slack but not everyone wants it. Duh? Yes. Duh! And here comes the kicker: in a world of ubiquity, users have real choices. That didn’t exist in earlier periods and certainly not when I was tire kicking systems in earnest. Roll the clock back five years and things like Slack didn’t exist in any meaningful sense.
Right now we want to solve tomorrow’s and the day after’s problem. It is hard because of two issues:

Defining what the main pain points look like with sufficient clarity that we don’t firefight but innovate.
Envision the outcomes so that we can work back to the next steps from here.

It is even harder in the context of colleagues who frame questions or express outcome desires using language or expression that each of us can easily misinterpret or misunderstand. It’s like having three or four people talking about more or less the same thing but in languages nobody except the speaker understands.
Buzzword bingo lingo
Overlay the fact that we’re hardly immune from the daily tsunami of consulting babble larded with buzzword bingo lingo at every opportunity. Here is a wonderful example:
I’m promoting a multilayer collaboration strategy, where you may have a couple of central activity streams and then you’re evaluating innovation on the margins.
On the edge, fragmentation is a source of innovation which can serve up even better ways of working together. You can then integrate edge tools into the hubs of your collaborative environment so the whole environment becomes even better.
That’s a future job — creating a more integrated employee experience. It’s very important that you use a people-centric lens, in terms of how does this all work and how does it make me feel?
WTAF does any of that mean? What if I don’t have central activity streams or how do I know that some imaginary edge is where I’ll find innovation rather than some dope fooling around? Heh – maybe I should send an email?
And please don’t get me started on Artificial Intelligence or, as I prefer, Artificial Stupidity.
How did I learn this lesson?
During our all hands, we identified a bunch of pain points that we have to solve. Some are more pressing than others but I take the view that problem solving should be an opportunity to expand horizons, come up with something new.
That conversation was going along swimmingly as I gleefully rattled off how solving this problem (tech) would lead to solving these extra problems (more tech) and bring us out the other side with all sorts of benefits (tech and business.)
That was until our resident millennial piped up and said in an oh-so matter of fact way:
Yes well I don’t understand and in any event it’s not the most important problem which is…
Momentarily stunned into silence, I turned to said PYT (Pimply Young Thing) asking for a precise explanation. I was looking for argumentative and logical flaws with which to slap down dissent alternative views. It usually works. Until it doesn’t.
As my LYF (Learned Young Friend) articulated the problem I suddenly realized that we were talking about the same concept albeit from different standpoints and using different language.
That changes the conversation completely. Now it is about finding a common position, framing outcomes as the first purpose and then backing into whatever technology is appropriate.
The millennial doesn’t really care about the technology and objectively speaking there is no reason for them to do so. After all, none of us care how electricity gets delivered so why should we be bothered about the ins and outs of a search engine for example?
That is a fundamentally different approach than saying that I want to follow X approach with Y tech because it will solve Z problem. Our millennials don’t understand that method and were not brought up on Mushroom Management so it doesn’t make sense to them. The good news (at least in our business) is that we have ears to hear even if some of us older folk don’t necessarily grok what they’re saying straight away.
Of kings and queens
All of this leaves open an important question. How do you square this ‘stuff’ with the currently fashionable view of developers as ‘The New Kingmakers.’ I enjoy this argument as it intuitively makes sense but I worry that it is overblown in the current context.
I recently heard about how developers are the real creative thinkers. I’ve seen some very creative stuff built by super smart developers that has boggled the mind. But the vast majority are more likely to build me a three legged stool when what I really need is a plush sofa. Or worse still, over engineer my plush sofa to include built in headlights and a sound system that are tightly integrated.
And by the way – who are the new kings and queens? It’s those same millennials who want outcomes and don’t (really) give a shit about technology.
All of which makes for an interesting set of new conversations, ones where there needs to be willingness to communicate on every side.
Let’s see how that works out going forward. For now, each of our core team walked away from all-hands in the belief that we have taken genuinely positive steps forward. Now we haver to execute those #evilplans.
Image credit - publicly on the interwebs, fotoliaDisclosure - SAP is a premier partner at the time of writing. Read more on: Analytics planning and data analysisCollaboration sharing and digital productivity 