
One of the many undesirable side-effects of the universal use of the word ‘cloud’ is that such a vaguely-defined term is open to broad interpretation, misapplication (cloud-washing) and false comparisons. One interpretation might as well be ‘whatever you want it to be.’ Hardly helpful to the stressed out buyer.
Apples-to-oranges comparisons are especially irritating to vendors since they are easily used by competitors to lead potential customers astray. Companies bring some of the confusion upon themselves by using ambiguous and divergent categories when reporting cloud revenues, with insufficient transparency into the relevant business segments.
Analyst firms follow suit by using different classifications when estimating cloud market share and ranking products in a rapidly evolving industry lacking well-defined categories and where feature creep leads to overlap in previously distinct segments. The resulting jumble is enough to baffle even the savviest IT leaders as they evaluate ‘cloud’ products.
A prime example of glossing over the fine print came in reportage about recent cloud vendor rankings, which the media, vendors and buyers oversimplify, misquote or otherwise misuse to draw erroneous conclusions. Gartner’s Magic Quadrant rankings are widely followed by both providers and IT execs as a handy shortlist of major products in a particular category, so last week’s update of IaaS providers received wide attention.
As has been the case, the report showed AWS and Microsoft Azure to be far superior to the competition. Although not a surprise given the focus of the research, this provoked some consternation among at least one major vendor, IBM, due to the perception it leaves about overall cloud capabilities and competence.
Big Blue’s SVP of cloud called the report “fundamentally flawed” since it ignores the application, data analysis, machine learning (Watson) and other cloud-based services that IBM has emphasized over raw shared infrastructure. Indeed, Gartner’s report acknowledges the complexities of the cloud market, stating,
This market is wholly separate and distinct from cloud SaaS, but is increasingly entangled with the PaaS market. Cloud IaaS providers are increasingly offering middleware and other software infrastructure capabilities as a service, as well as services that provision and orchestrate application containers (particularly Docker containers).
Customers want to develop, deploy and manage applications efficiently, and will choose the combination of IaaS and PaaS capabilities that best suits their needs — and often, neither customers nor providers will make a definitional distinction between IaaS and PaaS.
Herein lies the problem with looking solely at IaaS: as enterprise cloud maturity increases, IT organizations and developers internalize service-based computing and begin treating the cloud less as a shared pool of virtual servers and storage and more as a cornucopia of packaged software and services that can be mixed and matched into custom applications.
While AWS and Azure continue to augment and improve their platform services, these target use by developers, with services lower in the application stack. In contrast, IBM, Salesforce, Oracle and others often aim at the needs of systems and data analysts.
If one thinks of the typical XaaS hierarchy, where AWS and Azure approach the application platform by extending infrastructure up, Salesforce, Microsoft (via Office 365), SAP and to a lesser extent IBM and Oracle work it from SaaS down. All are considered cloud services; however each vendor has strengths and weaknesses in different areas that don’t don’t manifest when looking only at IaaS.
Cloud market complexity is also evident in market share rankings and the earnings reports of the companies themselves. For example, Synergy Research estimates that AWS has over 30% of the IaaS market, about three-times that of Microsoft and 4x IBM’s. However, it also finds Microsoft, IBM and number four Google growing faster than AWS. The same firm finds a much more Balkanized SaaS market, led by Salesforce and Microsoft with about 15% share of a bigger market: through last year, it estimated that total SaaS business was 35% larger ($27 billion versus $20B) than IaaS sales.
The companies themselves don’t help clarify the cloud confusion by the various ways they segment and report revenue. Although Amazon cleanly breaks out AWS revenue and profit in its earnings statement, Microsoft muddles things with a category called “intelligent cloud” that includes public, private, and hybrid server products and cloud services comprised of:

Server products and cloud services, including SQL Server, Windows Server, Visual Studio, System Center, and related CALs, as well as Azure.
Enterprise Services, including Premier Support Services and Microsoft Consulting Services.

It’s a $25 billion segment, but only growing at 6%, far from the estimated triple-digit rate of Azure itself.
IBM is arguably more confusing, having reorganized into a Cognitive Solutions segment that includes analytics, commerce, security and Watson and a Technology Services and Cloud Platforms segment includes the company’s cloud infrastructure and platform capabilities. The problem here is that most of the Cognitive Solutions are delivered via a cloud service and hence are things IBM would like you to consider as cloud capabilities. Together, these segments amount to almost two-thirds of IBM’s revenue, so the only way to see how much actual cloud, i.e. XaaS business the company does is by digging through its earnings presentation where it breaks out the numbers showing a $14 billion business growing at 30%.
My take
Depending on how you slice it, many companies can lay claim to cloud leadership, but due to the term’s malleability that companies and analysts define in different ways to suit their particular ends, it’s virtually impossible to compare or rank them using objective financial numbers.
Corporate financial results have become the latest area of cloud washing. What is clear is that IT infrastructure, software and bundled services are rapidly migrating to managed cloud (whether multitenant or private) delivery to the point that soon, the term itself will lose significance to IT buyers and investors since it will be universal, expected and irrelevant.
Instead, IT organizations should focus on a vendor’s broader portfolio and how it integrates the various XaaS technology tiers, simplifies building business processes comprised of many different cloud services and on the reliability, robustness, scalability and security of its cloud infrastructure.
On this score, size matters, but isn’t decisive: the winners will be those that can innovate and deliver at cloud scale. That means cloud-native companies like Google or even Facebook, should it get serious about turning Facebook at Work into an application platform, can close the gap with Amazon and Microsoft, while IBM looks increasingly like it will struggle to keep up.
Image credit - Joining jigsaw pieces in cloudy blue sky © hin255 - Fotolia.comDisclosure - Salesforce, SAP and Oracle are premier partners at time of writingRead more on: Cloud ERP financials and supply chainCloud platforms - infrastructure and architecture 