

Be careful!
There are lots of new cloud application software vendors out there and some of their offerings are quite compelling. These solutions may have matured a lot in the last few years and are now viable for companies of your size and complexity. That’s great.
Your existing vendor, as well as many of their long-standing, pre-cloud competitors, may also be trotting out new solutions. These new solutions from old vendors could be all-new, port-overs or transitional solutions that may have some, a lot or no cloud capabilities. You’ll need to assess these as to their usefulness to your firm.
Our recommendations:


Treat it/Think like you’re doing a software solution. There has been a generational shift in software. If typical, you’ve been using a prior solution for 10 years or longer. You’ll be surprised how much has changed in software since your last major software acquisition. Newer generation apps can have embedded process/exception handling, powerful collaboration, analytics, mobile, social, cloud and much more functionality. Shop well as this next solution could be with you a very long time, too.
Shop for the future, not the past. The best new products are designed for an era where IT is not constrained. Instead of products running on old-school RDBMS technology, newer products were designed with in-memory technology and Hadoop. Old products were designed for transactions that originated within the four walls of your enterprise. New products were designed for big data, external data, sensor data, weather data, etc. You get the drift. If your competitors are becoming digital, you’ll need a solution designed for the digital age not the industrial age.
Don’t listen to the caterwauling from vendors. Your existing vendor might throw a first-class hissy fit if they find you’re investigating ‘strategic alternatives’. Don’t be surprised if they try to pull some kind of end-around play for example going direct to your CIO, CEO or board to pre-empt your investigation/selection and lock your firm in for another 10 year hitch. If you want to talk disloyalty, where was your vendor when the economy tanked in 2008-9? Did they reduce your costs and their maintenance fees? No – they likely did the opposite. Where were they during the decade they didn’t have a viable cloud solution? Where was their understanding when they subjected your firm to repeated software audits and aggressively hit you with non-compliance fees? If anyone in this dysfunctional relationship was ‘disloyal’, it was probably your existing vendor.
Your vendor may not have the cloud version you really want. Not every software vendors’ cloud solution is the same. Some solutions might not be ready when you need them to be (timing is everything in enterprise software). It might not be robust enough. It could just be a port-over. It could be a kludge of on-premises and cloud software. And so on…
Investigate the use of third party maintenance while you consider a new direction for enterprise software. Whether you go this route or not, it can be eye-opening to see just how much you’re over-paying on old software. Call Rimini Street for some ideas. Alternatively, call Panaya (now part of Infosys) to see additional options on upgrades.
Use this time to do a rugged contract re-negotiation. When you originally signed your ERP contract, the license fee was ‘1X’ and the annual maintenance fee was ‘1Y’. Today, the maintenance fee is ‘3.4Y’ and somehow during the life of the contract, they made you pay for more licenses and users. Worse, you also paid a cumulative fee of ‘0.8X’ in audit penalties. So, when you sit down to re-negotiate, it’s time to take your old vendor on a time travel trip where pricing will MAX-OUT at the original ‘1X’ and ‘1Y’ prices. They’ll offer to ‘continue’ your current pricing. Don’t do it. Reset the starting point. Remember, it’s not a successful re-negotiation unless you get some old abuses corrected and competitive pricing for the future.
Do the FULL TCO comparison on ALL potential options – Why do companies use software for a decade but only calculate TCO for 1-3 years? Make any comparison cover at least the same timeframe you kept the last solution. Next, compare (apples to apples) the true, full costs of different solutions for the deployment method(s) you prefer whether it’s: On-premises, Private cloud, Public cloud single-tenant, Public cloud multi-tenant, or Partial cloud.
TCO cost comparisons must be complete to be fair – If typical, your firm refreshes, replaces, or upgrades servers every 3 years. In developing TCO costs for private cloud or on-premises solutions, replacement equipment costs should appear every 3 years in the full TCO cost worksheet. Likewise, if your IT group has dedicated support staff to care for, upgrade, maintain, etc. your private cloud/on-premises apps, then these costs must be accounted for too. These aren’t fixed or permanent costs as a multi-tenant cloud solution will likely eliminate much of these costs. Also watch for systems software license costs as well as incremental license costs should the on-premises/private cloud solution get ported to a larger or more powerful server. And don’t forget the costs of running that data center. Power ain’t going to get cheap any time soon.
Don’t forget the IT Debt re: the old application software – IT Debt is the time and cost associated with deferred application software updates. It may contain unimplemented functionality, tax updates, new versions of the software, etc. This is a real liability for the firm and a good TCO comparison will show that the REAL cost of current application software with all deferred IT debt included is a big number. Moving to a multi-tenant solution measurably reduces the potential for this debt ever accumulating again. That’s because most modern vendors ensure you don’t get into that situation. There’s also a strategic cost to this IT Debt as companies that are stuck in a time warp with old, out of date systems are rarely able to move into new spaces like the digital economy, omni-channel retail, aggressive M&A activities, etc. Eliminating this debt may be the best reason there is to upgrade your software.
Look at all the potential (and current) vendors with your eyes wide-open – I insist on taking my software selection clients to the home office of the finalist vendors. Sure, clients will push back but once I get their top leaders to meet their counterparts within these technology providers, interesting things happen. This activity highlights the true culture of the vendor – something a single salesperson doesn’t always reflect. I’ve witnessed clients pick up on the trustworthiness of some vendors and the abject lack of same for others. CIOs get to assess whether the vendor is a speedy innovator, fast follower or simply blowing smoke. CFOs get to negotiate 2-3 key items directly with the CEO. Clients can see how committed the vendor is re: the cloud, going paperless, serving their implementation customers, etc. They also identify, first hand, whether they and the vendor will have a transactional or partner-like relationship long-term. These interactions either cement the decision or identify material risk issues that must be addressed. But either way, I’ve seen it unite a management team and make their vendor choice one that is truly theirs and one they can personally share with their employees.
Benchmark your current and proposed processes – It has probably been a while since your firm did a thorough job of documenting its processes and comparing them to benchmarks. Even if you lack the benchmarks, do this step and identify how it will differ with new software. Better integration, better exception handling, etc. will make for marked efficiency and effectiveness improvements. This documentation not only will keep the implementation on track, it can help sell the new software choice to the executive committee.
Really understand who will help you with the implementation – Lots of systems integrators say they can help but old-time integration firms may have massive amounts of personnel trained in old-school products not newer cloud solutions. This is a key point to understand as these firms will want to keep personnel trained on the old products busy. Lots of integrators have a distinct bias against multi-tenant cloud implementations as there is not as much work for them to do. Moreover, there are few long-term opportunities to host the solution in their data centers (a la design/build/run, BPaaS or BPO). Vendors may have lots of SMEs (subject matter experts) but may lack any real ability to manage a complex project or place certain specialized skills (e.g., change management) on the job. If your firm is complex, divided or political, make sure your external implementation helpers are up to the challenge and can be on-site whenever necessary.

The actor Samuel L. Jackson has made a pretty penny asking television viewers “What’s in Your Wallet?” I suspect many firms would answer “My software vendor’s hand!” Prudence dictates all companies periodically review the relationship they have with all of their vendors. Technology vendors are no exception to this review. Time, technology, business conditions and other events may have changed the old relationship. Your to-do is to define the new relationship(s) – the one(s) that matches the real future of your firm. What are you waiting for?
Image credit - Graphics via the authorRead more on: Cloud ERP financials and supply chainCloud platforms - infrastructure and architecture 