
Did you know you can get a security profile of just about any web site – including your own – with a free web site risk grader? That’s courtesy the folks at UpGuard, who also offer a Chrome extension, CSTAR for Google Chrome, which provides a risk score for each web site you visit.
CSTAR stands for Cybersecurity Threat Assessment Report. UpGuard released the tool a year ago, with the important disclaimer that the free web site risk grader addresses about 20 percent of your total risk. To get the full score, they’d need to run internal tests on your systems – an offering for paid clients. But in the meantime, your risk grader score might give your IT folks something to work on. As per UpGuard:
The UpGuard external cyber audit uses publicly available information to grade your cyber risk posture. External scans are convenient and non-invasive, but require an internal scan to assess the majority of risk factors.
Given the prevalence of DDoS attacks and big IoT security questions, it’s no surprise that UpGuard is in growth mode. Based in Mountain View, UpGuard’s employee count is nearing one hundred, with offices in Portland and Australia.
UpGuard’s full/paid CSTAR score has an insurance angle, with the intent of providing a risk score which insurers can use to determine a fair premium for cybersecurity insurance. Recently I talked with Mike Baukes, co-founder and co-CEO of UpGuard, to get his advice on how companies should approach cybersecurity, and to get a gut check on how good – or bad – things are. And yes – I also found out what constitutes a good CSTAR score.
Companies are exposed by complexity
Prior to starting UpGuard in 2012, He and co-founder Alan Sharp-Paul learned about risk exposure firsthand, knee deep in IT projects in the financial services industry:
You’d walk into a room and you’d go, “Hey, who knows how this thing’s configured? What’s the system we’re talking about?” You may have 10 architects in there and then you’d get 20 different responses.
Companies are exposed by this complexity:
The more complex a system is, the more nefariously difficult it becomes to be able to control it. We realized that most companies lacked this visibility and control… That extended not only internally, but more importantly externally too. From a threat perspective externally, a lot of companies expose assets externally. A lot of companies don’t have a really good handle. They don’t know how to pull those into one portfolio style to get an understanding of what they actually have.
Mike Baukes, UpGuard
Enter UpGuard. Baukes says our modern “software supply chains” are much more exposed:
Market pressures change the way we deliver software. The software supply chain that powers our organizations is unfortunately at a massive risk in comparison to the old days, where everything was behind their own firewall.
Disparate workforces add another twist:
You could have an outsourcing group in India managing your systems. You may have testing performed in China; you may have development performed in L.A. You may have a sales organization in New York, and you may have end users that live in Switzerland. You’ve got this myriad of different stakeholders involved in these digital assets. The reality is they’re not resilient from the core.
The problem is compounded by the use of older tools and outdated approaches:
A lot of companies are still using old techniques to manage modern devices and modern cloud applications. That’s where we saw the big opportunity. So we left our jobs and full-time employment, and decided to try and solve the problem. I think we’ve come a long way to solving it.
Making sense of risk assessments
A good starting point? The free online assessment. Baukes says that an 800 score is a good indicator that “you are a modern company… Someone like Google will usually have a 900. Those digital companies usually have very high scores.” So do companies ever get ticked off at UpGuard about their scores? Why yes:
A little over three or four months ago, Financial Times wrote a big piece on retailers in the UK. Four of those retailers – I think Tesco was one of them – actually complained bitterly about it, saying that, “Hey, this isn’t accurate, because we have SSL turned on for a couple of different parts of our web application.”
And do they hear from companies determined to improve those scores? Yes again:
Recently a company got in touch with us and said, “Thank you so much for this, this has given us a road map of things we need to fix.” They started around 300. We’ve been back and forth with them, and they’ve improved their score by 400 points. They did it by making sure that their email was delivered securely, making sure that they had SSL enabled across their website, and making sure that DNSSEC was enabled for their domain name systems, so that effectively no one can hijack it.
Baukes was quick to point out that a full grasp of risk exposure requires more than an online tool. He urges the kind of internal audit a tool like CSTAR provides:
CSTAR for us is an aggregate scoring mechanism. It allows us to take best practices, be it from NIST, or CIS, or other factors that really affect the IT integrity. It’s about the rate of change in an organization, and really, the rate of unauthorized change in an organization. How many vulnerabilities present in a network are detected? What about those production environments that eventually service the customers?
To pull together a score like CSTAR, you need to draw on slew of data points:
An average server or network device probably has on average of around 1,500 to 2,000 configuration settings. Any one of those could expose a security problem, or it could create an ability for a user to be able to gain access to a machine and compromise it.
Risk assessment – the action steps
So where should a company go from here? Baukes advises:

Most businesses have technology as a core competency.
If, for example, you’re a supermarket using technology for customers or point of sale, that doesn’t mean you’re an email specialist.
Therefore, use services from email experts (Google, Microsoft)
“Rightsource” service provision to companies that have that service as their core competency, and who are expert in the security issues for that service.

Baukes is obviously an advocate for a service that provides a composite risk score – as long as you can drill into that score to get the details:
When it comes to working with your CFO and your board, a risk assessment system like CSTAR that allows you to take an aggregate and basically present that in a simple, easy to understand number is becoming even more important. That shared vernacular of that is something everyone can understand.
The goal is:

create an efficient way to assess the risk across systems
simplify the results to provide a visual view into a company’s strengths and weaknesses
develop a prioritized action plan to address the risk

Sounds simple when you spell it out that way, but Baukes says it’s not been easy to achieve:
I think that is the holy grail of security, because it’s pretty evident that the last 20 years of IT security spend really hasn’t helped that much.
The wrap – managing risk as a competitive advantage
We ended our chat with some disconcerting talk on hacking aircraft systems, including new in-flight wifi:
That’s kind of a scary thing for me. It’s scary and it’s exciting, right? Because we’re at that point where technology is becoming more open, you’re getting more visibility into it, but we’ve still got a lot of stuff holding us back that’s legacy in nature.
Baukes added one more incentive for companies. He sees security as impacting consumer decisions of the future:
That software supply chain in the future, if it’s tampered with for an average company, it’s actually the death knell for them, because just the same way that a lot of people care about, “Hey, this is an environmentally friendly product.”
There’s plenty of work ahead for UpGuard. They just completed a Series B funding round. Top of the list is building in more functionality for insurers. Baukes told me the court cases regarding technology risk are rolling on. Claims are not getting serviced due to disputes on the tech side: “Unfortunately, people getting burnt both ways. I think we can do a lot to help.”
 
Image credit - Feature image - Time for Assessment © gustavofrazao - Fotolia.com. Mike Baukes profile photo is from Baukes' LinkedIn profile.Read more on: Analytics planning and data analysisData privacyMachine intelligence and AISecurity 