
US retailer Urban Outfitters hit the headlines last month for an internet-related product. Unfortunately it attracted entirely the wrong kind of headlines in the process, resulting in a lot of mockery on social media channels.
The object of online derision was a $45 t-shirt featuring the old AOL logo from the 1990s, when dial-up modems were the order of the day and no-one talked about omni-channel retail. To be fair to Urban Outfitters, the t-shirt is entirely in line with its range of retro-branded products, but this one struck a nerve with the digital savvy hipster audience of today.

On the basis that no publicity is bad publicity, it’s all likely to be little more than a minor irritant to CEO Richard Hayne, who has much bigger omni-channel challenges to address, not the least of which is the one that’s becoming a recurring meme of 2017 – how to strike the balance between online and offline retail.
This is something that’s been seen at firms ranging from The GAP through Macy’s to Target and Walgreens. It’s now something that Hayne’s having to deal with as the firm sees direct-to-consumer online channels growing at a faster pace than in-store where footfall traffic is weakening:
The shift in consumer preference is both obvious and growing. Total company penetration of our direct channel across all brands increased by roughly 400 basis points during the holiday season. I predict within the next three years, total Urban Outfitters retail segment sales by channel will be almost equal.
This would be fine if the increase in direct-to-consumer sales were wholly additive, but they’re not. Digital shopping is partially replacing store shopping and thus is negatively impacting store traffic and store generated sales. Add to that the fact that the US market is oversaturated with retail space and far too much of that space is occupied by stores selling apparel. Retail square feet per capita in the United States is more than six times that of Europe or Japan. And this doesn’t count digital commerce.
This is a problem that has developed over time, he adds:
Our industry, not unlike the housing industry, saw too much square footage capacity added in the 90’s and early 2000’s. Thousands of new doors opened and rents soared; this created a bubble, and like housing, that bubble has now burst. We are seeing the results; doors shuttering and rents retreating.
This trend will continue for the foreseeable future and may even accelerate. Another consequence of overcapacity is discounting and endless promotions as retailers try to drive demand through lower prices. This causes Average Unit Retail deflation and erodes merchandise margins.
Digital re-focus
Given an uncertain environment where occupancy costs are deleveraging and merchandise margins are pressured, the only option open to Urban Outfitters is to invest where it sees the most promising opportunities and to rationalise risk in other areas. That means focusing on non-apparel products more, as well as taking a long, hard look at the firm’s real estate portfolio.
This doesn’t mean a mass closure program, as seen at Macy’s, but it does mean evaluating the worth of offline investments differently. Haynes explains:
I certainly don’t want to give the impression that we are abandoning the store channel because we’re not. I envision our brick and mortar store fleet as an equal partner with the virtual store in the new omni-channel retail world. We will continue to invest in this channel, but relative to historic levels, store investment is trending downward. This is largely because both larger brands have now reached what we believe, and have always said, is full penetration in North America, a fleet between 200 to 250 stores. Furthermore, it makes little sense to enter into many new, long-term leases at this time when all signs indicate that a similar lease will be less expensive in the near future.
With that in mind, 2017 will see the chain opening 15 new stores in the US, compared to 29 last year, while, so far, there are only eight planned for 2019. New stores will also primarily be expansions or relocations of existing stores rather than pushing into new geographies.
Balancing this will be an increased focus on online:
Our highest priority is where we’ve had the most recent success, digital. Last year, we made many improvements to our capabilities in this channel. We developed a single platform for all brands. This enables Urban Outfitters to be more scalable and efficient in developing and rolling out front end enhancements across all brands, both on mobile, and all websites. We have improved our functionality around check out, payments, search, inventory visibility, in store pick-up, ship to store, mobile capabilities and speed on all web platforms.
A clear indicator of the firm’s commitment to digital is the appointment of a Chief Digital Officer in the form of Dave Hayne. The namesake CEO says:
Dave Hayne..and his team, working in conjunction with the brands and the IT group, should help to facilitate investments in the digital channel by identifying and force ranking opportunities, and should allow us to implement those investments faster and more effectively.
The to-do list for the CDO is a busy one, says Hayne:
This year, in order to maintain that strong digital growth, we plan to complete the single platform rollout to all brands, make additional improvements to our site functionality, invest more in data analytics so we can know our customers better and give that customer personalized experiences, improve our service levels, including faster and more reliable shipping and enhanced customer communications, give the customer more product choices in all categories, and speak to her on the devices and through the social sites she prefers.
This last point is an important priority, says Hayne:
Digital community and social media are replacing store fronts and traditional advertising as a preferred means by which brands and customers are connecting. I believe the Urban brands use the social media platforms and the customer connections they are building are among the best in the industry. Currently the Urban brand enjoys almost 7 million Instagram followers, a 52% increase versus the prior year and well surpassing most of its peers.
My take
Urban Outfitters is a classic example of a retailer caught in mid-transition from shopping mall stalwart to lower margin digital sales. The right noises are being made, the appointment of a CDO is a clear statement-of-intent, but there’s a lot to be done yet to secure the future successes sought.
And I quite like the t-shirt actually…
Image credit - Urban OutfittersRead more on: Retail e-commerce and the omni-channel 