
Adopting a data-driven approach to improving service delivery is one of the keys to success for high-performing local government bodies, believes Elizabeth Reynoso, assistant director of public sector innovation at Living Cities.
Living Cities, for those not in the know, was originally set up in 1991 in New York under the original name of the National Community Development Initiative. Its aim was to bring together charitable foundations and financial institutions to try to improve the lives of people on low incomes and the cities in which they lived.
Three years ago, however, the organisation came across the work of the Project on Municipal Innovation Advisory Group (PMI-AG). Launched in 2006, The PMI-AG operated under the auspices of the Harvard Kennedy School’s Ash Center for Democratic Governance and Innovation.
Its membership consisted of chiefs of staff and mayoral policy advisors from 35 of the largest cities in the US who got together twice a year to discuss policy challenges, possible solutions and best practice. But the goal in coming together with Living Cities, says Reynoso, was to take things a step further and “create a safe space for city staff to pilot best practice” over a designated 18-month period. She explains:
“With the support of Citi Foundation, we designed an opportunity for cities in the PMI to apply to try out new approaches in areas that were causing them issues. The idea was to create an exchange between cities so they could learn from each other. But it was also about exposing them to subject matter experts in order to push new approaches, and then make it as easy as possible to share their learnings along the way. The thought that these cities could be helped to advance was key, but not just for members of the network – for all cities.
As a result, the so-called City Accelerator initiative was created in order to offer a forum for collaboration as well as provide participants with funding and technical assistance. At the same time, a collaborative venture was also set up with Governing magazine, which focuses on state and local government issues, to provide a “national stage” for sharing ideas and information. Reynoso explains the rationale:
“That’s what the ‘accelerator’ part is – it’s not so much about speeding up what’s happening in individual cities. It’s more that, once these cities have been in the trenches and have developed tools and resources, we hope it will accelerate innovation in other cities.
To this end, the City Accelerator has so far introduced three “cohorts”. The first one, which kicked off in December 2014 and ended in June 2016, was joined by Philadelphia, Louisville and Nashville. Its focus was on how to develop a sustainable approach to innovation in local government in order to come up with better ways of improving the lives of low-income residents.
A data-driven culture
Led by Nigel Jacob, co-chair for the Mayor’s Office of New Urban Mechanics in Boston and Living Cities’ urban technologist in residence, the cohort’s end-goal was to devise an implementation guide based on best practice and practical advice derived from projects in the field.
Projects in Louisville and Nashville, meanwhile, succeeded in making it quite clear just how important enabling a data-driven culture actually is when trying to tackle local problems.
After looking for patterns in its data, for example, Louisville’s newly-merged Office of Performance Improvement and Innovation noticed that a key challenge for the Fire Department was tackling blazes in vacant properties. On discovering a correlation between these fires and low-income neighbourhoods, it also noticed a link between households that were receiving support from the Department of Community Services as more than the average lived near these empty properties.
As a result, Community Service workers, who were already undertaking home visits, were trained to advise local residents on fire safety issues as they had ready access to them in a way that the Fire Department did not. They were also provided with a Fire Safety Checklist Tool and asked to alert the Fire Department of any homes that did not have a smoke detector.
Lastly, a “Holy Smokes” hackathon was set up to develop low-cost, early warning fire detectors for vacant and abandoned properties that could alert the Fire Department as soon as trouble struck.
In Philadelphia, meanwhile, where more than a quarter of residents live in poverty and rely on help from municipal assistance programmes, data analysis revealed that many of the city’s senior citizens were failing to take up its Water Discount scheme. Therefore, the City Accelerator team partnered with Columbia University and worked with behavioural science techniques to devise and conduct controlled trials on how best to approach this particular demographic.
Using the resultant data to help tweak communications, which included using different sized fonts and envelope colours, the team found that the scheme’s uptake increased by a huge 178%. In other words, $186 million was now being claimed to help improve the lives of disadvantaged citizens.
Engaging the community
The second cohort, which began six months after the first and concluded in February 2017, was tasked with “Revitalizing Community Engagement”. Member cities comprised Atlanta, Albuquerque, New Orleans, Baltimore and Seattle and their aim was to either improve communications or repair relations with certain target populations.
In Albuquerque, a key goal was to support immigrant entrepreneurs by making it easier for them to access business development services. As a result, the Mayor’s Office held a series of six “small business deep dive” sessions with 70 business owners over the course of two months in order to better understand their challenges.
A number of “Design Days” were then organised, which involved the entrepreneurs and service providers getting together to jointly design different tools and processes. For example, based on the input provided, Platform-as-a-Service provider appcitylife developed a mobile application called TrepConnect to help entrepreneurs across the state of New Mexico access resources and services within their community to help them grow their businesses.
Through this work, Albuquerque also realised that support for immigrants and refugees should not simply be provided on a one-off basis. Therefore, it now intends to introduce a range of new services and provide them with an ongoing point of contact.
The third cohort, meanwhile, is focusing on “Infrastructure Finance.” Kicking off last April, its aim is to find ways of working creatively with existing resources and of attracting new investment to fund high-priority capital projects in the face of budget gaps and limited means of additional revenue creation. The cities involved comprise Pittsburgh, St Paul, San Francisco and Washington DC.
As part of the bidding process, applicants were asked to take pertinent data, feed it into Esri’s geographic information system and use the Story Maps module to display it. The software enabled users to link text, images and multimedia content to maps of their area so they could tell the story of the challenges they faced in a more visual fashion. This cohort is due to complete its work this October, while a fourth (with focus undisclosed) is due to be announced in April.
Over the next few years, however, City Accelerator also plans to start hosting symposia, with the aim of enabling both national and international audiences to share and learn from each other’s experiences. Such a move is important, Reynoso says, because:
Being a data-driven city is something we believe is vitally important for high-performing government in order to enhance performance and engagement. The cities that partner with City Accelerator already have an appreciation of this kind of data-driven approach so our work with them is really an evolution of how seriously they already take it.
My take
Although many public sector bodies have been slow to adopt a data-driven approach to service provision, the projects conducted under the auspices of the City Acclerator demonstrate just how valuable this way of working can be, particularly in terms of optimising the use of limited resources. The fact that key learnings and best practice are being shared publicly on the governing.com website is a definite plus, meaning that public authorities not just in the US, but around the world, can benefit from participants’ experiences.
Image credit - Images free for commercial use Read more on: Digital government and public servicesLocal

