
New York City designers and UX experts, whom have plenty of private sector opportunities on their doorstep, may not see the appeal of moving to Washington DC to work amidst the beaurcracies of government. However, that’s exactly what US Digital Service designer Mollie Ruskin was last week urging attendees of the Design Driven NYC meet-up to do.
Ruskin, a former New Yorker herself, gave a compelling talk on why designers should consider the unique challenges of federal government as their next career move. She said:
There is an incredible amount more to do. If you are interested, we need you. We need designers left and right, of all skills from all backgrounds.
The US Digital Service is following in the footsteps of the Government Digital Service here in the UK and is quickly gaining momentum in its ambitions to transform public services for the digital age, making them easier to use for American citizens. For example, just a few weeks ago President Obama issued an executive order that formally established the Presidential Innovation Fellows program within government.
Sitting in the UK it’s very interesting to hear Ruskin speak about the challenges facing US federal government, as they so closely mimic the challenges that faced GDS this side of the Atlantic just a few short years ago. Many of these challenges are now resurfacing for us here in Britain, but when you listen to Ruskin’s talk you very much get an impression that the US is at the start of this transition.
 For example, Ruskin spoke about three of the core challenges when thinking about ‘designing’ for public services online – service design, UX or UI and content strategy. She said:
In the private sector we often have the opportunity to look at things like customer drop off, conversion channels and things like that. We certainly have analytics and information about how users are interacting with our services. But one of the fundamental differences between government and private sector products is the market incentive. At the end of the day many of you that work for companies is that you know you have this bottom line.
If you don’t get customers in the door, your company is going to fail. At the end of the day if Lizzie [an example of a US citizen used during the presentation] is unhappy, Lizzie doesn’t have a choice, she has to use the government service. One of the fundamental problems is that we have to convince the government that it’s in their best interest to do so.
Sound familiar? One of GDS’ biggest challenges during its early days was getting buy-in. But ultimately its position and work was propelled by the fact that simple digital products could deliver pretty big savings, pretty quickly. Something that Ruskin herself notes. She said:
One of the things that’s really compelling is that this work is about efficiency and effectiveness, and so it’s very compelling across party lines. It often results in cost savings.
However, she recognises that much of federal government’s processes are in a mess and are still driven by paper filling and box ticking. This is slowing things down for citizens and is creating complexity for government agencies. She said:
The inside is extremely siloed, different organisations talking to different

organisations, the left hand doesn’t know what the right hand is doing. That makes providing consistency and fluidity across experiences very, very difficult.
It’s hard. It’s extremely hard. It’s very hard when you’re in the midst of the bureaucracy and the midst of the red tape why you are doing this. [But we part of a movement] that is trying to make the civic experience of government work better.
Immigration
Ruskin joked that one of the services that the US Digital Service has decided to start work on is one that is easy and conflict free – immigration. That’s of course not the case and Ruskin notes that we all tend to think about immigration in a “very politicised way”. However, she believes, that there is an incredible amount that the government can do, through design thinking, to improve the experience for people coming into the US and trying to find work. She said:
We are tackling this issue from two sides, both from the inside, the tools that people in government are using to process immigration applications, but also from the experience end users applying are having.
You are inundated with laundry list of forms, they suck, they are usually 60 pages deep. And the result is that the agency has stacks and stacks of paper they are trying to process. You may have heard a story about an agency that’s roof was falling in because there was so much paper. That is unfortunately extremely realistic. We are trying to move away from this being about forms and paper, to it being about people moving through these systems.
Last fall we were helping this organisation redesign this system, which is entirely paper based, to being more of a digital process. We travelled around the country to the service centres where people assess these applications and we watched them pick the stacks of paper up and moving them around.
We did what any good UX folks would do, we prototyped. You would have thought we had invented the moon. These people had never seen anything like this, they were so excited to be included in the process. Design is an incredibly powerful tool in this process. To see an iterative process is incredibly process.”
She finished by saying that whilst she and the rest of USDS were working on the inside to improve the efficiency of the systems, 18F, the government’s digital agency, was working on the outside to make the process look “modern and beautiful”. She said:
They went through the human process of applying for things and the end result is an absolutely gorgeous website. It answers people’s questions, it’s designed to be warm and it has the face of people on it.
Future problems
Two of the biggest problems that GDS hasn’t yet been able to solve here in the UK, or hasn’t been able to articulate solutions to, are the issues of helping local government and also whether it’s best to buy or build technology. The first relates to the point that whilst central government has a role to play, much of a citizen’s interaction happens at a local level, and this isn’t yet being solved. Equally, should GDS be building so much code or should it be making use of commodity services available on the web?
These are problems that Ruskin highlighted that USDS needs to address going forward. She said:
Our work is primarily focused on federal government, but we know that the role that we play is something that’s very visible elsewhere. We have an extremely strong stance on building in the open and almost everything that we create is open sources. That’s part of it – we are creating tools that we can use at the local level. For example, we created an analytics dashboard so that you can see traffic across all federal government websites, and the city of Philadelphia repurposed it.
On the build versus buy topic, she said:
We are very, very aware, despite that we are hiring hundreds of people, that the federal government is far, far bigger and has way more work to be done than we could possibly influence just by hiring people in the private sector. A lot of our work is focused on fixing the way that government procures or buys technology and services. Generally speaking we are trying to make it easier for small businesses and organisations that have a good track record, so that when we buy things we can do it in a way that is smart and awesome.
My take
Interesting talk by Ruskin and the parallels to the UK’s story are fascinating. If you’re allowed to work in the US and think you could be up for the challenge of working for the US Digital Service, take a look at this website.
Read more on: Digital government and public services

