
The US Federal Government is cementing its commitment to digital transformation through the creation of a third service within the General Services Administration (GSA), called the Technology Transformation Service.
It has been said that the new service institutionalises digital within the US public sector, by bringing together three digital operations that have been underway and making progress for a couple of years now – 18F, the team at the Office of Citizen Services and Innovative Technologies, and the Presidential Innovation Fellows.
18F has been leading the charge to date and essentially acting as a central consulting service for agencies that are looking to transform services.
Executive Director, Aaron Snow, has worked closely with 18F’s UK counterpart GDS (which inspired the US organization) and has said that his team is about driving change management through federal teams to build user-centric services and create impactful tools for citizens using open source technologies.
At a recent GDS event in the UK, Snow took to the stage to explain the US’s approach to date with regards to digital transformation – where he said it wasn’t actually about digital at all. Snow said:
So here’s a secret, which you can’t tell anybody back home. 18F isn’t really a digital services office, we are a change management office disguised as a digital services office. Why do we play this game? Because it’s hard for most people to ask change managers for help, there’s stigma, shame, pride, anxiety. Am I going to be in trouble for doing it wrong all the time?
But it’s easy to invite the nerds into the room.
He added that departments contract with 18F, rather than going in heavy handed with some sort of mandate, which Snow believes has kept it honest and its performance strong. He said:
So departments hire us to work with them and they sign written agreements that lay out how we will work together: putting users first, working in 2 week sprints, everything open source.
It’s turned out to be a blessing. It keeps us accountable, it keeps us seeking product market fit with our department customers and it’s a nice blunt measure of our own efficiency and performance. But mostly it’s great because it turns out that the best government customers are paying government customers.
Customers who have skin in the game, who understand and have to sign a document saying that they’re committing themselves and their office’s money to our way of working. And doing that catapults them into our theory of change. Culture change happens because we deliver it together, hand in hand, aligned. Not coerced.
A new stage
 However, this week the GSA’s Administrator Denise Turner Roth announced that the three services mentioned about would be coming together under one new formalised Technology Transformation Service.
The GSA said that federal agencies are increasingly looking for technologists’ assistance in identifying the best solution, best tools, or best path to ‘digital’ and that a new dedicated service to meet this need will enable it to help partner agencies better build, buy, and share technology.
All with the end game of improving the public’s experience with government. The new service will be led by Commissioner Phaedra Chrousos, former associate administrator of the Office of Citizen Services, and Aaron Snow will take up post as deputy commissioner.
Administrator Roth said in a blog post:
The Technology Transformation Service is the “launchpad” to set us up for the next big expedition for the federal government in technology. We have to create a smart government that provides seamless experiences designed for the user first. Creating the Technology Transformation Service builds a great foundation for the federal government’s modernization efforts.
By moving these programs into a new service, we are demonstrating a commitment to make agile, user-centered delivery of technology the way we do business moving forward. This new service complements GSA’s current technology efforts, bolstering the strong support we already provide to partner agencies and allowing us to deliver transformative technology solutions.
Creating the Technology Transformation Service will allow GSA to better deliver on our mission to provide the best value in real estate, acquisitions and technology to government and the American people.
Today is the first day of a new era in our agency. Just as we were the first agency to put the internet on every desk 20 years ago, and the first to move to the cloud five years ago, we continue to blaze a trail providing cutting-edge technology support to our partner agencies.
Meanwhile, back in the UK, GDS executive director Stephen Foreshew-Cain offered his support for the decision:

Awesome news! Long term thinking shows much needed commitment to digital government. Or government. #thereisnotry https://t.co/CEG7T1xxmk
— Steve Foreshew-Cain (@s_foreshew_cain) May 3, 2016

My take
I never really understood why the US decided to have a number of disparate services, rather than one influential organisation that could work as a whole across federal government. I think it was a case of starting small and growing the use case.
However, this week’s announcement shows that this isn’t a side project for the US. It has been formalised and embedded, and should be seen as a long term commitment to digital transformation.
But that doesn’t mean the hard part is over. As we have seen in the UK, this is a long process that requires a lot of effort to reverse years of engrained practices and doing things ‘the old way’. Not to mention that federal government is just one element of the US public sector.
That being said, the right noises are being made, so it should be an exciting one to watch over the next year or two.
Image credit - Images via diginomicaRead more on: Digital government and public services

