
While fellow partner in crime Stuart Lauchlan has long held the view that Europe’s approach to privacy and specifically the collapse of Safe Harbor, foretell a two speed Internet where Europe loses out, BCG tells a different story. In its narrative, BCG demonstrates that of the EU28, Denmark, Luxembourg, Sweden, Netherlands and the UK  all best the US on BCG’s e-tensity score.
The graphic above, shows how positions have changed since 2011. It clearly demonstrates that not only are a number of European countries faring better than the US  on this scale, the rate at which they are improving their position is also improving, albeit marginally, relative to the US. What’s striking is that all the leaders are relatively small countries. What’s happening? Are there other measures to explain this?
Perhaps it is the fact that the leaders’ economies are dominated by services rather than manufacturing or farming. Nope. The US bests all of them with 80 percent of the economy being services based.

Maybe the leaders have a better take on bureaucracy? Nope. Looking at bureaucratic employment as a percentage of the labor force. Denmark is number two while the US is middling. When it comes to bureaucratic cost, a similar pattern emerges with Denmark taking the top slot while the US retains its middling ranking. What’s most striking is that among the leaders I have cited, only the Netherlands occupies a position lower than the US while Norway and Denmark are consistently among the highest.
Maybe there are other factors. What about R&D? That doesn’t seem to work either because in absolute terms, with the exception of China. the US beats pretty much every other country hands down.
Testing BCG’s definitions
Maybe BCG is wrong? Let’s go back to how BCG arrives at its conclusions. Here we need to look at how the definitional components make up BCGs e-tensity index:
The index consists of three components:

Enablement accounts for 50% of the total weighting; it measures various aspects of fixed and mobile infrastructure deployment.


Engagement, which accounts for 25%, measures how actively businesses, governments, and consumers are embracing the Internet.


Expenditure, also accounting for 25%, measures the proportion of money spent on online retail and advertising.

Enablement and expenditure have powered the overall rise in index scores, while engagement has stagnated. E-commerce has become so prevalent and popular in China that it now has the fourth highest score on the expenditure component, after the UK, South Korea, and Denmark.
I don’t have access to the detail behind these buckets but we know anecdotally that access to reliable, high speed Internet leads to much greater use of online resources. We also know that in the US, the way Internet access is both variable in terms of speed and tied up in convoluted bundling models makes for a morass of plans, options and the like that make for a haves and have nots society. This is particularly striking in the mobile arena where speed and access vary wildly from place to place.
Enablement a key measure?
On the enablement measure, Wikipedia uses Akamai benchmarks that rank both Norway and the Netherlands ahead of the US while Denmark is behind. But when you look at the detail, things get interesting. Again, from Wikipedia, several statements stand out as they relate to Denmark:
In an international context Denmark is viewed as a somewhat peculiar country when it comes to internet access. The former state owned telephone company TDC owns the entire last mile infrastructure in terms of copper telephone lines and the vast majority of the coaxial cableinfrastructure as well.[3] Even though the Danish telecommunications infrastructure is very heavily dominated by one company, Danish internet customers still enjoy fair prices and a wide availability of different next generation access internet connections in comparison with most other EUcountries.[1] Furthermore, TDCs de facto monopoly on last mile infrastructure has come under attack. In the last decade regional power companies have formed national business alliances aimed at implementing FTTH for private and business end users.[4][5]
In 2012 Denmark was ranked third by OECD in terms of wired broadband subscriptions per 100 inhabitants (see the bar chart below).[6] The same year 99,9 % of all households and companies were able to connect to the internet via a broadband connection of at least 2 Mbit/s.[7]
In 2014, Denmark became the top nation connected based on mobile phone and Internet use and one of the most thriving countries in Europe in terms of wired and wireless Internet. Its embrace of the Internet era in comparison to other nations has also kept it dominating rankings since 2013, when it ranked the second most connected country in the world.
Now compare what is said about the US:
A large number of people in the US have little or no choice at all on who provides their internet access. The country suffers from a severe lack of competition in the broadband business.[2] Nearly one-third of households in the United States have either no choice for home broadband Internet service, or no options at all.[3]
So much for capitalism as an engine for competition.
The Silicon Valley quotient
Media portrays Silicon Valley as the mecca for technology innovation. Having lived adjacent to the area and having traveled to other centers, I’m not convinced that Silicon Valley’s much vaunted technological supremacy is producing the goods that turn into the kind of claimed leadership that underlines the US media narrative. Let me be clear, I’m not talking investment, where the US leads the way by some considerable distance.
The competitive problem is structural and cultural, including business to business where, it seems, that a number of well funded US based players were wrong footed in their assumptions about penetrating European markets. We have seen that in the conversations we’ve had with some of those companies who are finding that future penetration of US markets is decelerating.
Amazon, Apple, Facebook and Google may well be the global consumer darlings in US eyes but that’s not how things are playing out in Europe at the business level. I suspect the same can be said for Asian and BRIC countries.
My take
Drawing conclusions from a bunch of statistics that at times seem contradictory is hardly the best research outcome but what we can say is that employment makeup and structural economics appear to have almost nothing to do with relative competitiveness when thought about from the statistical mindset.
BCGs assessment is interesting since it focuses a large chunk of its weighting on infrastructure enablement, a topic that can be independently assessed. If that reading is correct then the much vaunted capitalist market of the United States isn’t working in the context of competitive rankings based around BCGs measures.
However, US companies can still use their superior financial muscle to benefit from the infrastructures that leading European economies have already put in place. That may turn out to be the silver lining for competing in markets where US companies will need data centers. In short, getting past EU regulators might, after all, turn out to be a lesser problem than adjusting to the economic realities of dealing with a more sophisticated market.
Does that mean Europe loses out? Probably, but not for the reasons that Lauchlan laments. More likely, the internal scale at which the current leaders operate may be impressive but that doesn’t mean they can scale onto the global stage. That’s one ace the US has in spades (sic.)
Read more on: Infrastructure 