
Germany-based financial institution Deutsche Bank has once again found itself in hot water with US regulators over its swaps data practices, which have failed to meet requirements on multiple occasions, with particular blame being put on the bank’s continuity and disaster recovery plans.
The US Commodity Futures Trading Commission (CFTC) has filed a civil complaint in New York this week, charging Deutsche Bank with failing to report swap data for multiple asset classes for five days, following a systems failure earlier this year.
In addition to this, CFTC claims that Deutsche Bank submitted incomplete and untimely swap data, failed to supervise its employees responsible for swap data reporting, and failed to have an adequate business continuity and disaster recovery plan in place.
The follows a system outage in April, which meant that the bank didn’t report any swap data for multiple asset classes for five days. The CFTC states that efforts to end the system outage “repeatedly exacerbated existing reporting problems and often led to the discovery or creating of new reporting problems”.
These also violate CFTC order that was entered in September last year, where Deutsche Bank was fined $2.5 million for failing to properly report its swaps transactions from January 2013 until July 2015.
CFTC Director of Enforcement Aitan Goelman said:
Deutsche Bank’s repeated violations warrant the intervention of a Court-appointed monitor. Deutsche Bank has shown over the last year its inability to comply with its swap reporting responsibilities under the Commodity Exchange Act and CFTC Regulations. The CFTC treats these failures seriously and will take appropriate steps to ensure compliance.
The CFTC complaint alleges that Deutsche Bank’s swap data reported before and after the system outage revealed persistent problems with the integrity of certain data fields, and that reporting problems persist today – affecting market data that as made available to the public, as well as market data that is used by the CFTC to evaluate systematic risk throughout the swaps market.
In a statement to media, Deutsche Bank said:
We understand the concerns raised by the CFTC and have agreed on steps to resolve this matter. We continue to work on enhancing our reporting systems, and we are committed to meeting all regulatory requirements.
Problems elsewhere
Deutsche Bank is facing an increasingly tough environment with regulators in the US, following a number of fines and breaches.
Just last week the Financial Industry Regulatory Authority (FINRA) announced that it would be fining Deutsche Bank $12.5 million for “significant supervisory failures” related to research and trading-related information it disseminated to employees over internal speakers.
FINRA said that despite multiple “red flags” regarding the potential dissemination of confidential information, Deutsche Bank “failed to establish adequate supervision”.
Brad Bennett, FINRA’s Executive Vice President and Chief of Enforcement, said:
Recognizing and responding to red flags is the hallmark of proper supervision, particularly in areas involving confidential information. Deutsche Bank’s disregard of years of red flags including internal audit findings, risk assessments and compliance recommendations was particularly egregious given the risk that material nonpublic information could be communicated over squawk boxes.
Deutsche Bank neither admitted nor denied these charges, but consented to the entry of FINRA’s findings.
Not only this, but Deutsche Bank was one of only two banks operating in the US to fail the Federal Reserve’s annual stress test, which is designed to judge whether banks operating in the country can survive a large economic downturn.
Making investments
However, despite the problems, Deutsche Bank recently told investors as part of its annual report that its vision is to become a “trusted and successful bank”, which will in part be achieved by making strategic investments in technology.
Many ‘traditional’ financial institutions that have been operating in the market for years are grappling with their legacy infrastructure and technology, which is failing to keep up with the speed of innovation in the market, increased regulatory pressures and changing consumer expectations.
As part of its strategic objectives, Deutsche Bank said that technology was going to play a key role. It’s annual report notes:
[One of our goals is] to become less risky by modernizing our technology and withdrawing from higher-risk client relationships. We intend to (a) withdraw from those client relationships where in our view the risks are too high, to (b) improve our control framework, and to (c) implement automation in order to replace manual reconciliation.
We aim to modernize our IT architecture, for instance by reducing the number of individual operating systems and by replacing the Bank’s end-of-life hardware and software applications. Automation of manual processes is aimed at driving efficiency and improving control. We intend to prioritize investments in the Know-Your-Client and Anti-Money-Laundering infrastructure.
My take
It would be unfair to suggest that these problems are specific to Deutsche Bank. We have reported a lot on how the financial services industry is failing to keep up with the opportunities that modern digital technologies are able to provide. Not only this, but the failures to keep up with the increased pressures that these technologies create.
A tough time for Deutsche Bank in the US.
Image credit - Time for change © Coloures-pic - Fotolia.comRead more on: Financial services and fintech 