

A BlackBerry user
Sometimes it can be very tough to let go.
It’s a sentiment from Ralph Pini, Chief Operating Officer and General Manager for Devices at BlackBerry, in a blog posting reflecting on the end of the line for the BlackBerry Classic device.
But it might equally be applicable to the US government, where the Senate has decided this week that it’s dropping its use of BlackBerrys and shifting to Android handsets or iPhones. Senate staff will no longer receive BlackBerry phones once existing stock runs down.
The news was broken to Senate officials in a memo from the Sergeant at Arms, who said:
Once we have exhausted our current in-house stock, new device procurements will be limited, while supplies last, to warranty exchanges only.
There are still about 610 BlackBerry 10 devices still in the hands of Senate employees.
In the memo, it said that BlackBerry has told telecom carriers Verizon and AT&T that production of all Blackberry OS 10 devices (Q10, Z10, Z30, Passport and Classic) is being discontinued and future fulfillment can’t be guaranteed.
But that appears to have been a misunderstanding, with BlackBerry insisting that it’s only stopping production of the Classic:
We have informed our US carriers that the manufacturing cycle of only our BlackBerry Classic will cease.
We continue to actively support sales of our BlackBerry 10 smartphones to customers in most markets. And for customers choosing our Android device as their next smartphone, there will be a seamless transition without any compromise to the security of their mobile platform or operations.
We are focused on software updates for BlackBerry 10, with version 10.3.3 scheduled for next month, and a second update to follow next year.
Blow
Nonetheless, the Senate decision is a major blow to the already beleagured BlackBerry, which last month turned in a quarterly loss of $671 million and a 30% drop in revenue.
A telling stat that exposes the problems faced by the firm in the handset market. BlackBerry sold 500,000 phones during the quarter, whereas Apple sold 51 million iPhones for the comparable period.
The government sector had been one of the last happy-hunting grounds for Blackberry. Two weeks ago CEO John Chen cited as new high profile wins the likes of The Pentagon Force Protection Agency, The California Department of Justice and the United States Coastguard, as well as, er, the US Senate.
Chen also cited the government business as one reason why he remains convinced there is a future in the handset business:
Number one, it’s a customer reason. The customers, many customers especially in the government world, they’re still relying on us to provide a secure handset for them. That’s number one. Number two, I really, really believe that we could make money out of it of our device business.
The BlackBerry Classic first appeared in December 2014, with its 3.5-inch screen 60% larger than the previous BlackBerry Bold 9900 and boasting a better battery life as well as a standard keyboard and touch screen. In his blog, Pini, noted:
The Classic has long surpassed the average lifespan for a smartphone in today’s market. We are ready for this change so we can give our customers something better.
One development, according to Chen, is likely to be a mid-range product following the high price point of the PRIV device:
The PRIV is really a great engineering product. It’s done well for people who bought it, but it’s too expensive for enterprise. And so we’re…too much of a higher end. So this is why the enterprise have been asking as well as the carrier who represent the enterprise…for more of a mid-range [product]. They like everything BlackBerry represents in terms of security and the ability to run our software with the Android operating systems. But unfortunately the PRIV itself [is] only kind of affordable by the executive or the higher entity of the organization.
That follows on from comments made at the BlackBerry shareholder meeting in June when Chen reiterated:
[What] we attempt to do is to build the most secured android phone. Android enjoys 80% of the market share in terms of OS. That brings all kinds of applications for our customer to use, which is something that we need to solve upfront. But I don’t want to give up the Blackberry heritage and security, and I think the world needs a secure Android, so we are going to build the best Android phone, the most secure Android phone that the market could see. So this is why we are combining the two together.
My take
Given the FBI decision over Hillary Clinton’s emails and the infamous picture of her using her BlackBerry on her plane, the timing of the Senate’s decision is either deliciously or horribly ironic – delete according to political affiliation.
The wider implications of the US Senate’s decision could well be to expose BlackBerry to advances from the likes of Huawei which would have been ruled out due to the US public sector’s dependency on the devices. It’s more than likely that other government agencies and departments will follow suit in the wake of the US Senate’s decision.
Blackberry’s next big public outing will be in a couple of weeks time in New York at its annual Security Summit. It’s the same week as the Republican National Convention in Cleveland that will crown or topple Donald Trump as Presidential candidate. There’s likely to be more government action at one of those than the other.
Image credit - BlackBerry/TwitterRead more on: MobileUX and application design 