
Mike Palmer, Veritas EVP and Chief Product Officer and Microsoft Azure CTO Mark Russinovich
Many IT departments and their coterie of software/equipment vendors are struggling to adapt to a multi-cloud world. The fast rise of cloud infrastructure and services, the mobile ‘app-if-ication’ of commerce and business processes all wrappered by rapidly changing consumer behavior and customer expectations have contributed to the diminishing of once household names like Veritas, its image frozen in the past like a bug (sic) encased in amber, conjuring up stale technologies like bulky backup software for clunky tape drives. Finding relevance in the cloud era is a stretch, but it’s a journey the relaunched Veritas embarked upon last year after being spun out following years of neglect under Symantec’s ownership.
As I detailed last year, like most antediluvian technology vendors, Veritas has adopted a cloud-centric, software-defined-infrastructure strategy. It’s a similar approach to that recently espoused by VMware at VMworld 2017, in which each company retools itself around a multi-cloud message.
The strategic shift is both more difficult and easier when you’re like Veritas, rebooting as a newly-independent company yet challenging. On the one hand its product roadmap has suffered from stasis and indifference as a non-core adjunct of Symantec. On the other hand, the new Veritas started from a clean slate, able to dream big and act fast as it sets a strategy. It is fortunate to be endowed with a talented pool of engineers and product managers. The common link between Veritas and VMWare’s strategy is the development of software to support a multi-cloud enterprise while maintaining compatibility with platforms that support live critical business systems.
Veritas introduced its ambitious cloud-agnostic strategy at the inaugural Vision conference last year that, as I wrote at the time,
Pushes Veritas out of its niche in backup software with a focus on data management and visualization for cloud infrastructure. Veritas sees itself at the center of a data-centric IT in which hardware, virtualization platforms and even infrastructure location are interchangeable cogs orbiting the body of rapidly-growing business data that provides organizations with cultural identity, customer relationships and ultimately, competitive advantage. … While Veritas successfully articulated its vision, it’s far too early to assess how well it does in executing it and whether it can convince customers to come along.
From strategy to multi-cloud execution
If last year was focused on strategy development, Vision 2017 was about product execution. On that score, Veritas has been busy, using the event to introduce several significant updates to its foundational NetBackup product, with more features to protect data on cloud infrastructure and better support for distributed, scale out NoSQL and Hadoop data stores. Other announcements included:

Improvements to the Information Map software for managing an organization’s overall data portfolio including connectors for 23 new data sources, better UI and visualizations and features to assist with data privacy requirements including HIPAA and GDPR.
A new scale out software-defined storage (SDS) product that can systematically classify and apply metadata to incoming files, works with on-premise and cloud storage services and can automatically tier data between the two environments.

Like VMware, Veritas announced a new cloud partnership, this time with Microsoft, complete with a keynote address by Azure CTO Mark Russinovich. Although his presentation was primarily an introduction to Azure services for the uninitiated Veritas audience and the joint announcement was bereft of details, his appearance, much like Andy Jassy’s at VMworld, was significant since the presence of one of Microsoft’s top cloud executives underscores the importance it places on building alliances that further Azure’s penetration into the enterprise.
Enabling the hybrid cloud enterprise
Whereas VMware aims to be the infrastructure broker for multi-cloud applications, Veritas want to be your cloud-agnostic information manager, handling the entire data lifecycle from storage and backup to information extraction and policy enforcement.
A constant theme from Veritas execs is that information is the indispensable fuel for a company’s digital transformation. Without a comprehensive platform to manage, filter and protect data, digital strategies put businesses at a competitive disadvantage to organizations that fully exploit their information assets.
It’s a compelling argument since even the most sophisticated machine learning (ML) algorithms are subject to the timeless computer science maxim, GIGO, garbage in, garbage out. AI might turn out to be the perfect test case for proving the value of Veritas’ hybrid cloud strategy since the majority of most organization’s data, particularly historical records and transactions, is still accumulated and stored on-premises.
The symbiosis between company-managed data and cloud-provided ML services is a key reason why the Azure partnership was the most significant announcement of Veritas Vision. It’s not a one-way street since the fact that Russinovich made an appearance shows that Microsoft sees plenty of upside and takes the partnership seriously.
Despite the lack of specifics, there are several ripe opportunities for Microsoft and Veritas to provide differentiated products and services. These include:

Using the aforementioned Veritas SDS product to tightly connect various Azure storage and database services into a seamless hybrid storage platform with Azure used for cold storage and hot data analysis with on-premise Veritas managing the data of record.
Simplifying the implementation of hybrid storage by providing automated data replication, redundancy, geo-distribution and caching between on-premise and in-cloud storage.
Facilitating the development and deployment of data security and access policies and ensuring their consistent application across a hybrid environment.

Longer term, the companies could unleash the potential of latent, secondary enterprise data by developing software that allows conveniently searching, filtering and extracting data from (mostly) on-premise repositories, then automatically feeding an Azure data pipeline that can trigger event-driven Azure Functions, predictive models running on Azure ML, HDInsight or Analysis Services, and Azure’s AI Cognitive Services.
Coupling better tools for legacy data management with cloud data analysis and AI services would allow business leaders to unearth insights into customer preferences, buyer behavior, market trends and competitive threats that otherwise would remain obscured in a mountain of unused and forgotten data repositories. Indeed, a mantra from Mike Palmer, Veritas EVP and Chief Product Officer, is that “secondary data is an organization’s most underutilized asset” and one that should be definable and measured on a company’s balance sheet.
My take
Last year, I admired Veritas’ strategy, but challenged it on the execution, suggesting that it “rename its conference not simply Vision but Executing on the Vision 2017.” While it didn’t change the name, this year’s event, replete with product announcements and demos of coming attractions, showed that the company has been preoccupied with execution, not exhibition.
Of course, no vendor event is complete without some executive hyperbole, so when CEO Bill Coleman claimed that “Veritas is changing the agenda for the technology industry” and that it’s “the only company with an integrated data platform,” I’ll chalk it up to home-team boosterism. Still, the company is making a significant and necessary pivot from a niche specialist in a commodified software category (backup) to a platform company providing a suite of data management products covering the entire lifecycle of enterprise information.
The problem with expansive platforms and integrated product suites is that they often leave buyers (and analysts) thinking that you don’t realize the full value shown in the whiz-bang on-stage demos without going for the whole enchilada.
I asked Coleman about the problem of selling C-level execs on yet another, when they are already suffering from platform fatigue. His answer was wise and reassuring.
Instead of leading with the vision, Veritas pitches customers on particular business problems, notably migrating data to the cloud data, enforcing data privacy regulations (particularly GDPR) and turning data into information and business insights. Since most organizations have already tagged one or more of these as IT priorities, it provides Coleman and Veritas with a receptive audience, especially as most large companies already use and trust its NetBackup product.
Whether Veritas can bootstrap success solving targeted business problems into a broad relationship where it’s the foundation of an organization’s information management strategy is an open question, however the company can build several years of runway with a solutions-focused approach. It will be interesting how fast it can accelerate and whether it can, in fact, change the IT agenda.
Image credit - via the authorDisclosure - Veritas covered the author's T&E for attending the event Read more on: Infrastructure 