
John Wookey
In the run-up to Dreamforce this year, Salesforce slipped out a couple of interesting announcements built around vertical industry-focused cloud offerings – Financial Services Cloud and Healthcare Cloud.
It’s an interesting shift towards vertically-focused solution delivery, pitched at specific industry needs and supported by third party partners.
Earlier today I hooked up with John Wookey, EVP of Salesforce Industries, to get more detail on this initiative.
The original focus of Salesforce’s industry business unit – under Vivek Kundra – was to tailor messages to markets and support the field operation in its work. All that changed 15 months ago when Salesforce co-founder Parker Harris and President Keith Block asked Wookey to look into building industry-specific offerings.
This was something that Wookey had views on having observed what happened at Siebel Systems, not something that necessarily elicits the most positive of reactions from alumni there:
When you talk to Siebel veterans about industries you get a schizophrenic reaction. Siebel verticalized early on and that drove a lot of success. But they didn’t focus on the boundaries and that hurt them. They got into building a hospitality system for Marriott Hotels, for example, and that turned into a gargantuan project.
What Salesforce is doing differently is pursuing what Wookey calls a “very deterministic” strategy:
 We continue to focus on alignment. Our sales teams have been increasingly getting into vertical alignments. It makes sense. You can’t really have an account guy calling a bank one day and a hospital the next.
This is about more than just providing repackaged marketing material for each industry, he insists, but rather about refocusing on how the industries function:
We have a lot of very smart industry people here, but while the presentations they created were good, they didn’t really speak to how we work. So we’ve spent a lot of time with customers and partners to understand and address industry requirements.
Don’t do everything!
Another key decision has been not to attempt to deliver everything but to lean on third party partners to deliver industry specific elements. This in turn of course leads to the question of what Salesforce builds and what it decides to deliver through partners.
The basic principle here is simple. Salesforce delivers CRM and front office customer-centric systems while the likes of Oracle and SAP deliver back office ERP. These are cross-industry systems. But in every industry there will be specific operational applications, such as electronic patient records in healthcare or core banking systems in financial services. Wookey states:
We don’t want to build those. We want to partner to deliver those, but we want the partners to build on our platform and against a commonly-agreed data model.
What this means in practice is that Salesforce will, for example, seek to create B2C definitions, such as how to define households, and then work with ISVs to enable them to deliver against those definitions. This should then result in 3rd party offerings that have a common platform and architecture.
Wookey argues that this means the firm will avoid the problems created by buying in solutions to fill functionality gaps:
When I was at Oracle we bought most of the companies that become retail solutions . We had great ERP, great CRM and we had point of sales from Retek, which had itself acquired most of those products. So it was a case of ‘here’s a phone book of products, here’s a price list’, but none of them worked right together. Customers owned the problem of trying to make this work together.
In contrast, our approach is to bring people in, go to the customer and say ‘We focus on CRM that will work well with your industry, but we also partner with others so this will work for you.’.
Transformation
The first two industry-centric offerings from Salesforce both address highly-regulated industries that vary from country to country. A US healthcare solution, for example, isn’t going to map directly onto a ‘free-at-the-point-of-delivery’ health service such as the UK’s NHS.
As a result, the focus for the two industry clouds will be on North America in the first instance, but international expansion is of course on the cards. As such, partners may vary from region to region. Wookey adds:
Regulation is something that we need to be able to address and we’ve got a very strong compliance team doing that. But we aren’t,for example, building the electronic medical record layer, we’re building the horizontal layer on top of that.
So why Financial Services and Healthcare as the first two industries? It’s in large part because both are going through periods of transformative change, explains Wookey. For example, in the US healthcare market, ‘Obamacare’ is prompting a move towards ‘fee-for-performance’ payment models whereby hospitals don’t get reimbursed if patients are re-admitted within 30 days of being discharged.
This is leading to a greater interest in having care co-ordinators and patient care follow-up, but without having the technology in place to support such initiatives. What’s needed is the kind of customer management capabilities of the Service Cloud, but not the ‘out-of-the-box’ Service Cloud. Wookey explains:
We need to bring EMR data into the conversation. We need to get the nomenclatures right. You need to provide the right dashboards. You need to extend the Service Cloud into healthcare.
Salesforce has been re-shaping itself to support all this, such as creating a national sales team based around healthcare in the US, as well as having 5 areas across the country with focused financial services teams. That mirrors what has already been done in Europe and Japan at enterprise sales level.
As for the next steps in terms of product, there will be expansion of the two new clouds. In Financial Services, retail banking and insurance partners look likely to be the next additions, while in Healthcare the current provider focus may be fleshed out from the payer side as well as life sciences. After that, a Retail Cloud and a Government Cloud are potential candidates.
My take
Not trying to do everything is a sound principle. So many vendors have found themselves in difficulty in rabid pursuit of vertical market revenues, so taking a pragmatic approach is a solid strategy. I’ve known Wookey for a long time in various guises and he’s the right person to execute on this. 
International expansion of this partner model is going to be interesting to track. Finance and Healthcare go into pilot around now, with general availability planned for the Spring release of Salesforce in February next year. Definitely an interesting initiative to keep an eye on.
Disclosure – at time of writing, Salesforce is a premier partner of diginomica. 
Read more on: Cloud platforms - infrastructure and architectureCRM and customer experienceDigital and content marketingFinancial services and fintechFintechHealthcare transformation 