
Grandinetti at NRF 2017
My colleague Phil Wainewright has written about Vibram’s potent use of social media to connect with customers and personalize products – including the nifty Sole Factor program, which adds a custom Vibram sole to any shoe. You get the insert for free at a local Vibram truck, along with a social media pic.
At NRF 2017, I had the chance to sit down with Vibram’s global digital marketing manager Giuseppe Grandinetti. He shared some impressive numbers:

Since Vibram moved onto the Salesforce platform in 2015, they’ve seen a 50 percent increase in e-commerce revenue, and a 30 percent increase in traffic.
Originally a B2B brand, 30 percent of their revenue now comes from from B2c.

The story goes deeper. It’s about how Vibram’s customer-facing projects have changed their brand. It’s also about competing with that retail gorilla, Amazon, and not surrendering the customer relationship (and data!) to a third party behemoth.
The B2C push – data brings Vibram closer to customers
An Italian footwear company, Vibram is named after its founder, Vitale Bramani, who is credited with inventing the first rubber lug sole. A tragic climbing accident in 1935 – partially blamed on footwear – drove Bramani to design a new climbing sole. Today, Vibram sells more than rubber soles; Phil has written about Vibram’s “convention-breaking” FiveFingers running shoe, which are more of a foot glove than a shoe.
The FiveFingers brand was a big part of Vibram’s direct-to-consumer e-commerce push to the U.S. in 2005. With several “smart shoe” collaborations underway, including Vibram’s own phone-charging smart shoe prototype, Vibram is pushing ahead with its international consumer presence. Notable markets include the U.S., Europe, China, Japan and Brazil.
Digital brings tough lessons from retailers
Grandinetti says that before their B2C push, Vibram struggled to get data on their end customers:
When we started, our only customer information was through our partners. The idea was to try to figure out if we can put B2B and B2C together to create one big vision, and one big brand awareness.
Perhaps that sounds obvious, but for retailers, it’s easier said than done. Vibram has learned some tough lessons:

Just because you have a web site doesn’t mean you are interacting with your customers effectively. To do that, you need to connect with customers on their platforms for choice – a major push behind the social media initiatives Phil wrote about. “The biggest community we have is on social networks,” Grandinetti told me.
Not all e-commerce web sites are created equal. You can lose plenty of sales through a bad and/or complicated user experience. That’s the motivation behind Vibram’s 2015 move to the Salesforce platform.
Amazon’s dominance is a reality to reckon with. Vibram continues to sell its products on Amazon. However, Grandinetti’s team believes they have built a customer experience that can keep customers connected to their brand – something Amazon can’t ever do for them.

Why did the Salesforce platform make a difference?
So why did the move to Salesforce platform, including the Customer Cloud, and Demandware (now the Commerce Cloud), have such a big impact on engagement and commerce?
Before, the platform was not responsive; it was not easy to navigate. Everything was complicated… If people can’t buy easily with one click, they won’t buy.
Yes, Vibram can offer their customers a deeper relationship than Amazon. But they must still compete with Amazon on frictionless purchasing:
The idea is to try to give, with our branded entity, the same service that customers have from Amazon. For us, the customer is in the center of everything.
Using the Salesforce platform, Vibram has designed a customer experience with product at the center. It doesn’t end at the sale:
We made the platform customizable. I can customize a product for you. I can send you a newsletter directly. I can invite you to test a product. After I give you the product, you are inside in my network. I give you information, I support you. Maybe you want something different.
Which brings us to feedback. Social media feedback is not always pleasant. But for Grandinetti’s team, that data is invaluable:
The data is the big thing that we needed. We needed the feedback, negative and positive. From our social network, and from our platform, we can understand how to improve our product.
Vibram also uses the Salesforce platform to manage and promote their user-generated content (UGC). In Vibram’s case, UGC is significant. As Phil quoted:
We now have 1 million followers without pushing, without promotion. People who just wanted to have a connection with us.
Vibram’s B2B partners have gained from this new social-and-platform approach as well:
We really know our customers much better. We can also support our partners better, because we give them access to our platform.  We’ve increased our social sharing activity with them.
The wrap – from rubber soles to smart shoes
For Grandinetti, the ultimate goal lies ahead, what he calls “consumer-to-business.” To get there, motr Salesforce projects are on deck. The Salesforce Commerce Cloud, now up in the U.S. and Europe, will go live in China next.
Inspired by his talks at NRF 2017, Grandinetti now plans to give the Salesforce Marketing Cloud a closer look as well. Talking to peers was a show highlight:
It is always a good opportunity to see the other clouds all working together. We’ve been receiving feedback from other customers that already use the Marketing Cloud.
Grandinetti looks at the Marketing Cloud as a way to manage Vibram’s promotions, campaigns, and newsletters while integrating to their customer record/relationship. He thinks that could bolster Vibram’s goal of one-to-one consumer relationships.
We ended our chat with Grandinetti’s enthusiasm for Vibram’s Smart Shoe. Still a prototype, the Smart Shoe will allow you to charge your mobile device while you run or walk. It has GPS, lights, and interactive features. That’s a long way from rubber soles:
This is the evolution from a rubber sole, the evolution of a user experience that for us is the future.  Now we are here. This move to digital is the biggest leap that we have done. We’ve spent a lot of money and effort – all the company has worked on it – to make the change.
Alas, Grandinetti did not have a prototype with him, so I was unable to give these trendy shoes a spin and give you a report. But with a Vibram storefront in the same state as I live, there is a good chance of a future installment – and a test run.
Image credit - Photo of Grandinetti on site at NRF 2017 by Jon Reed. Disclosure - Salesforce is a diginomica premier partner. NRF provided me with press access to NRF 2017.Read more on: CRM and customer experienceDigital enterprise in the real worldRetail e-commerce and the omni-channelUse cases 