
While Wall Street was down on former darlings Apple and Twitter this week, Facebook put a spring back in investors steps by reporting first quarter net income that nearly tripled year-over-year.
The company’s net income was $1.51 billion for the first three months of the year, up from $512 million in the same period last year, on revenues of $5.3 billion, up from $3.5 billion last year. 
Other stats of note: 

1.65 billion users of Facebook every month. 
1.09 billion daily users. 
Mobile ad revenue of $4.2 billion is now 82% of total ad revenue. 
“More than one billion” mobile users each day. 
More than 3 million businesses using Facebook for advertising. 

With those golden numbers out there, CEO Mark Zuckerberg is staking a claim to propose a new class non-voting stock to make sure that he retains majority control of Facebook. 
Shareholders will have to vote on the proposed move in June, but it’s indicative of Zuckerberg’s intent to make sure that he can steer Facebook’s path towards philanthropic endeavors as well as non-ROI delivering ventures. 
He’s been at pains to emphasise to investors that they need to take a long-term view of projects like Oculus Rift: 

In Q1, we also started shipping Oculus Rift. We’ve got a lot of great content, with more than 50 games and apps built for Rift. And again, this is very early, and we don’t expect VR to take off as a mainstream success right away. I really want to emphasize that. Most Rift early adopters are gamers and developers. But eventually, we believe that VR is going to be the next big computing platform, and we’re making the investments necessary to lead the way there.

It’s essential to think in terms of ten year roadmaps, he insisted: 

Bringing people together and giving everyone a voice takes a long-term commitment, not just over the next few years but over the next few decades. We’re focused on the long term, and that’s the main reason for today’s proposal.
Facebook has been built by a series of bold moves. And when I look out into the future, I see more bold moves ahead of us than behind us. We’re focused not on what Facebook is, but on what it can be and on what it needs to be, and that means doing bold things. A lot of what we’re building today in areas like connectivity, artificial intelligence, and virtual and augmented reality may not pay off for years, but they’re important to our mission of connecting the world. And I’m committed to seeing this mission through and to leading Facebook there over the long term.

Zuckerberg drilled down on video and Live as areas of growth over the next five years: 

We’re at the beginning of a golden age of online video. Video isn’t just a single kind of content. We think it’s a medium that allows people to interact in a lot of new ways. So that’s why in addition to normal Internet video, we’re also focusing on more interactive video experiences like Live and 360 video. I’m a big Game of Thrones fan, and the other week HBO and our Oculus team came out with a 360 video of the opening sequence of the show. And it’s now the most watched 360 video on Facebook in any 24-hour period, with more than 12 million total views.
Earlier this month, we opened up Live to everyone. Live is just one part of our overall video effort, but we think it has a lot of potential. Friends go Live because it’s unfiltered and personal. Actors and news anchors go Live because they can reach bigger audiences in some cases than they can on even their own shows. And if we do a good job, we think it’s something that people will associate with Facebook, with interacting with people and not just watching content. But it’s also a very new and small part of all of the videos that we see on Facebook today.

Video games
The video theme was picked up by Chief Operating Officer Sheryl Sandberg, who said that video is key driver of the consumer shift to mobile: 

People are sharing and creating nearly three times more video on Facebook than they were a year ago. And as of February, the time people spend watching videos on Instagram increased by more than 40% over the preceding six months. This presents a big opportunity for marketers.
The best marketers understand that people watch video differently on mobile feed than on TV. They create ads that grab attention in the first few seconds, sometimes even without sound, what we now call thumb-stopping creative. For example, Nestlé took their TV ad for Natural Bliss coffee creamer and in less than a day edited it for mobile feed by creating a new opening and adding text overlays to relay their message without sound. They showed both the original TV ad and the mobile ad on Facebook. The original TV ad drove a four-point increase in ad recall. The mobile-optimized version, however, drove an even stronger 10-point increase in ad recall and a seven-point increase in product awareness.

She pointed to new video formats, such as Facebook’s Canvas Ads, which combine video with call-to-action buttons: 

While it’s still early, we’re pleased with the results and are seeing adoption across many verticals.
To motivate millennials to take on do-it-yourself projects, Lowe’s and BBDO targeted 25 to 34-year-old homeowners with Canvas ads that let them see bathroom designs, discover the products in each design, and tap to purchase. The ads were so engaging that people spent an average of 28 seconds interacting with them, and Lowe’s saw a 6.7 times return on AdSense.

But there’s a video learning curve to navigate, she cautioned, and marketers need to adjust to delivering shorter ads that can work even without sounds. She points to Toyota’s launch of the RAV4 Hybrid as a case in point:


They used a very broad video to drive brand awareness. They reached over 36 million people in a target demo within three days. Then, and this is where it gets even more interesting, they re-targeted people who watched the video with over 500 personalized video ads which were optimized for Facebook and Instagram. So they were creating a direct response campaign to get people to take specific actions like requesting a quote and finding a specific dealer. We saw a 14-point lift in ad recall, a seven-point lift in message association.

My take
Staggering numbers. Given that Zuckerberg holds a majority of voting Facebook shares, his proposed new structure will probably avoid the shareholder lawsuit that resulted from similar plans at Google. We noted yesterday that Twitter is looking to video to reboot its growth. Facebook’s well ahead of the game here. 
Read more on: Collaboration sharing and digital productivityDigital and content marketingProductivitySocial 