
One of the most entrenched throwbacks to a pre-digital age is the notion of paying bills with a paper check. I’m constantly astonished at how prevalent this outdated practice remains among US businesses. Yet there are many barriers to replacing it with a digital alternative.
Most accounting systems invariably offer check printing as the default payment method, with often poor support for automating electronic payment processes such as ACH. Online procurement and invoicing systems generally offer better support for electronic payments, but each one has their own proprietary portal. Why jump through all those hoops to set up electronic payment when it’s easier to run off another check and put it in the mail?
So I take my hat off to Viewpost, an innovative startup based in Maitland, Florida, which cleverly inserts itself into a company’s existing processes to provide electronic invoicing and payments without any changes to the installed accounting or procurement software. Even better, having linked buyers and suppliers, it makes it easy for suppliers to track the progress of their invoice towards payment, and gives buyers the option of paying early in return for dynamic discounts offered by suppliers in need of cashflow.
Where Viewpost is really smart is the way that it works within the existing system in order to ultimately replace it. It never forces anyone to stop producing paper checks, it merely offers the choice of a more convenient alternative. It takes a similar approach to invoices.
When a buyer starts using Viewpost, their suppliers still get their checks in the mail, but each one is accompanied by an invitation to enrol with Viewpost and deposit the check electronically. When suppliers send out invoices by email or mail using Viewpost, there’s an invitation for the buyer to sign up and settle electronically.
Less paperwork, faster turnaround
The proposition to both parties is less paperwork and a faster turnaround. Viewpost connects into both enterprise and SMB procurement and accounting systems, from Oracle and SAP to MS Dynamics GP, Sage and Quickbooks, to automate the flow of transactions. In addition, suppliers see a dramatic improvement in visibility into when they’re getting paid, plus faster settlement when buyers opt for electronic deposit of payments. For cash-rich buyers, there’s the opportunity to benefit from discounts for paying early.
All of this automation, including the integration to procurement and accounting systems, is free of charge. Viewpost makes a small margin on a 75c charge for checks that it mails, or 50c for electronic deposit, although that source of revenue will decline with the rise of alternative electronic payment systems such as ACH. Its main revenue stream comes from the cut it takes on dynamic discounting for early payment. The Viewpost network allows buyers to advertise their willingness to pay early, with a sliding scale of discount depending on how far in advance of the due date the payment is made. Vendors can then accept early payment in order to gain extra liquidity, and Viewpost takes its cut on the transaction.
Clearly this is a business model designed to be profitable at scale, and that’s Viewpost’s biggest challenge, a point we’ll come back to shortly.
Viewpost’s neatest trick is the way that it works with print file images to insert automation into paper-based check processes. The buyer doesn’t have to change the way their accounts payable systems operate at all. They just run the check as normal and Viewpost then takes the print file as its input. There’s no need to involve IT in setting up the integration because there’s nothing to set up so long as Viewpost can access the print file.
Even more importantly, the bank doesn’t have to change its systems either. Viewpost has partnerships with leading US banks such as Bank of America, Fifth Third, PNC and US Bank, which allow it to electronically deposit the print file image exactly as if it were a physical check, but faster. And for banks where it doesn’t have a partnership, it can simply print off the check and deposit it in the normal way.
My take
Unlike other systems that automate invoicing and payments, Viewpost is explicitly setting out to build a network that links the maximum number of B2B buyers and sellers. It’s another example of a classic value network strategy, in which a newcomer disrupts an ossified, regulated market by linking buyers to sellers in a new way. I particularly like the approach Viewpost has taken of infiltrating its network non-disruptively into the existing system and then using viral networking to expand its customer footprint.
The challenge for any network play of this nature is to reach sufficient scale quickly enough. Already, the company claims that over $18 billion in payables data and $1 billion in payments has been exchanged over Viewpost, but when you’re earning pennies on each transaction, that’s not enough to yield a significant return. Viewpost needs to get enterprises making use of its early payment scheme for its business model to take off.
But with layoffs reported last month (even though the company insists it is still recruiting), there have evidently been some bumps along the way. Viewpost is a sister company to an established factoring business and has raised a substantial $90 million from angel investors. But that still looks a paltry amount compared to the sums being raised by other value network plays in the SMB market — $500 million recently raised by Zenefits, for example.
I’d like to see Viewpost succeed, not least because I personally never want to have to deal with another US business that thinks putting a check in the mail is an acceptable way to pay a UK-based supplier. But the challenges it faces in reaching sufficient scale are a measure of just how hard it is to build successful digital network business. It takes a lot of cash and very strong nerves get there.
[Updated 09:15 PDT with corrected figures for total network spend to date and amount and source of funding raised].
Disclosure: Oracle and SAP are diginomica premier partners. Microsoft funded my travel to its Convergence conference in March this year, where I met with Viewpost.
Image credit: Red Pay Bills key on keyboard © tashka2000 – Fotolia.

Read more on: Spend management 