
For over 20 years now Virgin Atlantic has differentiated itself based on its customer experience. Whilst other airlines through the 1990s and the early 2000s thought that all that travellers cared about was the cost of a seat, Virgin continued to stick to it’s brand ethos and focused on making flying a pleasurable experience.
As a Virgin Atlantic frequent flyer and member of its loyalty programme, I’ve got an appreciation for the attention to detail the airline gives to the customer journey. Which is why I was keen to sit down with the company’s customer experience leads this week at Microsoft’s Future Decoded event in London, where Virgin Atlantic was launching a new immersive digital experience based on Windows 10 for its sales team.
I got to try out the ‘experience’ first hand, which involves placing some googles on, which have a smartphone slid into them with a preloaded application that takes you through a 360 degree virtual tour of the upper class passenger journey. The application creates a really realistic view of what it’s like to check in using Virgin Upper Class, use the lounge at the airport and throughout the flying experience itself.
The company is equipping its sales team with these apps, in the hope it will be able to differentiate itself from other airlines when selling to corporate clients that are picking which company they are going to send all their valuable flying business customers to.
Using a Microsoft wearable device on my wrist, a separate app also collected data on my ‘experience’ of the journey as I went through the 7 minute tour. This data is going to be used to then finesse the real-life experience of travelling with Virgin Atlantic.
Debbie Hulme, Head of Customer Experience at the airline, explained:
On the app here you can see that we were tracking you and the experience that you were having with us. It’s something that’s very exciting and interesting, to be able to get that real time data around the emotional reaction that you’re having to our journey. We do that already through traditional methods, track the emotional resonance that people have to our brand throughout our physical journey of Virgin. Trying to recreate that and having that data in real time is really interesting.
It will enrich the data that we already have and we can trial the relevance of that journey and see how you react, how our customers react to it. What we look to do is to smooth some of the emotional peaks for customers, particularly through the physical airport journey. There are times that that can be quite a stressful journey for people. We have traditionally looked at products to smooth those peaks, this gives us a richer insight to trial, test and look at ways to continue to smooth that.
This gives us richer insight to really understand how you feel and how you are reacting to something. Rather than the traditional methods of you telling me how you feel.
Iteration is key
 Hulme explained that the benefits of partnering with Microsoft for the app and the importance of being able to deploy something within a very short time-frame. She said:
We set ourselves the challenge, jointly with Microsoft, within a matter of 8 weeks from ‘here’s the challenge’ to getting out and deploying it out to the salesforce in that time. That’s really important to us. To get stuff out there, to trial it, test it, put it in front of customers, particularly when it’s new. That way we can really learn and develop product from that insight from our customers.
Reuben Arnold, SVP Marketing and Customer Experience, added that because the application can be deployed virtually on to the sales teams’ smartphones and tablets and the kit required to ‘experience’ the tour isn’t expensive, the total cost of the project hasn’t been particularly expensive. He said:
Because of the technology that we are using, that it’s built on this Windows 10 universal app, it doesn’t require lots of expensive heavy kit. We are not giving out special headsets to our teams. They already have these sorts of devices, they have tablets, Surface devices and smartphones. It can just be very quickly deployed, they don’t need to carry lots of stuff with them, it’s also a very familiar interface for them to use.
They can just focus on talking to the customers and using this experience without having to go through lots of training and so forth. It’s very cost effective to deploy.
The importance of data
Arnold went on to explain that Virgin Atlantic has always had a strong focus on the experience for customers of flying with the company. And that technology and digital have added to the ability to enhance this experience for customers. He added that data is absolutely essential in all of this. Arnold explained:
Technology just gives us another opportunity to really describe that experience in a more immersive way. I think digital, the portability, the mobility of digital tools means that is so much easier now. Traditionally our teams would have gone out with very two dimensional imagery and product information, which we don’t feel really adequately describes what it is like to fly with us.
Data is critical really. We have always done journey mapping, we have done a lot of customer research, looking at how customers feel. We have always tried to differentiate around how do our customers feel, rather than just what is the product. Data as we were saying just helps us get under the skin of some of that insight in a bit more depth.
Hulme agreed and added that having a loyalty programme and using the data from those highly valued members is particularly useful for the airline, as this group of highly engaged people can help Virgin Atlantic to continue to iterate and improve the experience regularly. She said:
I think our customers have always had high expectations, I think it’s part of the Virgin brand and ethos to meet that. Which is why I think getting out there and testing is important. You have to be brave enough to get things out there and try. Not everything will work, which is fine, as long as you learn from that and move on.
With loyalty members, we just understand just a little bit more about you and we use that rich insight to enhance. We often with our loyalty members will try stuff with them first. We have a digital community called ‘Plane Talk’, which are some of our very regular flyers.
They record their experiences, we get videos, we get lots of footage, then we will share that with us. We also test things with that community, so it’s a very collaborative way of starting to develop our products and services.
Read more on: CRM and customer experienceUse cases 