

Visa Checkout meets Google Android
We don’t use the word innovation around here anymore because it becomes part of the way people think about doing their business.

It’s a bold statement of intent from Visa’s outgoing CEO Charles Scharf, who took the markets by surprise earlier this month when announcing his resignation for personal reasons. 
It was a decision that comes at a time when Visa is in the throes of integrating its purchase of Visa Europe as well as expanding its digital footprint with some significant new investments and expansions. 
Despite a lengthening to-do list, Scharf says that the company is well-placed to create a digital future and has made the mind-shift necessary to accomplish it: 

Everything we do is about continuing to be strong in the physical world but recognizing that we needed to think very differently in the digital world. 

Nonetheless, there’s a lot going on. Back in June, Visa spent $20 billion to purchase Visa Europe. The two operations had been separate companies for the previous eight years. The benefits of the merger will be to increase contributions from the European market to the overall corporate pot, but this comes at a price. 
Not the least of the costs to bring this unification to a head is the estimated $80 million that will be spent next year to harmonize the technology platforms of the two firms. This integration won’t be complete until the 2020 time frame and could end up costing as much as $500 million before it’s done. 
According to Visa, its technology teams are currently aligning authorization clearance and settlement systems, upgrading network compute and storage infrastructure, implementing next generation information security systems and preparing to move to common end user and corporate platform.
Checking out
While all that goes on, it’s business as usual, with plans for expansion of the Visa  Checkout offering after the company decided to open up the platform to partners to allow them to integrate the payment service into their own digital wallets. Google has announced that its own Android Pay will start to offer Visa Checkout to their consumers for online purchases. Scharf explains: 

Issuers, digital wallets and payment app providers can access a streamline set of APIs to easily integrate Visa Checkout open platform and immediately begin to offer payments to their customers shopping online on their mobile devices. For example, an online shopper who uses a digital wallet from a participating Visa issuer or Android Pay would simply click the Visa Checkout button on a merchant’s checkout page and authenticate their identity through biometrics to complete a purchase.

Scharf says that Visa Checkout is one of the firm’s success stories, with over 15 million consumer accounts in 21 countries, and over 1,400 financial institution partners across the globe participating: 

More than 300,000 merchants, including some of the largest global retailers have signed on to accept Visa Checkout, representing $162 billion in addressable volume. In October, we rolled out a redesigned Visa Checkout experience to all global merchants. This new experience makes it easier for consumers to sign up and complete purchases on mobile devices.

Another push to expand its footprint comes wth Visa’s recent alliance with Oracle to deliver Visa Advertising Solutions.  The intention is that Visa Advertising Solutions will tap into digital advertising and cross-device connection data from the Oracle Data Cloud with aggregated purchase data from Visa Advertising Solutions.
Merchants will be able to measure consumer response to advertising campaigns run on mobile, display, video and social channels, and use the insights gained to optimize their efforts, as well as receiving recommendations to target customer segments for future ad campaigns and timely offers based on past purchase behavior. 
It’s all about providing new capabilities for merchant clients, says Scharf: 

Visa Ad Measurement and Visa Audiences are products that integrate with ad tech platforms like Oracle Data Cloud, allowing Visa’s merchants to easily access valuable insights when executing a digital ad campaign. Top quick service restaurants and retail merchants, such as Banana Republic, have used Visa Ad Measurement reports to understand sales impact and optimize their marketing campaigns. Visa Advertising Solutions are available to merchants through leading digital platforms such as Facebook, Google, Twitter, Pinterest, and over 200 other media networks.

Another new initiative is designed to help developing economies to get on board with mobile payments and this has resulted in a new service called mVisa, so far available in India, Kenya and Rwanda. Scharf says: 

mVisa allows a consumer to transfer money to a merchant in real time with nothing more than their mobile phone, and merchants are able to start accepting Visa transactions immediately without any additional hardware. We’ve seen early success in several different categories, including small micro-merchants, local transportation such as taxi, and bill payment.

Blockchain B2B
Finally there’s the inevitable blockchain angle, with Visa recently announcing work with Chain to build Visa B2B Connect using Chain Core, an enterprise blockchain infrastructure that facilitates financial transactions on scalable, private blockchain networks. The intention is to create a ‘near real-time’ transaction system designed for the exchange of high-value international payments between participating banks on behalf of their corporate clients. 
Scheduled for pilot in 2017, Visa’s pitch for BRB Connect is that it will offer a system that is: 

predictable and transparent — banks and their corporate clients receive near real-time notification and finality of payment.
secure — signed and cryptographically linked transactions are designed to ensure an immutable system of record.
trusted — all parties in the network are known participants on a permissioned private blockchain architecture that is operated by Visa.

The B2B angle on this is what’s of real interest, suggests Scharf, as this is where payments are inefficient: 

For what we do in our traditional consumer-to-business world, that’s not a problem that needs to get solved today in terms of what blockchain can do. But certainly in the commercial space, it’s a very, very inefficient market, and there are opportunities to use different technologies to bring some efficiency there. So the things that we’re doing, they are around doing things to improve something that exists and for the core business of what we do today between consumers and merchants…It’s leveraging the core assets that we have that work really well that have access to these 3 billion cards across the world.

My take
It’s interesting  – and pleasing  – to see how big a part technology and digital plays in Visa’s stated strategic direction. Earlier this month when American Express announced its latest set of quarterly numbers, digital was discussed briefly in the context of digital marketing and a new channel for customer acquisition, but there wasn’t the ‘bet the farm’ vibe that comes from Visa. Later this week MasterCard announces its latest numbers. I suspect what comes from that will lean more to the Visa than the Amex approach. 
Image credit - Visa Disclosure - At time of writing, Oracle is a premier partner of diginomica. Read more on: e-commerceFinancial services and fintechFintechIdentityMobile 