
Pay by Watch?
Back in March, I posed the question, ‘What happens to the plastic pushers in an age of Apple Pay?’. It was a theme that was returned to last week at the Cowen & Co. 43rd Annual Technology, Media and Telecom Conference where Bill Gaida, SVP Devices, Platforms and Mobile Operations at Visa took center stage.
His conclusion was essentially very simple:
Any time cash becomes digital, whether it’s an app payment or NFC for a more frictionless ecommerce payment where all the breakages are happening because it’s kind of seamless, that benefits us, because we take cash out of the system. So I would say broadly the digitization of payments helps Visa in their efforts.
That said, it’s not yet clear which of the various contenders in the digital payment space will succeed, he argued, although he played up the Apple customer experience:
People love it. They love the consumer experience. They love the fact that they initiate the payment, the fact that they’re given additional security because they are authenticating themselves with the thumbprint. They get that immediate receipt afterwards and you’re not taking your wallet out. They use their mobile phone for anything, everything anyways.
So from a consumer’s perspective, where it works, people love it and we have seen a shift where people actually have changed their shopping habits a little bit. If it works at Whole Foods and not other grocery store then they go to Whole Foods more often just because they can use Apple Pay.
What this does mean is more and more retailers are investing in and enabling the necessary NFC (Near Field Communication) technology so as to allow customers to use Apple Pay, a case in point being Home Depot. Gaida commented:
That’s broadly because of the consumer experience, that they don’t want to be left behind. I think that we’re going to continue to see more and more merchants accept Apple Pay and not just Apple Pay, [but] NFC generally because we’re going to see competitors to Apple Pay in the market very soon.
The other factor that will help Apple here is the forthcoming deadline for EMV chip-and-pin standards implementation in the US, predicted Gaida, adding that the chip-and-pin process in Europe takes too long:
It’s 9 to 13 seconds, it’s not swipe and go. Payments is already really easy in United States, right, which is why, one of the reasons why NFC was slow to take off because payments is easy in United States. You go to chip-and—pin models, boy, that will prong consumers to move to tap-and-go quicker than anything.
Rivals
But there are other contenders than Apple, such as Google.  Gaida said:
I think Google Pay is interesting because they announced more than a year ago host card emulation (HCE) model, where you are able to move a secure element into the cloud and not be dependent upon a device and access to device, which basically took the mobile operators out of it. A bank could do an NSE implementation with a bank-branded wallet using the secured element in the cloud, using a relatively open operating system.
So, we are going to see the first of those implementations this year. It won’t just be Google Pay. We are going to see a number of HCE bank lead implementations around the world because it’s based on that OS that’s available on hundreds of millions of devices now. So, I think that’s going to provide further growth or catalyst for growth for NFC, which again will encourage merchants who haven’t already to upgrade.
Another potential challenge to Apple Pay comes from the MCX (Merchant Customer Exchange) consortium, led by retail giant Walmart, which has cut out both Apple Pay and the established credit card companies in favor of its own mobile digital payments solution.
Gaida contends that MCX faces its own challenges, citing the closure of the Softcard mobile payments joint-venture between Verizon Wireless, AT&T, and T-Mobile. That fell apart with only three partners, he pointed out. Compare that to MCX, he said:
We’ve now got dozens of merchants that compete with each other in almost every respect, except for MCX. The co-ordination costs and the co-ordination issues are extremely large, which is one of the reasons why I think it’s been what almost three years now and we haven’t seen something in the market because I think the co-ordination costs are high.
He added:
I haven’t heard what the consumer proposition is, why consumers are going to want to adopt an MCX wallet. I haven’t seen a compelling kind of customer proposition right, and ultimately these wallets, all of them are going to succeed and fail based on that.
The final nail in the MCX coffin is its ambition to build a network, for payments or loyalty or analytics:
This thing has got to be built to maintain and invested in. And it’s not free. And so they all can complain about often the cost of the networks. Well, if they are building a network of their own in any respect, they are going to find out very quickly, these aren’t free, right. All of those issues indicate challenges for MCX.
Data exploitation
But the idea of using data analytics technology and skills is something that Gaida feels Visa can turn to its advantage:
We use data today in real-time to provide fraud scores to banks and we apply literally dozens of vectors in milliseconds to a transaction in terms of have you been there before, is it in a zipcode that we’re familiar with, what’s your average spend at that store, increasingly is your mobile phone near that card. We’re adding vectors all the time to provide a fraud score to banks.
If you extend that offline data set into more marketing, loyalty, other things, you can see how it extends. At an aggregated and normalized way, we’re already assisting merchants with things like store locations. But we can analyze, say, five locations that we’re given and tell you over the last five to seven years and in real-time, traffic patterns, spending patterns, time of day, people flow. We don’t know the people ,but we can track cards in real-time as they move through commerce experiences.
New value at the GAP
This has already been put into use at some outlets, such as the GAP:
Someone swipes their card at Starbucks [and] I know in real-time where the Gap stores are. I know by looking at five to seven years whether you shop at the Gap every week or haven’t been there in six months. And on behalf of the Gap, I can deliver, before you get your coffee, an offer that’s relevant to you. And the offer may just be remind you the Gaps across the street if you shop there every week because I don’t need to incent you.
But in real-time I can say, ‘Jeez, if you haven’t been in the Gap in six months and Gap wants you back in the store, here is 40% off for the next two hours’. And then get back to the Gap and say, offer delivered at 10:13, they pay to the Gap at 10:46, their average basket was $45, this time it was $86, this is basically what that coupon did and close the loop. We have the capability to do that in real-time.
Marketing loyalty, analytics is where the whole thing is going to be played out. This is where arguably a lot of value can be created, it’s early days.
But with this power comes responsibility, he concluded. There are privacy and consumer protection implications that need to be factored in. As Gaida pointed out:
It’s your money and so we can’t get it wrong.

Read more on: Analytics planning and data analysisDigital and content marketinge-commerceFrictionless enterpriseRetail e-commerce and the omni-channel 