
Pat Gelsinger
Sometimes a single word can encapsulate what a whole company is trying to put across and not quite making it stick. The word in question is ‘polyglot’ and it came from VMware’s EMEA Director for Cloud Management Sales, Jonathan Alexander.
It emerged during a conversation with him at the European VMworld conference in Barcelona, an event that came so adjacently to the company’s Las Vegas jamboree that there seemed to be little new to report…….except for the small question of a rather significant change in direction for company that it continued to have difficulty nailing in terms of simple, positional messaging.
This is, of course, an increasingly common problem where a company such as VMware is shifting its position, and most of its newer developments, from the traditional large enterprise on-premises environment into the cloud. Such companies are often beholden to try and keep both messages live. And often a well-entrenched traditional position can prejudice the new story.
The Cloud Management operation now represents a significant minority share of VMware’s business, but it is still a minority. So CEO Pat Gelsinger was keen to re-state the Las Vegas theme that IT is leaving the nest, with the growth and penetration now being achieved by cloud-delivered services:
The technology is breaking out of ‘tech’ and moving into the world of business, and VMware aims to be leading that change. I don’t want VMware to be the 501st company offering some kind of AI solution. I want it to be the company that enables the other 500.
Not a walled garden
This is, obviously, starting to become something of a crowded marketplace, with even the most established of vendors, such as Oracle and its own Cloud offering, pitching to establish themselves as competition. Alexander, however, sees Oracle Cloud as a ‘walled garden’ rather than a potential general competitor in the enterprise space:
It does appreciate that it will lose its traditional enterprise market because it will collectively now transition to the cloud, but that is why we’re investing in new services and offerings which will exist in that future where every customer has closed their data centers.
That is also why just about every new VMware offering outside of vSphere is completely agnostic about where they are hosted. So now we have customers hosting services on AWS, Google, and IBM and we aim to provide customers with value wherever they are running services.
There is a word we are using internally, and that is `polyglot’. And we are trying to come out with solutions that have a polyglot approach.
This is a good way to describe the position the company is pitching at – just a part of a broad cloud service ‘infrastructure’, but a universal interface and bridge that provides management and service tools both up the stack and down it, and across multiple different stacks.
Looked at simplistically, it sits on top of the base cloud provision and management environment – be that AWS, Google, IBM, the new addition of OpenStack (formally introduced in Barcelona) and, to a lesser extent, some parts of Microsoft Azure – and provides a wide range of services and capabilities on top of the core services the base systems provide.
By the same token it will communicate, help manage and provide services to the cloud service providers that then sit on top. These will be the wide mix of service providers offering both horizontal core business management services and/or vertical, specialised niche skills and capabilities. Some will operate as ISVs delivering SaaS capabilities to customers, while some will act as Managed Service Providers (probably acting as the `managing partner’ for a customer, overseeing a collection of service providers).
These will provide the essential re-intermediation of widely diverse and specialised capabilities now made available as cloud services, rather than internal departments within a business. Some, such as CenturyLink, Fujitsu and Rackspace, will be available to customers in transition to the cloud as Certified Consultants that have existing relationships with many of the major cloud service providers. The more traditional consultancy operators, such as Accenture, are also existing VMware partners.
The company will also have the tools and capabilities to manage the communications, such as workload movements, between different cloud stacks as and when the user requires it, said Alexander:
We want to speak the language of all the clouds whether they are on premise, private or public services. This is the agnostic, unifying environment across all of them. And that is our background. VMware grew up with all the server manufacturers happy to work with us. Some vendors chose to take a more proprietary approach, but the majority of vendors and the customers remember that there is a history of VMware always being fair and open.
This polyglottal capability could be an important line for VMware to take with customers, for the multi-cloud openness of providing co-operative services that collaborate to achieve a common end is one that will undoubtedly seem alien to many large enterprise users.
Building well-behaved bridges
Perhaps the most important new announcement made at the conference was the way that the AppDefense tools can be used to capture than the impose best practice in security management. Given that many of security lapses have their root cause in human error and fallability, this sets out to trap as much of that as possible and impose best practice on users.
The company’s security position does step away significantly from the traditional model of simply buying more tech tools to plug perceived gaps in a security infrastructure. The objective, according to Gelsinger, is to provide a consistent security infrastructure, based on the company forming partnerships with a selection of security tools it considers important and relevant, together with really good cyber hygiene practices. This, he stressed, is likely to be one of the most important steps businesses can take in the run up to the arrival of GDPR across Europe.
The new vCloud NFV-OpenStack platform, which is initially being pitched at the Telecoms service provider market, includes VMware Integrated OpenStack-Carrier Edition, VMware’s new OpenStack Ocata-based distribution that is fully integrated, tested, and certified with VMware’s NFV infrastructure platform. Using this as an NFV Virtualized Infrastructure Manager (VIM), network architects can deploy, upgrade, and operate an OpenStack cloud on top of VMware’s carrier-grade NFVI platform.
Gelsinger told the conference the company’s objective is the build a consistent infrastructure, which he believes is what customers need. This was demonstrated to some extent by a short `panel’ session where representatives of Swisscom and Liberty Global both talked about how they had to move away from applications siloes and on to a single environment that is common across all aspects of the business. In addition, Heinz Herren, the CIO and CTO of Swisscom, pointed to a growing need for master partners, especially as the use of cloud services and multiple cloud service providers grows. What is more, he indicated he saw VMware starting to operate in that role.
The company’s COO Sanjay Poonen, told the conference how its re-positioning in the cloud could play a part in spreading its appeal more widely, particularly as it is seen as an integral part of the Dell-EMC family:
We want to be optimised for it, but not tethered to it. We will take advantage of the Dell ecosphere, but we won’t be tethered to it. We are happy to work with any mix of compute and storage.
And this has to be an inevitable position for the company to adopt now. With all-but universal commonality in datacentre systems – whether that is in cloud service providers or on-premises enterprise datacentres – the name on the hardware box or the applications shrinkwrap is a factor that no longer matters to any great degree. Managing what happens between them is now the important game.
My take
VMware is aiming at the obvious target for a traditional systems management tools business, for that is where all its customers are – or soon will be – heading as the need for digitalisation forces enterprises to transition.
The company is not unusual in coming from being heavily committed to the efficacy of its technologies and having to shift fast to stay ‘half a page ahead in the manual’ when it comes working with customers who may have a clearer vision of what cloud services can mean for them. At same time, of course, it also has to be no more than half a page ahead when dealing with other customers.
But the ‘polyglot’ motif is a good way to get across the key requirement of successful digitalisation: that every application and service used must have the potential to communicate and collaborate with every other application and service, as and when required.
Image credit - VMwareRead more on: Cloud platforms - infrastructure and architectureInfrastructure 