


Last week, I wrote about Professor Nathan Furr’s views on tackling digital disruption head-on, by identifying and implementing hybrid business and technology solutions that can bridge the gap between mature products and solutions that are running out of steam, and the new disruptor technologies that are coming over the horizon.
At the back end of last week, just such an example of hybridization appeared with the announcement of a partnership between VMware and Amazon’s AWS Division that could provide a way through to the cloud for many established enterprise businesses.
This week VMware CEO Pat Gelsinger was on hand at the company’s VMworld conference in Barcelona to tell some 10,000 delegates all about it.
OK, not all, there are still lots of detail yet to emerge, and still a fair bit to speculate about. But it is fair to say that the partnership does open up a bridge for VMware users, which represents a goodly slice of the global enterprise community, to move to the cloud in ways ranging from the occasional dabble at a bit of cloud bursting, through to building extensive hybrid cloud environments.
This is also a pretty good pitch at building a hybrid business model. VMware is not cutting and running for the fresh white folds of the cloud, and neither is it pitching camp and burying its head alongside many of its customers who, it can be expected, are in no rush to head for those white folds themselves, no matter what anyone says about digital transformation and disruption.
The company has already formed partnerships with Microsoft for users to get on to Azure and IBM for SoftLayer, but with AWS it has teamed up with the biggest of the elephants in the cloud services room. And there was evidence that the implications of this were sinking through to the delegates by the end of Gelsinger’s presentation.
His final rallying cry – along the lines of ‘What do you think of that then?’ – was met with a rather muted ripple of applause. It was as though most of the 10,000 had suddenly realised what had happened to them. Their excuse for not heading for the cloud – ‘It’s not really possible for an enterprise with a large and complex on-premise infrastructure to do it yet ‘ – had just been neatly removed.
A last throw of the dice?
To be fair, however, with the announcement of the VMware Cross Cloud Architecture, it does give well-established on-premise IT users a route through into cloud services and getting to grips with at least the foothills of digital transformation, without being overly prescriptive. The goal, as Gelsinger told the conference delegates:

Digital transformation is not a choice between a new world or and old world, it is both. The real question is what is your strategy to win. Cloud-powered IT is leaving the IT nest as all company departments become IT departments. This is the age old conflict of freedom vs control. Users want freedom to choose the services they need and IT needs to maintain some level of control. The aim now is to allow users  to work with any cloud across any device.

It would be easy to see this move as a last throw of the dice’ by VMware to get itself into the cloud services business, but in practice that is probably unfair. For a start the company has cloud services offerings and if its user base was deadly keen on a headlong rush in that direction they would have taken that route already.
Instead, there is an inevitable conservatism in play which, as some numbers Gelsinger threw out during his keynote show, suggest that digital transformation is going to be a long, drawn out affair for many enterprise users. This, in turn, creates a good breeding ground for that type of hybrid business model Prof Furr was referring to.
No matter what the cloud proponents may say, VMware’s best estimates of the uptake of cloud services show it to be slow and steady. For example, he quoted an IDC report which suggested 80% of customers are not seen as `leading’ in digital transformation. By 2006 just 2% of IT capability was delivered by cloud services, yet by 2021 the estimate is that this number will have risen to only 50%, and that will be of both hybrid and private clouds (which can include some on-premise services that arguably only bear a passing resemblance to cloud services). Even by 2030, only some 50% will be hosted on public cloud services.
Against such a background the increasingly common perception that VMware is just another of those mature IT vendors now looking at a steady decline as its users move on to new pastures may need a rethink. Neither is it now trying to convince its user base that it has a cloud offering of its own that can take into and through the digital transformation piece all by itself, an option adopted by several other major IT players, usually with little success.
Baring the metal
Rather it is setting out to create the common ground on which the specialist cloud service providers can come to the enterprise users, but come with services that they can exploit directly, running applications they know in environments that they understand.
That comes from the work done by VMware and AWS engineers to create a platform that can run VMware environments on the AWS architecture. Some of the story goes a bit awry at this point, because the talk was of specific bare metal systems being required, which suggests that any user looking to make the move to AWS has first to invest in buying dedicated servers, which would be a burden in terms of both cost and provisioning delays.
In practice, however, the process exploits the Software Defined Datacenter (SDDC) approach of loading the software environment required by any and every job, along with the application and relevant data.  As has been observed, AWS is provisioning bare metal servers all the time.
The result from the users’ perspective is that they can, from next year, take a workload running on-premise on VMware, with all the operations and management tooling that is used with it, and move it to a cloud environment. And this is not just for workloads where the decision is to run a group of, say, non-business critical applications out in the cloud  permanently, though that is a perfectly valid option. But it can also be for dynamic reallocation of an application to a far bigger resource pool to accommodate a spike in demand – the classic cloud-bursting model.
Tools to manage a wide range of such options in using cloud resources were demonstrated at the conference. They also include the very sensible facility of telling users what they have spent so far on the service.    
With  AWS now joining Microsoft and IBM as service providers to the VMware community, the opportunity arises that enterprise users will be able to pick and choose what applications go on which service (where ‘service’ includes applications continuing to run on premise), though there is at least one caveat which should be added when considering this option – VMware has no tools yet available to analyse workloads against service resources available from the service providers, and against cost. This does mean that one other fear users will have about moving into the cloud still hovers around.
Without having knowledge a wide range of factors about any individual workload, including the compute, storage and network requirements, the times when it needs to be run, its dependencies with other applications and its sensitivity to latency issues, it can prove to be expensive to run it in the cloud. It seems inevitable that many VMware customers attracted by the potential of exploiting the cloud may fall into this trap and will not have the experience, or internal skills, to manage this process effectively.
But while VMware does not have such tools available one of its partners, analysis tools vendor Cirba does. It has recently introduced a service called densify.com, which is based on its analysis toolset. This can gather relevant data about workloads and service provider resources and provide users with advice on which workloads are best run on what service provider, what level of resources to sign up for and what the running costs will be.
This, according to Cirba co-founder and CTO Andrew Hillier, using this approach can result in significant savings as not only can the most appropriate service provider be identified, including remaining on-premise, but also it can manage bundling workloads together so that they run effectively on much larger – and therefore cost-effective – resource blocks than an inexperienced user might select on their own.
Who fancies a price war?
This does seem to also open up the possibility for VMware users to start generating something of a price war between the service providers as they compete to attract enterprise users. Gelsinger accepted the possibility existed, but was sceptical it would happen any time soon, especially given the cloud penetration rates quoted above:

Pricing is already driven by a number of factors, including the fact that it can be delivered by a number of different service providers. But for now the market is not being driven by price, it is being driven by ease of use. It will be a competitive market but we still have a long way to go before reaching market saturation, which is when, yes, a price war might happen. But we do see this accelerating cloud adoption…..period.

There is one potential negative factor worth considering. While the partnership with AWS gives VMware a significant increase in its overall reach in terms of infrastructure, especially deliverable as a service, it still ends up lacking that next level of abstraction of a platform targeting the delivery of business outcomes. This is likely to be where most of the money is made in cloud in the long term. Just offering Infrastructure as a Service is a market where revenues will always trend towards zero.
This is no doubt why AWS see the VMware partnership with equal enthusiasm, as was made clear during the keynote by Mike Clayville, EMEA VP for Amazon Web Services. Most enterprise workloads making it into the cloud are still either pilot projects or non-business critical applications where the risks are low. The partnership puts it in a place where it can start hosting business critical enterprise workloads, if only on the basis that they can be drawn back into the on-premise environment if needed.
But in practice VMware now does have the potential of a business outcomes-focused platform available to it. The legacy applications vendors that are already the key workloads in the enterprise market will be the applications making the journey to the cloud. The company is giving those vendors, and their customers, a route through to the cloud without the pretence of trying build and offer cloud services of their own or cloud versions of the own applications.
Yes, they will still have to develop those new versions over time, but as the hybrid business model outlined by Prof Furr suggests, partnering with VMware will defer that issue while the user community gets up to speed with using the cloud, and decides what directions digital transformation demands that they take.
My take
This may, of course still turn out to be the definable point where VMware slipped from major player status to dwindling legacy business. But much of what it on offer here links together with other developments and trends to suggest that VMware Cross Cloud may prove to be a win-win-win – just the bridge that the users, the legacy applications vendors and the cloud service providers have been looking for.
Image credit - TwitterRead more on: Cloud platforms - infrastructure and architecture 