
Pat Gelsinger – CEO VMWare
After a so-so day one at VMWorld 2015, the crowd was expecting great things from VMWare CEO Pat Gelsinger’s keynote. They kinda got it but most of it was about the future of computing, a vision if you will rather than an additional flogging of VMWare products. As such, you can certainly argue that it represented a good exercise in demonstrating leadership. How that works out for VMWare’s product strategy for the future is another matter. How that works out in the event of an EMC reverse takeover is equally debatable.
Gelsinger spent the first 20 minutes or so of his keynote talking to well worn themes, ubiquitous connectivity but still lots to do, heterogeneous enterprise landscapes that VMWare would like to simplify, nodding in the direction of the new style of DevOps for new classes of application while keeping the tried and tested backbone systems running safely and of course, let’s not forget security.
The PR version goes like this:
Pat concluded the show with a visionary talk on Five Imperatives for Digital Business. He framed these imperatives as strategic ‘must-do’s’ for business and IT leaders looking to stay ahead in a time of unpredictable and relentless change.
Imperatives included:

Asymmetry in Business
Now Entering: The Professional Era of Cloud
The Security Challenge: Protecting People, Apps, and Data
The Next Wave of IT Innovation: Proactive Technology
Tech-driven Change Reshapes the S&P 500


The problem as I see it is that VMWare is not addressing the real problems of tomorrow from an enterprise standpoint in a way where you can say that IT, DevOps and the business will all be happy.
While its hybrid solutions and specifically the notion of a unified infrastructure sound good on paper, they represent incremental steps rather than step change improvements that will hit the 10x improvement requirement. I’m not even sure that the proposed view of VMWare as the ‘bridge’ between cloud and on premises is correct.

It was curious for example that he used the ‘future of the car’ (illustration above) as illustrative of radical change yet did not point to any technology offering or price book topic that you could say represents how VMWare helps customers make the same kinds of change.
Overall it was a curious keynote. On the one hand we had a leader doing leader stuff in a polished manner. But on the other hand we had a keynote that in subsequent sessions Gelsinger was keen to frame as his personal industry view rather than as statements of VMWare intent. That’s confusing from a buyer standpoint.
There is another dimension. As part of the EMC Federation, VMWare’s future is inextricably tied to whatever decisions are made by its parent. It may be separately quoted on the exchanges but that’s pretty much meaningless when EMC owns 80%. In recent times, activist shareholders have held a gun at EMC management’s head, arguing that hiving VMWare off provides better shareholder value than hanging on to it. The alternative is currently spun as a ‘downstream merger‘ but which I prefer to call a reverse takeover where VMWare acquires its parent. If that’s the case then Gelsinger must be in line for the top slot.
If so, then yesterday’s keynote was an excellent public presentation of his vision and a masterful wrangling of the schedule to ensure that his vision is what customers and investors walk away thinking about.
Read more on: Cloud platforms - infrastructure and architecture 