
Tech-heavy
First things first. Despite the fact that VMworld Europe in Barcelona is a largely tech-oriented exposition of the capabilities of both VMware and its many partner companies, the one thing the assembled hordes of the European media and analyst wanted to hear was further news about the Dell acquisition of EMC and what it means for VMware.
Chief Operating Officer Carl Eschenbach used his keynote at the event to tackle this one head-on, though to be fair he said very little more than might have been expected:
VMware will continue to be a publicly traded company, so nothing will change. It will maintain its independence and we see Dell continuing to use and leverage VMware into the future. These are exciting times, and there is lots to be worked out still.
His one comment that added a bit of detail was that if Dell had wanted to buy VMware it would have had to pay more than the $67 billion it is set to pay for EMC.
Michael Dell made a brief appearance at the event in the form of a video. He too said little more in his two or three minutes than one might expect under the circumstances. He talked about being excited to unite Dell and EMC, and about the opportunities it would create in areas such as Software-Defined Data Centers (SDDC):
VMware leads the way for cloud in the future, and we look forward to working with them in the future.
Both statements left, of course, many more questions and imagined answers than either party was willing to address, at least formally.
Back to business
More pertinent, given the nature of the event, is where the latest batch of announcements from the company will leave it in the not too distant future. The keynote sessions included a European debut of the announcements already made at the recent VMworld conference in San Francisco. These included the latest version of EVO providing SDDC capabilities, the Unified Hybrid Cloud, and the vSphere Integrated Containers Technology.
To these can now be added the latest (v7) versions of vRealize Automation and Business, plus new versions of vCloud Air and vCloud NFV.
These join the company’s growing throng of new tools that are designed to help it meet the demands coming in from new developments such as containerisation of applications, and the move to hyper-converged data centers and the use of the Dev-Ops approach to applications delivery.
Tackling these new challenges is, of course, an essential step that the company must take if it is to stay in touch with developments, but it also creates the possibility of ever-growing problems for both the company and its customers.
With a long track record behind it, the company obviously has a huge number of users running various degrees of legacy. That creates the inevitable problem of not being able to empty the bath and build a shower instead; the bath is still occupied.
So new technologies are layered onto old and the whole of it gets bigger, more complex and, in the real world, inevitably more likely to hit some kind of problem.
For, example, VMware’s answer to the issue of working with that coming technology, applications containers, comes in two forms, one for existing applications and one for new, cloud native environments. Both, however, are based on a new piece of technology, Photon OS.
This is a light weight (25Mbyte) Virtual Machine (VM) that runs on top of vSphere. It is designed to run just one container, which would seem to compare poorly with other approaches, which can run three or four containers in the same VM. The company claims its approach is more efficient however, not only because of the small code footprint of Photon OS, but also because it sees a security risk in running multiple containers in the same VM.
Should one container become compromised it could affect the others, particularly if they lack the ability to defend their contents.
The other side of this is that most user businesses will, increasingly, be looking to run services, regardless of the number of containerised applications might be needed to deliver them. It would often make sense to have the containers in the same VM so that the applications making up such a service can collaborate to best effect. In addition, the issue of any increase in management overhead incurred by running one container per VM was skirted round.
The strong technology bias continued with the introduction of additions to the company’s Unified Hybrid Cloud. These are vRealize Automation 7 and vRealize Business 7 Standard. The former provides enhanced blueprint capabilities, making it simpler to automate multi-tier application delivery in hybrid cloud environments, while the latter delivers hybrid cloud costing and consumption data across VMware and third-party clouds in a single dashboard.
A third addition is Cross-Cloud vMotion, described as a highly optimised environment that can deploy applications to a wide range of public and third party cloud services, such as Amazon AWS, OpenStack and vCloud Air.
This is, perhaps, one of the more important developments to come from this latest batch of announcements. The ability to move applications, even while they are running, from one service to another, is likely to provide users with a far greater level of operational agility and flexibility in how they work and where they work.
My take
With VMware’s inevitable part in the Dell/EMC story, it is possible to see it feeling safe talking heavy technology to a hall full of fans. But with a growing number of competitors, with new and interesting alternative solutions, it is perhaps time for it to start talking about business benefits.
There was a degree of irony to be had in the post keynote Q&A session, when Eschenbach acknowledged that in a fast changing sector already heavy with technology developments, one of the key stumbling blocks for businesses was the inability for people to recognise the changes needed in themselves and the business processes they use.
A little less technology overload and a bit more ‘why businesses should think about this’ would not go amiss when (or, given current events, maybe, just possibly, if) VMworld 2016 takes place.
Read more on: Cloud platforms - infrastructure and architectureDigital and content marketingInfrastructure 