
I imagine that Phil Wainewright will be spitting feathers to hear about VMWare’s push towards hybrid cloud deployments, even though the company nods in the direction of public clouds. In 2013 he said:
By making it easier for its customers to move their existing computing to a public cloud platform, VMware is giving them new excuses to avoid truly grappling with how much they need to rearchitect their computing to take full advantage of the cloud. That in turn ties VMware to the laggards rather than keeping pace with the leading edge of innovation in cloud platforms.
For now, though, the larger market opportunity is among the laggards. VMware must pace its own evolution to that of its mainstream enterprise customers, leaving it forced to choose a middle path between the leading-edge innovation of the public cloud platforms and the more muted, reversible tactics of those customers.
On the other hand, Stuart Lauchlan has been more sanguine, noting in early 2014 that the importance of VMWare’s presence in the UK was of sufficient import to bring CEO Pat Gelsinger over to the country for the launch of the company’s hybrid cloud service in Europe:
The essential pitch to the CIO is sound and thought-through and, from the feedback from early beta program participants, compelling.
I have a few wobbles still about the ‘public cloud bad’ messaging – that could do with perhaps one more iteration to road test it and a ‘handle with care’ assumption on delivery to avoid accusations of FUD spreading.
In between, I noted this time last year that VMWorld was notable for being excitingly dull. Fast forward to today and little has changed. If anything, day one of VMWorld was duller than 2014 and mostly content free in the sense of no eye popping announcements. Instead, exec after exec trotted out the hybrid line as if reading comparative texts from the four Gospels. On Twitter, John Furrier, founder of Silicon Angle said  on CrowdChat:
It was definitely a kool-aid injection. I see lots of work to truely unify the infrastructure
He was being kind. I felt we were drenched in kool-aid.
VMWare has a problem. For all the talk about hybrid clouds, and all the good intentions around making public and private cloud IT infrastructures something of a seamless affair, there is currently no compelling reason that I can see for customers to wholesale shift workloads in the manner VMWare is suggesting.
The theory sounds good enough – get all the agility you need Mr CTO while ensuring that you can readily plug legacy applications together with the new public cloud applications, or if you don’t want to, then they can sit on a performant private cloud instead. Why is that problematic?
As VMWare acknowledges, legacy applications that sit in ‘old’ data centers are complex yet stable and compliant. Moving them off to a public cloud represents a risk for certain classes of core business application. Even if you can do that, why would any enterprise contemplate such a move unless the cost business case is so compelling as to be a no brainer? That is not simply a technology question but one of business practicality. Companies sign up multi-year data center agreements. Unraveling those without significant penalty is not straightforward.
From what I could see, the only thing that likely makes sense to a CTO is implementation of the recently acquired Virtustream. We recently how Virtustream adds solid value, especially to SAP shops. Has anything fundamentally changed? Not as far as I can tell. Add in the fact that again, according to Furrier, the vast majority of major VMWorld  sponsors are talking storage rather than complementing the whole hybrid enchilada and perhaps VMWare’s messaging is off kilter with the enterprise agenda.
To that point, I was fascinated to hear Mark Lewis, CEO Formation Data Systems talking about his belief that while Google and Amazon in particular have done a great job for small scale storage, the large enterprise has been stuck in expensive network storage for many years. Lewis believes that the large scale providers (read EMC/IBM) have done little to help enterprise customers take advantage of modern cloud infrastructures and especially in storage. Lewis wants to change that.
On the flip side, VMWare devoted a LOT of space to developers with a well organized and laid out hang space offering plenty of training opportunities for developers working with the cool ‘stuff’ like Docker containers inside enterprise environments. How well that is received is an open question but I give VMWare kudos for making a serious and genuine effort.
Tomorrow sees the company talk about mobile and here, rumors continue to circulate that AirWatch is not doing as well as the company would like. Sources inside the company tell me that AirWatch has doubled revenue since acquisition and is now posting close to $1 billion a year in revenue. That’s not to be sneezed at.
Disclosure: SAP is a premier partner at time of writing. VMWare covered most of my travel expenses for attending VMWorld.
Read more on: Cloud platforms - infrastructure and architecture 