
Telecoms operator Vodafone is finding that a number of factors are changing the way that it has to operate its business, particularly as it relates to customer service.
Vodafone’s B2B business consists of 1,700 of the world’s largest companies, it has a presence in 72 countries, it has mobile networks in 26 countries and it is managing approximately half a billion SIMs globally.
However, the nature of connectivity is changing, and so is the expectations that customers place on their service provider for insights into their network – creating a perfect storm that forced Vodafone to reconsider its underlying systems that support customer service.
It is now using cloud-vendor ServiceNow to aggregate data across a number of silos, to provide a single view for both customer service agents, as well as the customers themselves, resulting an improved experience and efficiency savings.
Andy Luckham, head of design and transition at Vodafone, was speaking at ServiceNow’s annual user conference in Orlando this week, where explained the complexities behind the telecom operator’s business and how this was impacting performance. He said:
We have grown very much by acquisition, which is part of the challenge we have had with customer service historically. As we’ve acquired technology companies, everyone had their own way of doing things and their own systems. It’s a challenge in terms of how you drive that consistent experience to your customers.
Luckham added that the telecoms landscape has also become more dynamic with the advancements in 4G/5G networks and the introduction of software defined networking – both of which put strain on Vodafone to be more responsive and reactive in the way that responds to customers. He said:
I think for the last 20 or 30 years it’s been reasonably static. We had fixed connections, we had routers, or you’ve had mobile. I think what we are seeing now is very much that the move to 5G will mean that our customers won’t need that fixed network. The mobile network speeds will be fast enough for them to run their businesses on a mobile network.
Another big driver for us, is this concept of software defined networks, which is really game changing for most telecoms operators. Today if a customer orders a circuit, we have a very slow process – it takes somewhere between a month to two months – where we ship them a router, we connect it up to another router, and hey presto, you have connectivity.
In a software defined network world, we will ship them an image, they will download it in about 5 minutes, they will fire up the image on a server or on a device on their premises, and they can use anybody’s connectivity to connect to a WAN or a network that we will manage. For us it takes us from having a very nice process which takes 60 to 90 days, which gives us lots of time for what operations need to be ready for the customer, to an environment where we can switch on services in 30 minutes. So it’s a huge change for us and it’s going to cause us some real big challenges.
Luckham said that customers are now demanding service agility. Customers want to be able to phone up and say “I need something this weekend”, he said, and this sort of speed is something that the telecoms industry has historically struggled with.
Customers also want great transparency, Luckham explained. When networks have gone down in the past, customers were typically given the bare minimum to keep them happy, rather than actually given information about the problem they were facing. Luckham said:
A lot of customers are pushing us to be a lot more transparent. This is becoming a lot more complicated for us, because normally we are part of an ecosystem, so as a service provider we might be in with another infrastructure provider, another cloud provider. It’s becoming an environment where we need to not only share with our customer, but with other providers as well.
Also, they want to have a tailored interaction with us, where they get the information they need, when they need, in the format that they need it. Again, they’re forcing us to change and deliver information in a different way.
From old to new
Luckham explained that Vodafone’s B2B customers typically buy more than one product from the company at a time, which is good news for the telecom operator’s bottom line, but bad new for the grater complexity it introduces.
As Vodafone has grown by acquisition, what it was finding is that every product is very much sold as an individual product – whilst customers expect and end-to-end solution. However, any individual product could be tied to a particular service desk, to a particular team, maybe even a particular geography.
Luckham said:
Even down to the actual underlying technology, this was the real challenge for us, because we had eleven ticketing platforms, we have got multiple monitoring platforms, multiple CMDBs. And when you’re providing connectivity into a UC platform, then over the mobile network – you find people saying ‘oh that’s not that team, you need to raise a ticket with another team, and we will get back to you’. A customer expects us to know immediately where the issue is and run that as a service end-to-end.
Luckham was joined on stage by his colleague Paul Myers, a user experience evangelist at Vodafone, who added that the operator needed to “provide a unified way” to provide support to both customers and agents, across a large landscape of systems. However, Vodafone started by focusing on the end customer by creating an enterprise service BUS across its systems – but still found this to be ineffective. Myers said:
We were going to mediate all of that with an enterprise service BUS, so being able to mediate across all of those different systems underneath. Of course you start to get into all the challenges around, what is the data model across each of those different systems where you’ve taken a best in class solution?
You’ve now got to join those things together and really start a seamless experience from a presentation perspective. The big challenge for all of that though, is that you’ve ended up with a number of different systems, you still end up with a big amount of fragmentation within your environment.
Even in best in breed – we have a single system for inventory, a single system for configuration and performance management, ITSM in a box on its own – yes the technology might be very good, but can you still deliver that single unified experience for a customer? What we increasingly found that it’s pretty much impossible to that.
He added that even if customers did get a better end-to-end service, this still meant that agents had to manage a number of disparate systems, which inevitably means manually copying and pasting data, local work instructions, and manual processes.
Treat everyone the same
This led to Vodafone coming up with a strategy to treat everyone as a single customer – both agent and external customer – which led them to ServiceNow, which would be used as an aggregation layer to provide a single view.
Myers explained:
With ServiceNow what we’ve effectively done is create an overlay and underlay architecture. That architecture allowed us to use the best in breed tools as part of the underlay. So where we have a local market that is consuming local products that are only solving that one particular geography, we can now plum those all into ServiceNow, via our enterprise service BUS, and we can start to get that single view of the customer.
So our agents are working in one single system of record, they’re able to leverage slave data from an inventory perspective, all of the configuration and performance management information is there at their fingertips, and they’re essentially able to navigate across that very complex landscape that we have within that technology underlay.
What that’s enabled us to do as well is make sure that our third line teams, all of our engineering resources, they’re actually able to use the tools they need to get the right result from a technology perspective. But from a service perspective, our agents are able to focus on having that 360 degree of the customer, knowledge of any event coming off the network, they’re able to start having an intelligent conversation with the customer based on the data we have.
Myers said that Vodafone now has a single logical data model, which can be presented out to the customer, because everything is aggregated into ServiceNow. Vodafone now has a much clearer view of the end-to-end customer lifecycle, he added, and it is able to track the customer perception across the entire interaction.
Luckham added that ServiceNow’s automation engine has really allowed Vodafone to drive efficiency, where it has been able to streamline inbound communications and processes, saving agents the manual work of copying and pasting data from one system into another.
As well as cost savings, it has also led to greater customer satisfaction. Luckham said:
We’ve actually managed to drive automation of the platform, so we’ve seen massive efficiency savings off the back of having it all in one place and being able to act across the different modules.
In terms of customer experience, we’ve been faster to resolve. We’ve been able to do it on the first touch, because the agents have that 360 view now and we can understand the impact between one product on another product. Being able to join these products together and have that holistic view has been fantastic.
By increasing the transparency out to our customers, we aren’t getting the phone calls of ‘can I have the latest update?’, ‘what’s happening with this ticket?’. Because it’s completely transparent. We’ve actually got to the point where our customers can actually see a clock that ticks down against SLA. I know that sounds like a simple concept, that’s a huge leap for us.
Image credit - Images free for commercial use Disclosure - ServiceNow is a diginomica premier partner at time of writing. Read more on: Customer service managementIT service managementUse cases 