
Vodafone’s director of Internet-of-Things (IoT), Ivo Rook, took to the stage at PTC’s annual ThingWorx conference in Boston this week, where he hit on a point that we at diginomica have touched on a few times before.
Speaking both about Vodafone’s own business and other businesses that may be impacted by IoT, Rook said that it wasn’t enough for a company to simply use new technologies to optimise their existing ecosystem and processes (which is often what vendors label as IoT) – but rather they need to completely rethink what they do.
Rook began by telling very familiar anecdotes that are often heard on the enterprise software conference circuit – e.g. 50% of the S&P will be replaced over the next 10 years, Blockbuster should have seen Netflix coming etc. However, he also interestingly placed Vodafone in a category of companies that ‘must adapt’ to survive against the threat of digital native newcomers.
To drive his point home, Rook used the example of Porsche. He said that Porsche’s CTO recently explained to him that the future of its business will centre around three things – cars being autonomous, connected and electric. A far cry from the Porsche sports cars we know today.
The impact? Rook used two pictures (see below) to show what this will mean for Porsche’s ecosystem. It will go from complex and diverse (picture one), to being much more slimmed down and completely different to how we think of what makes up a car today (picture two).


However, not enough companies think about how digital could similarly impact what they do. Rook said:
I love the fact that these companies think out of the box because they know that the future of the car industry looks like this. I wonder, if we are really critical around our own companies, what ecosystems and what metaphors and what paradigms do we still work in? Do we really see it coming when everything will be simplified, digital and different? I don’t think we do.
I think that too many companies want to stare at the parts they know so well because short term shareholder gain is about optimising, it is not about disrupting.
The impact of video
Rook’s primary concern for Vodafone is that the impact of video on IoT networks is being underestimated by analysts, as it was underestimated by analysts during the rise of the smartphone. Again, Rook used an image to illustrate his point – looking at the graph below, the lower blue line shows what analysts thought the impact of the smartphone would be on the mobile network, whilst the higher blue line is the reality (because of video services such as Netflix and YouTube).
The red line shows the analyst (and current Vodafone predictions) of the impact of video on the cellular networks. Rook, however, is concerned that history will repeat itself.

He said:
“And actually if there’s one thing to remember, it’s this boring graph. This is where I tell you that we as an industry are about to get it wrong again. Lots of intelligent analyst firms were trying to predict how much data was going to come out of the smartphone over time. The red line underneath is what the same analysts, us included, are predicting that the traffic on IoT on cellular networks will be. Now, what if? What if we get it wrong? What if video is going to hit IoT like it hit smartphones? And why wouldn’t it?
“There is lots of 3D imaging already, autonomous driving won’t work without cameras, why would Intel buy a company called Mobileye for $15bn, which specialises in image processing? And we think that imagery and video is not going to hit the IoT? What if history repeats itself?
There’s 8 billion people in the world, but there will be so many more devices. The data of IoT is intersecting with the data produced by mobile networks. That means two things. One, my CTO is going to tell me that I now need to pay for the mobile networks of Vodafone rather than the consumer unit. But the second thing is, singularity – the moment in time where machines become more intelligent than human beings. Now, who do you think needs more data then?
Reinventing Vodafone
Rook explained that Vodafone was fairly quick to recognise the opportunity of IoT, having already set up a global division for machine network contracts (almost a $1 billion business). However, he is concerned that Vodafone is doing what some car manufacturers are doing and not rethinking its ecosystem, such in the way that Porsche is. He said:
Why is this so important? Because this is my industry’s version of the two cars. And if that’s going to happen we need to make a change right now. And I’m proposing that change. And we are making that change because we need to stop running IoT on a consumer network. We can no longer build an IoT network across the world with best effort SLAs. We need to build the factory that allows all of you to start using a mobile connection in a reliable way because the processing and the device will happen in two complete different parts of the world.
He said that Vodafone is proposing a dedicated IoT network that gives companies the confidence to build IoT apps directly on the network, in combination with other technologies – something Rook calls the IoT operating system. He explained:
We need to move to a network that is dedicated. This is the paradigm that I change inside our company and I propose many other operators to do. We need to get away from thinking of mobile IoT as a tariff on the network. It is not.
We need to be brave enough to think about these things towards the future, because what we need to be able to build is a network that gives you that predictable performance. That allows you to design with latency that basically says that that IoT device, wherever it is in the world, will be able to talk to the processing, wherever that it is in the world, with guaranteed latency so that you can develop your own applications on top of it.
We need to get away from this centralised product management and rethink how an IoT network should be delivered to all of you. We are actually going to make the change that our IoT network is no longer a connectivity platform, but is an operating system. An operating system on which you can build an IoT application in days.”
You swipe a bit of Amazon in, you swipe a bit of Watson in, you swipe the connectivity in and you make it on your own. It’s the type of incremental application development that we need to become comfortable with. And the networks underneath need to be trusted.
Image credit - Images free for commercial use Read more on: Internet of Things 