
Care to take a bet on which movies will be the breakout hits among this year’s crop of summer blockbusters?
Will action/adventure fans scramble to see Captain America: Civil War or will X-Men: Apocalypse win the battle for their attention? Will bored kids on school holidays whine endlessly to see Finding Dory or The BFG?
And what are the prospects for director Paul Feig’s rebooted, female-led Ghostbusters? On social media, the trailer’s had a big thumbs-down from male chauvinists, to become one of YouTube’s most disliked videos ever (“This movie is pure feminazi propaganda,” bleats one commentator, while another implores: “When will people realise that women are just not funny?”). But there’ll be plenty of comedy fans eager to see the latest offering from the man who brought us Bridesmaids, directing a cast that includes Kristen Wiig and Melissa McCarthy.
It’s almost impossible to say, according to Roland Jones, executive director of technical services at cinema chain Vue International. The history of film, he points out, is littered with films that should have been massive but weren’t, and others that came out of nowhere to become runaway successes.
Either way, he’s the person responsible for dealing with the consequences of unexpected (or disappointing) traffic volumes to the web servers that present Vue customers with film and cinema information and take their bookings.
One week, we might have 200,000 people walking into our cinemas. The next week it could be 1.5 million. In the digital world, we need an infrastructure that can cope with massive swings in demand and I’m at the sharp end of having to deliver it.
A shift to virtualisation
 Vue is a longstanding Rackspace customer, but until last year, it was just using the providers plain-vanilla hosting services. A switch to VMware-based Managed Virtualisation from Rackspace is helping to take the guesswork out of bolstering the infrastructure when additional resources are needed, and scaling them back down again when they’re not, he explains:
Before, we were forced to take a punt on the hardware we needed when the biggest blockbuster hit came along – and yet, economics dictated that 90% of the time, we weren’t going to need it. Trying to tread that thin line was difficult. So when we had the chance to move from a purely physical infrastructure to a partially virtualised one, we could finally sit back and say, ‘This is great. We can step up and step down our architecture as needs dictate.’
The most recent blockbuster to test that set-up was Star Wars: The Force Awakens. After tickets for the film went on sale, 10,000 were sold online in the first 90 minutes alone, increasing to 45,000 in the first 24 hours.
Today, Jones is delivered a wealth of information that enables him to make rapid decisions about whether to scale servers up or down, according to audience appetite for the 600 films that Vue shows each year, across 800 screens.
I’m constantly looking at graphs or statistics, in real time, which arrive on my screen every three or four minutes and these tell me which cinemas are booking what tickets; exactly what films are being booked; and the rates of sales. These are then translated into 20 or 30 graphs that allow me to see CPUs, request numbers, database processes, the actual connections being requested from the front-end web servers [to the back-end ticketing system].”
We’ve got a lot of data. The analogy I like to use is of being on a ship at sea. You have all these signals that you’re monitoring and, every now and then, you’ll spot something on the horizon that makes you think, ‘Hang on a second: why has the number of processes here jumped from 690 to 930? All these indicators and patterns tell us when a big movie’s on the horizon and start to prepare.
Switching off servers
A member of his team can spin up a web server in Rackspace in about 20 minutes, he says. It’s not as simple as turning on a tap, because there’s some expertise and finesse involved in deciding whether to turn on one server or two and how to spread bandwidth across multiple servers. But it’s still pretty straightforward – as is the process of scaling back down again:
It’s the same process, but in reverse. There’s a certain minimum infrastructure that we always hold, of course, but as demand dies away, we can switch off servers and no longer pay for them.
He’s also scouring the horizon for technical issues – but these are handled on Vue’s behalf by Rackspace:
Right now, I’m looking at DD1, which is one of our database clusters, and I can see that there was a processor surge to about 40% [utilisation] at around midday today. It’s a pattern that’s out of the ordinary. I can see there’s been some kind of ‘event’, so I’ll call Rackspace and ask them to take a look. Can they see what it was? Is it something that’s likely to re-occur? Is there some process that needs tuning or switching off? We’re running these servers 24 hours a day, 7 days a week, so anything odd, even if it’s not a problem now, is worth investigating, in case it could become a problem in two days or two weeks’ time.”
We run a pretty lean IT team here, but we have Rackspace expertise on tap, to look into anything we observe. And I can call them at 6pm on a Saturday evening, if I need to – because that’s our critical, peak-trading time, even if it’s out of hours for many other businesses.
So if he’s looking at those graphs and statistics right now, what else can he tell us about the current situation in audience ticket-buying patterns?
Well, Captain America: Civil War is coming out this week so I’m watching that closely. The film had its UK premier on Tuesday and ticket sales are starting to rise. We’d already got two virtual web servers online, I put a third on yesterday and I suspect I’ll be ramping those up as the week goes on. That’s the great thing about the set-up we have now: we’re much more responsive to the demand we see in real time.
Image credit - Images via Marvel website and YouTubeRead more on: InfrastructureUse cases 