
Mark Zuckerberg
Over the past couple of years I’ve always thought there was a certain inadvertent cruelty in the fact that 24 hours after Yahoo! turns in its latest sorry numbers, Facebook pitches up with its latest sky-high figures.
So when Yahoo! saw profits collapse 93% yesterday, more of the same might have been expected. But in fact, Facebook let Wall Street down by only reporting a 42% increase in revenues to $3.5 billion, falling short of consensus expectations for the first time since 2013.
Now, this disappointment could well be attributed to Wall Street greed of course. Yahoo! has the ‘advantage’ that the worst is expected of it; Facebook is in a different expectations league.
And Facebook’s senior management team has been completely transparent with investors that the company is playing a long game that requires serious commitment and comes with a price tag.
That could be seen yesterday with a 20% drop in year-on-year profits to $512 million, a fall attributed to higher investment in mobile apps development, part of an overall rise of 83% in expenses for the first quarter. Spending on R&D jumped to $566 million from $181 million a year earlier.
And so Wall Street flinched a little yesterday, although nowhere nearly as much as other vendors have endured in recent times.
Zuckerberg on course
CEO Mark Zuckerberg remains unrepentant, insisting that innovation comes at a cost:
Facebook is continuing to make progress for the years ahead. Facebook has evolved from a single blue app on your phone into a family of apps. Now, many of these apps are reaching a global scale.
He’s also resistant to monetizing some of the newer innovations, such as WhatsApp VoiP services, preferring to gain marketshare in the space:
In terms of voice calling, no, we’re not going to charge for it just like we’re not going to charge for messaging. What we’re focused on doing is providing more higher quality services for free than what you could otherwise get in paying for them.
One of our theories in this is that one of the reasons why voice calling has been a little slower to catch on is because you need the large established network of people who you know will have access to be able to receive a voice call before that behavior can really take on in a big global community.
Between Facebook Messenger and WhatsApp, which are two very broad communication networks, we’re pretty confident that because of the higher quality of calling that you can get through the services that we’re providing ,that this is going to continue growing very quickly.
In Facebook Messenger, it’s been out for a little while and we’re already more than 10% of the global VoIP market.
Zuckerberg is also still firmly on track with the longer term global initiatives, such as internet.org:
We’ve now made free basic Internet services available to more than 800 million people in nine countries, including just in this quarter, launching in India, Colombia, Ghana, Guatemala, and the Philippines. More than seven million people who weren’t connected to the Internet before now use internet.org to get online.
Thanks to our entire community and all of our employees, partners, and shareholders for being a part of this journey and for helping to build something great.
Mobile marketing
It’s perhaps a moot point whether all investors and shareholders are entirely behind Zuckerberg on that one – although they should be! – but there is plenty of good news for the shorter term thinkers as well:

Monthly active users are up 13% from a year earlier to 1.44 billion.
Daily active users are now 936 million
Monthly mobile users increased by 24% to 1.25 billion, a majority of the site’s users.
There are now 2 million advertisers on Facebook.
Total ad revenue was up 46% to $3.3 billion.
Revenue from mobile ad sales of $2.4 billion makes up 73% of total ad sales.

Sheryl Sandberg
That mobile strength is one of the company’s biggest assets and converges with other areas of development, says COO Sheryl Sandberg:
Mobile continues to be a great opportunity for us. People continue to be highly engaged with our mobile apps. In the United States, for example, Facebook and Instagram get more than one out of every five minutes spent on mobile. As consumers shift to mobile, businesses are following, and we’re focusing on helping them take advantage of this opportunity to use mobile to build their businesses.
There’s a twin play here with video, she adds:
We believe video will play a significant role in bringing more marketers to mobile. More than 75% of global video views on Facebook occur on mobile, and we believe mobile video will become more important to marketers over time.
Lionsgate’s Age of Adaline premiere is a great example. To promote the film, Lionsgate targeted young women on Instagram with multiple video ads over the last few weeks. This week, since the film opens on Friday, they are retargeting the audience from the Instagram campaign on Facebook. We expect more marketers to put mobile video at the heart of their campaigns in the future and we’re well-positioned to drive this shift.
There’s still a long way to go, says Sandberg, injecting some sobriety into the pitch:
In terms of penetration, we work with almost all the large marketers almost everywhere in the world. But even for the largest, the largest clients we have, we are a very small part of their budget.
With our largest clients, even our large ones, we’re not close to 5% of their spend.
My take
Keep on keeping on. This long game strategy is entirely right.

Read more on: Cloud platforms - infrastructure and architectureDigital and content marketingMobileSocial 