
Our strategy is to make every day easier for busy families.
So says Walmart CEO Doug McMillon of his mile-high corporate mission statement for the US retailer. It’s also to shore up the online defenses on the grocery front before the Amazon-Whole Foods merger closes, although Walmart US CEO Greg Foran puts a brave face on the oncoming storm:
We don’t know what Amazon will do. We keep our eyes crossed on what a strong competitor does in the marketplace.”I think Amazon is an unbelievably good competitor and to be honest with you, I like the fact that they’re a good competitor…but, obviously keep our eyes very much across what our other strong competitor does in the marketplace. It lifts our performance to do well…In a market that is improving, you have to do better yourself.
McMillon sees good progress on the part of Walmart, which relies on food and grocery sales for around half of its total revenue:
We’ve seen strong results from the rollout of online grocery, which is now in more than 900 US locations, and we’re expanding this service in many of our markets around the world. Retail is constantly evolving and it’s critical that we move even faster as the customer and competitive landscape continue to change. We’re testing associate delivery of walmart.com orders in a few stores and by the end of the year, we’ll have approximately 100 automated pickup towers in stores across the US, where customers can pick up their orders within a matter of minutes.
Marc Lore, the head of Walmart’s e-commerce arm, adds:
We have the assets in place to do that last mile delivery of grocery…We’re leveraging the strength of our stores. We are saving costs by not paying for last-mile delivery. We will expand that over time.
This is a sound strategy, reckons Oliver Chen of analysts Cowen and Company. In a note to client, Chen argues:
Walmart will continue to need to use its physical assets as a competitive advantage (90% of the US is within 10 miles of a Wal-Mart store). Ship-from-store, pick up today, online grocery, car pickup, discounted pickup in-store, [and] associate delivery tests are essential and competitive weapons which should incorporate both price and convenience advantages and drive share.
Other analysts concur. Josh Brown, the CEO of Ritholtz Wealth Management, told Marketplace:
You have Amazon buying Whole Foods, which is essentially a chain of 100 some odd brick-and-mortar supermarkets — which is as brutal a business as any business — and they’re paying almost $14 billion for it. Walmart already has that brick-and-mortar infrastructure. So anything that Amazon does with Whole Foods, just as an example, Walmart can probably do as well. The old phase where we’re thinking about Amazon pulling sales away from Walmart retail stores — we’re probably through that period.
Innovation
For McMillon’s big picture, what matters most is:
our transformation to become more of a digital enterprise that moves with speed and agility.
Walmart.com is now the second-largest online retailer, behind Amazon, as a result of last year’s $3.3 billion acquisition of jet.com, which also Lore into its service. For the most recent quarter, e-commerce sales were up 60% year-on-year.
Part of that has come from acquisitions, most recently Moosejaw, Shoebuy and Bonobos, but McMillion insists that most e-commerce growth is organic:
In e-commerce, customers are responding favorably to our expanded assortment, which surpassed 67 million SKUs on walmart.com. Our recent acquisitions, such as further improved our assortment, and have provided critical category expertise in higher margin categories like shoes and apparel.
The challenge now is to continue to innovate, he adds, citing recent examples what initiatives to make the customer experience better:
With Easy Reorder on walmart.com, a customer has visibility to their past in-store and online purchases. In a matter of seconds, they can easily repurchase the items they’ve bought most frequently before and save the time it may have taken to make a weekly shopping list.
Another example is our integrated back-to-school offering. Our dedicated back-to-school destination on walmart.com enables customers to shop school supply lists for more than a million classrooms across the United States. They can find their own list by simply entering their zip code and quickly adding all the items from the school list to their basket.
Then, they can choose whether to pick up the items at their local store or ship them to their home. It’s a huge time-saver for busy families. If you haven’t done your back-to-school shopping, you should definitely check this out. We have tests going on with digital endless aisle shopping, robotics and image analytics to scan aisles for outs and we’re using machine learning to assist our merchants with pricing.
My take
For all the Walmart’s senior exec team’s confident talk, Wall Street isn’t convinced just yet. The company’s share price tanked yesterday. For all that, Walmart is still much bigger than Amazon, with second-quarter revenue of $123.3 billion. compared to its rival’s $38 billion. But the e-commerce investment has taken its toll on profit margins.
The store infrastructure is the big asset, with footfall up for the past 11 quarters. Once it becomes clear what Amazon intends to do with Whole Foods offline retail outlets, this particular battle for dominance is going to step up a notch.
Image credit - WalmartRead more on: Retail e-commerce and the omni-channel 