
Late last week, US retail chain Target turned in some better-than-expected digital sales numbers, undermined by ongoing footfall issues in-store. It’s clear, as I said then, that the brand’s problems in an omni-channel age of retail aren’t over yet.
To add to the pressure on Target, arch-rival Walmart just turned in a set of stellar numbers that can only be summed up as “this is how you do it”. E-commerce sales were up 63% year-on-year, while in-store sales were up for the 11th successive quarter, up 1.5% in the past three months.
The numbers are testament to the success of the firm’s online investment, including a number of key acquistions, most notably its $3.3 billion purchase of jet.com. CEO Doug McMillon is pleased with progress to date, but says there is still much to be done – and it’s not all about splashing more cash:
The acquisitions have received a lot of attention, but our plan in e-commerce is not to buy our way to success. The majority of our growth is and will be organic. The acquisitions are helping us speed some things up. So overall, we’re making progress in providing the seamless shopping experience our customer’s desire and we will keep moving along this journey.
What he does want to see happening is greater exploitation of Walmart’s offline retail real estate, blended with new digital offerings. Here at diginomica we’ve written a lot about that elusive balance between online and offline assets in the retail sector, noting that some firms have found it easier to strike than others.
Walmart is definitely in credit on this front:
Our stores are located within 10 miles of nearly 90% of the US population, so this is convenient for many of our customers, and also saves them money when they order online and pick it up during their visit to our stores.
But again it’s a journey with room for improvements. McMillon notes:
Inside the company, we can see that we’re moving faster to combine our digital and physical assets to make shopping easier and more enjoyable for customers, but we can also see plenty of room to improve. We need to scale our e-commerce business further and see some additional strength in our store comps to deliver the results we know we’re capable of, so that’s what we’re focused on.
He cites a couple of examples of the sort of improvements that the firm is pursuing:
First, we made the change to shipping terms at the beginning of the quarter. Customers [on walmart.com] don’t have to pay a membership fee to get two-day shipping on millions of items.
Second, we recently began offering customers pick-up discounts on non-store items… Walmart.com now has 50 million first and third-party items to choose from compared to 10 million at this time last year, so our assortment continues to ramp.
Proof points
McMillon says that there are more and more proof points to validate the firm’s digital investments:
A few weeks ago, while visiting stores in Oklahoma City, I saw first-hand how the combination of some new in-store apps and mobile handhelds are improving our in-store processes and making life easier for associates. A grocery department manager in one store showed us how she now ensures side counter modular accuracy and in-stock with a new app we’ve developed for our mobile handhelds. With this new app, the time to complete her work has now been reduced, improving her productivity and giving her more time to interact with customers. I saw it again last week in Omaha, Nebraska.
I saw another example in Canada in April. There, we’ve an improved process at store level that is reducing inventory levels in the back room in a meaningful way. Our team is building better tools, our associates are embracing them and the results are improving.
All of this is vital for the future of Walmart and how it engages with – and holds onto. – its customers, he adds:
Our key to winning starts with how we work inside the company. We’re transforming to become more of a digital enterprise. The change is starting to be visible to our customers as they use online grocery, Walmart Pay, Scan & Go at Sam’s Club and our Walmart app to skip the line when using our pharmacies and financial services in our U.S. stores. Online grocery also continues to perform well and we’re on track to scale the offering to more stores this year in several countries, including the US. We’re taking steps to save customers time as well as money.
My take
Impressive progress, although it’s important to put this into context. Walmart doesn’t actually break out specific numbers for its online business, although market watchers reckon it accounts for around $14 billion, about 3% of total sales. Compare that to Amazon’s $90 billion for fiscal 2016 and there’s a way to go to even claim catch-up.
That said,it’s important not to be too daunted by Amazon or nothing will be achieved. As Mark Astrachan, an analyst at investment firm Stifel, noted in a research note to clients:
While share loss online and to Amazon.com specifically is inevitable and likely to become more pronounced in time, Walmart has an effective omni-channel approach in place to better compete than peers…Walmart is effectively competing in a tough retail environment, and given its size, scale, and leverage will be able to stay the course on the current strategy.
Image credit - WalmartRead more on: Retail e-commerce and the omni-channel 