
Finally – a US retail brand name that’s looking forward to Christmas! While the likes of Nordstrom and Macy’s have been downbeat over the past week, Walmart has turned in better-than-expected numbers, albeit with online stats that are slowing down.
Walmart’s global e-commerce sales rose 16% in the previous quarter, compared with 17% in the first quarter of this fiscal year and 24% in the year-earlier period. That’s something that needs addressing, admits CEO Doug McMillon, and that’s going to impact on the bottom line short term:
To improve the store experience for our customers and create a bridge to our future where digital capabilities will play an increasing role in our stores, we’re making a $1.2 billion planned investment in our people this year that we understood what impact near-term operating income. This is by far the biggest driver of the decline in consolidated operating income.
We’ve never been a company that manages only for the short term and that’s certainly true during this period of change. Although investments in our people and technology impact near-term earnings, they will help us deliver sustainable growth and returns to shareholders over time.
The company is seeing differing results from different geographies. For example, the growth of online business in the UK comes mostly from its grocery business in the shape of supermarket chain Asda, whereas in Mexico, the e-commerce business centers more around general merchandising.
But McMillon insists that Walmart’s overall objective remains clear thanks to its:
network of stores supported by a supply chain and systems like ours with an emerging set of digital capabilities to win with customers.
We will be the first to deliver a seamless shopping experience at scale. No matter how you choose to shop with us, through your mobile device, online, in a store, or a combination, it will be fast and easy.
This “seamless experience” is built on a number of key areas:
First, we will continue to win on value. We’ve won on value in the past and that won’t change. Second, convenience is increasingly important as customers want to save both money and time. Third, we will always work to be great merchants whether in stores or online. Fourth, we’re focused on the key geographies for customer growth which are North America and China.
Of China, McMillon says:
China remains a huge long term opportunity. We started in China in 1996. We’ve grown the business, reached profitability years ago and grown our level of profitability.
We see that e-commerce, online grocery and convenience are critical in the dense urban areas that make up so much of the Chinese opportunity.
At the heart of this is the relationship with the customer, says McMillon:
As we build out our e-commerce capabilities we are deepening our digital relationships with our customers. We’ve accelerated our expansion of online grocery pickup and we’ve seen that customers who start using online grocery spent nearly 50% more than similar customers who shop only in stores. This is the customer we’re going after, the shopper in our sweet spot who accesses Walmart in multiple ways.
To address this customer, Walmart has put in place various tech and digital initiatives, including extending business member privileges at Sam’s Club to allow everyone to pre-order merchandise for pickup at the club for more than a decade.
McMillon adds:
We also began the chain-wide use of a mobile service that can tell us when a customer is coming to pick up an online general merchandise order before they even walk into the store. We launched a new digital wish list that you can build at home or simply by scanning items in a store. We expect more than 210 million visits to our app in November and December up from 18 million in 2012.
All of this digital push sits alongside the major asset of owning one of the best-known offline brands in the retail sector. McMillion concludes:
A key part of creating a seamless shopping experience is to have great stores and we feel good about where we’re headed.
My take
The last of the big name US retailers to turn in its pre-Holiday numbers and happily one that sent Wall Street away happy.
Now, deep breath everyone, it’s Black Friday time…
Read more on: Analytics planning and data analysisCRM and customer experienceDigital and content marketinge-commerceRetail e-commerce and the omni-channelSocial 