
This has only just been brought to my attention but ever it was going to happen.
In the red corner we have 66 year old ADP, purveyor of payroll and certain benefits services which can legitimately claim to have been offering “…as a Service” style solutions for many years. When people raise the specter of security and privacy with me, I point them in ADPs direction. I argue that payroll is the working definition of a solution that must always be rock solid and yet many millions of people are happy to entrust their payroll to ADP. The company has a market cap just shy of $40 billion.
In the blue corner we have Zenefits, a snot nosed benefits administration startup service that is offered for free. It derives revenue by virtue of acting as a benefits and insurance broker. Zenefits has surprised many people with the speed at which it is growing. Some numbers:
Zenefits has signed up more than 10,000 companies, with a combined 100,000-plus employees, to use its cloud software during the 18 months the San Francisco startup has been operating.
That was in January 2015. Some believe it will hit $100 million in revenue by the end of 2015. That’s a rocketship propelling the company to a $4.5 billion valuation after taking in a $500 million round.
What’s the big deal?
In time honored tradition – at least in the start up world – Zenefits CEO took to the blogs to plead the company case:
Last week, without your permission, ADP systematically de-activated Zenefits accounts within ADP — accounts that small businesses had set up so Zenefits could help them automate time-consuming, day-to-day payroll administration work.
Nice. Or rather not so nice if you are both an ADP and Zenefits customer. ADP for its part claims it saw a spike in network calls and thought it might be under a denial of service attack so cut off access as a preventative measure. Odd that this only implicated 850 joint customers but there ya go. More to the point, it looks like Zenefits found a way of accessing joint customer data without requiring it to pay a fee to ADP, most likely by getting partners to hand over ADP related credentials.
Zenefits comes back with a petition to get ADP to play ball. So far, it has garnered 2.250 signatories. That’s not at all bad when you reflect this issue only affects a third of that number in joint customers.
It’s at this point that ADP plays its ‘See you in court’ card (complaint detailed below) which talks to the unusual offense of defamation or at least unusual in the US.
I have no dog in this fight but I suspect that ADP sees Zenefits as a long term threat, especially now Zenefits has a huge warchest with which to acquire, grow and market its way into thousands of accounts. Rather than adjust its business model, it seems ADP has decided it stands a better chance to deflect that threat if it can distract management with what will be a very messy lawsuit. For its part, Zenefits is not going to let this go.
As others have said, it is the customers caught in the middle who have the real problem and they will have to decide which of the two is the real villain of the piece. Right now. the sentiment is on the side of Zenefits. I’m with Mike Masnick when he says: 
Zenefits is providing a useful service in an innovative way. And tons of small businesses are using it — because it works. And none of them seem to be complaining about the way Zenefits works with ADP — they like it. ADP should get with the program, whether or not it’s actually trying to build a competing service.
That’s all very well but as we’ve seen many times in the past, older technology companies frequently revert to the law courts rather than work out a deal when they believe they’re under threat. That to me is a much bigger concern for ADP and should be raising alarm bells.
What happens next will not be decided in any court of law. If Zenefits can persuade customers that it is acting in their best interests with no immediate threat to ADP then Zenefits only needs to point those same customers towards the likes of Intuit, Paychex and others. Those services have had no such problems partnering with Zenefits.
ADP v. Zenefits Defamation Complaint by TonyWebster


Read more on: HCM and the digital future of workHR admin and payroll 