
Dave O’Carroll
Every month, the number of people displaced by the war in Syria creeps closer to 5 million. According to the latest figures from the UN High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), released on 11 April 2016, the total now stands at 4,837,208. More than half of them (51.7%) are children.
At the Zaatari Refugee Camp in neighbouring Jordan, charity workers for War Child UK are providing some of those kids with schooling and other services – just as they do for children in other war-torn parts of the world, including Afghanistan, Iraq, Uganda, the Democratic Republic of Congo and the Central African Republic. 
War Child UK might be a small charity with a far-flung team, but thanks to the generosity of intranet software company Interact, its workers are now able to stay in touch, share experiences and offer advice, regardless of their location. 
That’s because last year, Interact named War Child UK the winner of its annual non-profit competition, the prize for which is the implementation of a new intranet, worth around £40,000 according to the company, including consultancy, training and project management services. Interact CEO Nigel Danson explains:

Entrants were required to share a video entry describing why [an intranet] would make a difference in the organisation and what features would deliver most value to their respective causes. Of 13 entrants, War Child was shortlisted to the final seven and their videos were put up on our website, where the final winner was selected by public vote.

Winner
War Child beat the others to the punch and was declared the winner in early 2015 but, in a surprise twist, Interact decided to award each of the six runners-up with a free intranet, too. These included Trinity Hospice, Acumen, Houston Zoo, Autism Wessex, the MS Society and Action for Blind People.
For War Child UK, the new intranet came as a welcome replacement to some preceding technology, says Dave O’Carroll, head of digital:

We already had an intranet but it was very static and, as they are at a lot of organisations, it was just a place where forms went to die, a graveyard for documents. I had recently joined the organisation and was trying to find a way to improve our internal communications, so entering the competition seemed like a perfect opportunity. We were absolutely thrilled to win.

Work soon got underway, he says, and it took Interact arounds three or four months to deliver the intranet, working closely with War Child UK on requirements capture and the design processes. The completed intranet, named ‘Phileas’, was then handed over to the charity for its own team to populate with forms and content, a process that took a few more months, before its launch in early December 2015. Says O’Carroll:

Phileas is an interactive space that everyone in the organisation can use, rather than a document library really only available to people in the London office who need a holiday form or to search for a policy documents. It’s a really global thing, which is a huge bonus for us, and it’s interactive and conversational, which encourages everyone to contribute.
People leave comments, clarify points with each other, chat about their jobs, post blog entries. Now, a finance officer in Afghanistan can message with a finance officer in the Democratic Republic of Congo at a time when they’re both preparing budgets, for example, to share experiences and learning. It’s knocked down the walls that geographic distance created in our organisation.

Although Phileas is primarily a work tool, he explains, he’s been keen to encourage the social aspects of the intranet, too, and 90% of the charity’s staff now use it on a regular basis. Over time, it could become more of a learning platform, as O’Carroll has plans to start uploading videos of visiting speakers at its London headquarters, for example. 
And there’s going to be more face-to-face training for War Child’s employees, with O’Carroll making plans to personally visit teams in the Central African Republic in the near future, in order to make sure they’re getting the most from Phileas and find out more about their future needs from the platform. Says O’Carroll:

We’re very pleased with the intranet, but it’s important we put in place strategies to ensure that it remains an integral part of the organisation for the long term.


Image credit - James Marcus Haney/War Child UKRead more on: Cloud platforms - infrastructure and architectureDigital enterprise in the real worldUse cases 