
When colleagues berate me for paying too much attention to back office systems and not enough to the cool things going on I only have this to say: fix the broken stuff first before telling me how great the world is going to become. You can have all the cool stuff you want but if you’re stymied from getting a connection in a new country or can’t pay bills, then none of this cool stuff matters. In that sense, I feel we are stuck in the Dark Ages.
We live in an ‘always on’ world – yay! We are all connected – yay! Except we’re not when it comes to accessing essential services or even for that matter dealing with relatively mundane issues. Time and effort is wasted, frustration levels rise and the more I think about this, the more I see organizations imposing their antiquated processes onto the customers they are supposed to be serving rather than thinking through the implications. It’s mad, it’s bad and it has to stop.
Earlier today, colleague Holger Mueller was bemoaning the fact that he struggled to get an EE chip in the UK for his US smartphone. He’d found a great deal and was prepared to pony up £30 for 25GB of data but EE could not accept his US credit card. As he said in one Tweet: #DarkAges.

@dahowlett Looks like they couldn’t resist me.. 😉 Only had to pay for device, not usage, but can use it right away.
— Holger Mueller (@holgermu) July 30, 2015
As you can see, Mueller found a way to overcome the problem but this is not an uncommon scenario. In the US for example, the financial systems cannot recognize EU debit cards. It is easily overcome by treating the debit card as a credit card. Then it works. Convenience may win out but the thought of what this means for security sends shivers down my spine.
In another case, a colleague was due to be out of the country for an extended period of time. One day he received an email from EDF requesting that he mail back a meter reading for electricity consumption. Anyone at EDF heard of smart meters?
Check this one. A property owner in the UK became liable for Council Tax (US equivalent?) in 2014. Her partner, who does not own the property, dealt with the issue and established regular payments with the bank. At the end of the year, the Council sent out an enquiry asking the same questions that had been asked earlier in the year. The owner answered and never heard anything back.
Some months later and purely by chance, the owner was checking the joint bank account. Normally there is no need to do so. She noticed that the council was not taking payments.
On calling the council, she was horrified to find that there was a huge debt outstanding to the council that included multiple charges and a threat of court summons. The only thing that had changed from her perspective was a name. The bank account was already in place and there were funds to handle anything the council might want.
It appears that somewhere along the line, there is correspondence that likely requires the setting up of a new direct debit mandate. The council already know there is an email address they can contact and if they’d looked at the bank mandate, they would have seen the same two names that could have been the alert to connect the dots. This didn’t happen because there is no review process in place to pre-check the bank account.
OK – so we have a comedy of errors but this left the owner with a set of hurdles to overcome. In attempting to deal with the issue over the phone, she quickly learned that inflexible processes at the council did not allow her to play catch up and then regularize the situation. Instead, the council was insistent upon establishing a direct debit that includes everything outstanding plus what will be due in the remainder of the year. Including fees.
Eventually, she was able to get the council to accept a payment for the small outstanding payment from 2014, a transfer of funds that had been allocated to her partner’s ‘account’ but which were sitting at the council doing nothing. She also set up a fresh direct debit for 2015/16 and onwards. That still doesn’t solve the problem of fees that may be in play. Resolving that element now puts her into email correspondence hell.
In fairness to the collections department, they totally get what happened but they are hamstrung because their processes do not allow them to make a judgment call. Neither do they have a direct line of sight back to the billings department.
In the US, I have found a remarkable level of inconsistency in the handling of automatic payments. Some can be set up relatively easily. Others require data the payer may not have. A good example is the need to provide a social security number. Another example is where the payee wants a paper copy of a cancelled check in order to set up the automatic payment.
In some parts of Europe I’ve found that while credit cards often work well, debit cards may be refused, forcing the user back to a credit card.
In short, the payments picture across the world is highly inconsistent and the equivalent of a lottery. In one sense this should not be a surprise. Despite talk of standards, much of which goes back decades. There is no universal agreement on how to manage payments across nation states. Internally, there are no agreements or processes that allow for variations in circumstances.
The expectation is that people are fixed to a single locale. That is not how the world is working. Planes are full of people transiting between countries and the volume of airline traffic is only going up. Migrant workers are part of every European and American landscape.
I’m just scratching the surface. There are numerous other examples. That was just today’s quota.  In the meantime, pleas solve these problems and then come tell me about the good stuff.

Read more on: Collaboration sharing and digital productivityCRM and customer experiencee-commerceFrictionless enterpriseFuture of work 