
Brits are renowned for talking about the weather, especially with the thundery conditions we often get this time of year. But the conversations became unusually stormy late last month after it emerged that the BBC is ending its longstanding relationship with the Met Office.
The story has a worrying sting in the tail for any enterprise that has nurtured a long-term relationship with an important customer (the Met has supplied weather data to the BBC ever since it broadcast its first weather forecast on 14 November 1922).
It seems the contract was lost because the Met Office’s mobile app wasn’t up to scratch, according to The Telegraph:
Although a statement from the corporation suggested that the Met Office bid had not been the best value for money, a source at the BBC said that it was its inability to produce a good enough app for mobile phones that was the main reason behind the decision. The current Met Office weather app is rated just two stars.
The evolution of weather forecasting is a prime example of how cloud computing is transforming the way we consume large-scale compute resources as we move into the digital era. It was the military and government that initially funded weather organizations. Mass media became the next set of customers, along with large commercial organizations that had particular weather dependencies.
Personalized forecasts
These days, any of us can download a weather app such as Dark Sky (my own favorite) and get our own, personalized forecasts, on demand. That raises expectations for accuracy and clarity that the Met Office and the BBC have been wrestling with.
To compete in the weather business, forecasters not only have to collect and analyze huge volumes of data in their core systems, they also have to make those available for real-time consumption via rich APIs and compelling mobile apps.
Casey McGeever, chief commercial officer at US weather service Accuweather, explained the scale of the challenge on stage at Microsoft’s Convergence 2015 event earlier this year:
Since we have an enormous network, we pull in more data than anybody else on earth, actually. We’re an incredible big data house.
Having the data’s not the only story. You need to be able to process it, you need to be able to assemble it. Everyone who looks at [a weather map on] their cellphone, they think they’re looking at radar — and they are — but they’re looking at a radar amalgamation from dozens of different locations. We do that amalgamation, we make that consolidated picture ourselves.
Life-and-death
McGeever also gave some examples where commercial customers had relied on its data feeds to make life-and-death decisions:
One of our rail clients had a fascinating experience. They had two trains heading towards Greensburg, Kansas, from opposite directions at 70 miles an hour.
We determined that there was going to be a tornado in the area. We asked them to stop the trains, they did stop them. The tornado shot right between the two trains, exactly where we said it would be.
The conductors of the trains actually saw the tornado backlit by lightning as it passed between them. No trains were derailed, no one was injured on the train. It was a huge success story because the tornado was exactly where we told them it would be …
For those of you who are concert goers, in Chicago in Soldier Field last year, during the summer, Pearl Jam was giving a concert. And we warned them during the concert of a sudden lightning storm that was going to sweep across Soldier Field.
It did, indeed, sweep across Soldier Field, but first they moved everyone to safety, the musicians and the concert goers. Lightning actually struck the platform where Eddie Vedder had been standing just a few minutes earlier, but no one was injured. And, again, that’s because of the extreme accuracy we have.
My take
Fortunately for the Met Office, it will still be a source for a significant portion of the data supplied to the BBC. Both of the candidates to take over contract — Netherlands-based MeteoGroup and New Zealand forecasting service Metra — are extensive users of Met Office data. But as it moves down the API stack, the margins the Met Office will be able to command will be significantly lower. If only it had paid more attention to the ratings its mobile app was getting …
There’s a lesson in all this for every enterprise that relies on information processing and data analysis to serve its customers (and what enterprise doesn’t today?). Their customers expect them to to aggregate and deliver accurate, timely data, tailored to meet a vast range of different needs.
Even if the relationship dates back for decades, enterprises have to constantly innovate and evolve the way they deliver information and analysis to remain competitive — or risk losing that long-standing contract.
Disclosure: Microsoft funded my travel to attend its Convergence event.
Image credit: Running businessman with tablet chased by dark storm cloud © Tsung-Lin Wu – Fotolia.com.
Read more on: Mobile 