
Those who are on either our daily or weekly email list know that we include non-diginomica story links with a snippet of commentary. Jon Reed includes external content references in his weekly Hits & Misses.
Including external sources goes to the idea that there are many more interesting voices than any one media title can hope to cover. Sharing what we find is a net good. This is not aggregation but curation, a discipline we value. Think of that old maxim, ‘We stand on the shoulders of giants.’
Curation is especially important when a topic becomes hot because it is often the case that important voices emerge we have not seen before and which inform and enrich our work. With that in mind – and with a heavy focus on AI related topics, here are your picks for today. If you want to see more then you’ll need to subscribe to the daily or weekly email list.
Sources you might enjoy – weekly newsletters
Nick Halstead’s DataScan – a curated digest on the world of data science, security and privacy
Azeem Azhars’ Exponential View – transport, AI, robots…it’s all there.
Digital Doughnut – all things marketing and CX
My picks from the last couple of days
Bankers Ditch Fat Salaries to Chase Digital Currency Riches – initial coin offerings (ICOs) are the new hotness as cryptocurrency related technologies are mushrooming. An ICO is sort of like a VC fund only it’s off market capital raising. The amounts raised are often much larger than you’d expect in a normal VC cycle. In this story, the author cites: “Tezos, a smart contracts platform that raised $200 million to outstrip the average Hong Kong IPO size this year of around $31 million.”
How AI Will Change the Way We Make Decisions – a thoughtful piece from HBR on prediction and judgment. The money shot: “Economic theory suggests that AI will substantially raise the value of human judgment. People who display good judgment will become more valuable, not less.” My question – where are these people going to come from?
A computer was asked to predict which start-ups would be successful. The results were astonishing – weforum goes back in time to discover which predictions made in 2009 turned out on the money. A comparative analysis against a fund of funds shows that the predictions were the equivalent of positioning the predicted portfolio as the second best performing funds of all time. Wow! What makes this piece interesting is the direction in which investments are flowing because that suggests where you should be thinking.
Next Leap for Robots: Picking Out and Boxing Your Online Order – the WSJ reports on advances in packing technology that will ‘soon’ threaten to eliminate yet another mundane but essential job that today employs 950,000 people in the U.S. It is a complex problem and multiple companies are pursuing alternative approaches. I’m thinking about the systems impact and acceleration in supply chain movements.
Amazon has a secret health tech team called 1492 working on medical records, virtual doc visits – CNBC says it has discovered a skunkworks at Amazon working on electronic medical records and telemedicine. This is a woefully inefficient area of health provision but one that is mired in regulation. Both Google and Microsoft have ‘stumbled’ in past efforts. Apple is attempting to aggregate medical information. Will Amazon be more successful? One to watch.
Engagement, Not Traffic, Is The Future of Social Media – this one by Alfred Lua made me giggle but then recent conversations suggest that many practitioners do not understand the nature of relationship. Shocked? Maybe not so much because the trajectory for the dominant forms of social media (think Twitter, Facebook etc) is all about transactions in the form of advertising and exhortations to ‘buy me.’ Anyone who has been engaged with media for any amount of time knows that is orthogonal to what makes for great media.
Image credit - public imagesRead more on: Hits and misses 