
We’ve been tracking Intacct since diginomica launched. Why? Their strong best-of-breed take on cloud financials and ERP makes the space a lot more interesting. That trend continued in July 2017, when Sage announced their pending acquisition of Intacct.
The acquisition raised potent questions on the future of Intacct, but according to Sage Intacct Managing Director and EVP Rob Reid, it’s worked out well so far.
Today, we formally welcome Sage Intacct as a diginomica premier partner. So what can you expect from Sage Intacct content on diginomica? I don’t want to get into spoilers, but I guarantee you’ll hear plenty about transformation of the CFO, and what Sage Intacct is learning. As Reid said to me in November, their customers want to spend 80 percent of their time on finance and 20 percent on accounting.
Yes, those transitions are happening; I look forward to hearing more from Sage Intacct on what that transition takes. Needless to say, “AI and automation” will play a key role. That was a big theme of Sage Intacct Advantage, as we move from what Intacct calls Financial Leadership 2.0 to Financial Leadership 3.0. Now, we can seriously consider the potential of once-radical ideas like the “continuous audit.” Reid:
3.0 is all about predicting the future. 3.0 is telling you about the trends. It’s forward-looking as opposed to in the moment. And literally, into the future, we’re going to be able to tell organizations where they should make their next investment, where they put their next dollar or $10,000 or millions of dollars and why.
But you can’t achieve that vision of finance on a legacy architecture. Intacct has been outspoken about the need for “true cloud,” as in multi-tenancy at scale, since before diginomica (Back in 2008, colleague Phil Wainewright quoted Intacct CTO Aaron Harris in a ZDNet post on why multi-tenancy matters).
So it’s apropos that for Sage Intacct’s diginomica debut, For growth, scalability, innovation – it has to be true cloud, CTO Aaron Harris steps into the true cloud debate once again:
High growth companies seeking a technological advantage today are looking to the cloud. And not just any cloud, but true cloud, which hinges on several key elements – multi-tenancy, elastic infrastructure, high configurability, self-service expansion, and integration APIs.
Harris doesn’t sees us advancing on AI without “true cloud” architecture:
Under the architecture of a true cloud system, developers can innovate to solve large data issues that just aren’t possible on limited, single-server solutions. True cloud is also where AI will come of age, as applications that learn from past actions will have billions of transactions to teach them.
As exciting as it is to see financial transformations in high gear, change is never easy. One thing I’ve always liked about Sage Intacct is their customer focus. They always put me in front of their customers early and often, so I can weigh their vision against what finance teams are facing on the ground.
As you’d expect, there are very real challenges. But also, some very encouraging results:

Sage Intacct Advantage 2018 – customers speak to the results of financial transformation
How Meals on Wheels America delivers a lot more than food – a Sage Intacct micro-verticals story
How World Learning seized the day by building apps on the Sage Intacct platform
Smith Systems on driver safety, autonomous vehicles, and cloud ERP with Intacct

I look forward to hearing more about these bold adventures in finance. I hope you get as much out of those stories as I did. And with that, welcome to Sage Intacct.
Image credit - Feature image - Group of people holding with hands the word welcome, by @MarkusMainka - Shutterstock.com.Disclosure - Sage Intacct is a diginomica premier partner.Read more on: Cloud ERP financials and supply chainFinancials 