
As we begin to settle into a new year, we’re delighted to officially welcome a new diginomica partner, New Relic.
As a leading light of the new breed of application performance management (APM) vendors that have grown up with the emergence of agile, digital applications, New Relic is a company we’ve been covering for a while. We love digital enterprise use cases, and New Relic is one of those vendors whose customer base is chock-full of ’em. Here are three from the past year:

36 hours in the Black Friday ops room at John Lewis
Trainline sees data as the ticket to more sales
Waterstones authors new DevOps playbook with New Relic monitoring tools

Suits and geeks
New Relic comes on board as a diginomica partner at a time when it’s aiming to bridge the gap between the suits and geeks, as my colleague Den Howlett put it in his report from the vendor’s annual conference in San Francisco last November:
New Relic has managed to do something I did not expect to see from a technically based organization. They are delivering data driven answers … that serve the needs of both the technical people and the business user.
Den goes on to quote New Relic CEO Lew Cirne on what’s been driving this:
When half of Domino’s Pizza’s business is coming through digital, every suit wants to know what’s going on in digital …
Business leaders have to have an understanding of technology in order to be really successful with digital, which is helping the rest of the company. So there are these forcing functions that are leading to a thinking they have to work together — they have to, and there’s a growing appreciation for what either side brings to the table, especially when they can agree on the data.
New Relic therefore is now engaging with business decision makers as well as the technologists that have been its early adopters. Which is where the fit with diginomica comes in, as a platform through which to nurture that engagement.
A new trend
This is an interesting development for us, since our partners have characteristically been enterprise application vendors rather than at the development and infrastructure layer. But there are a number of vendors we’ve been covering, like New Relic, that provide the technology tools to operate a digital business. New Relic may be the first of these to have become a partner, but we have a hunch there will be others who will follow its example. All are experiencing the same interest from enterprise leaders in understanding the contribution that digital technologies can make to business success.
The New Relic logo joined our Premier Partner Newsfeed last month, but we decided to postpone our official welcome until publication of their first partner post, which came out this week. How to tell SaaS look-alikes from the real thing has already been welcomed on social media as a useful and informative primer on the different types of SaaS.
Thank you New Relic for this contribution to our storehouse of digital insights — and, officially, welcome to diginomica!
Image credit - Feature image - New Relic CEO Lew Cirne on stage at FutureStack 2015 and logo via New RelicDisclosure - New Relic is a diginomica premier partner and funded Den Howlett's travel to attend its event. Read more on: Cloud platforms - infrastructure and architectureDevOps NoSQL and the open source stackDigital skills and trainingUX and application design 