
Simon Hansford
Coinciding with the launch of diginomica/government, we’re pleased to welcome UKCloud on board as our latest content partner.
Formerly known as Skyscape Cloud Services, UKCloud is one of the genuine success stories in cloud provision in the UK public sector.  This year the company was name the winner of The Sunday Times Hiscox Tech Track 100, a highly-regarded league table of fast-growing UK privately-held commercial technology companies. It’s also ranked highly on the Deloitte Global’s Technology Fast 500 EMEA programme, which also ranks fast-growing public and private technology companies. And it’s even been dubbed a ‘cool vendor‘ in the cloud space by Gartner. 
What marks out UKCloud in the public sector is that it exists purely to service UK public sector organisations. It counts among its customers The Cabinet Office, DVLA, Home Office, HMRC and MoD, as well as bodies in the wider public sectors, such as Genomics England. 
With UK only data centers, the issues of data sovereignty and data retention that are of particular concern to the public sector don’t come into play for UKCloud, something which is only likely to become increasingly important in the coming years. 
From a technology point of view, the firm has recently announced a major upgrade to its entire Cloud Native Infrastructure platform to support the 13th release of OpenStack, Mitaka, making it the first UK public sector public cloud provider to run at this release level. UKCloud has also become a corporate sponsor of the OpenStack Foundation. 
All told, UKCloud’s successes to date make it an ideal partner for diginomica/government’s public sector readership. And there’s lots more to do yet. As CEO Simon Hansford told our events affiliate Think Digital Partners: 

We are only at the start of our journey. There are some great markers for that journey, like some real momentum around the Marketplace and G-Cloud, some real use cases and proof points about the value of this new way of procurement, and a sense from all quarters that we’re not going to go back to the ‘Bad Old Days’. But it’s absolutely, just the beginning; last estimates I saw were that cloud is about 2% of the entire UK public sector market, as it stands. So we’re on the way, but a lot of ground still needs to be covered.

Welcome on board UKCloud!
Image credit - UKCloud Disclosure - UKCloud is a Government Partner of diginomica. Read more on: Digital government and public servicesGoverning identity privacy and security

