
Sailthru took me by surprise. I’ve already told the story of my first encounter with Sailthru CEO Neil Capel, and how my cynicism about personalization and the so-called omni-channel met its match in Capel, who has built a company to be reckoned with, based on these very concepts.
Well, the surprises keep poppin’ – Sailthru is now a diginomica premier partner. Quickie bio: Sailthru is headquartered in New York City, 450+ enterprise customers and counting, and have figured out some pretty neat use cases I haven’t kicked tires on before, like dynamically-generated content. Imagine a world where generic email “newsletters” are extinct, where information is delivered to you (or your prospects) – exactly when they want it – no more, no less. Worthy of a good debate at the least, right?
Sailthru’s first piece, Debunking the five myths of personalization, authored by Capel, is already live for your perusal. What does this mean to you, the discerning diginomica reader? it means that on a regular basis, Sailthru will be opening the next-gen personalization kimono, so to speak. Here on diginomica, they’ll share the stories and methods behind the enterprise voodoo that they do.
It is my hope – and Sailthru’s as well – that these pieces will pull the reader into a fruitful dialogue about how we can truly serve the modern consumer. Because that’s what all the omni-heck and automation tech comes down to – or so I think.
So how are we going to pull that off? Well, that’s diginomica’s secret sauce we’re talking about here, but it involves a distinct/vigorous editorial process. Translation: plenty of behind-the-scenes wrangling, until everyone thinks we’ve nailed it down. If we do this right, the result should be pieces that reflect Sailthru’s own culture – fun, data/tech insatiable, and yeah, maybe a little bit obsessive. You’ve got to have that last part if you want to take on the software giants (though some of the giants may just holler mercy and partner with Sailthru instead – we shall see.)
To tweak your content curiosity, here’s a highlight from Capel’s first piece:
If you’re using legacy technologies, personalization at scale really isn’t possible – it can be incredibly expensive, time consuming, and inefficient. Legacy technology houses data in relational databases and employs rules to govern them. To create 1:1 personalization, you’d need a unique rule for each individual. Few brands can afford that, so they end up with a veiled segmentation approach.
So that’s why personalization is so chronically impersonal – it needs what Capel calls “permutations at scale”. And we’re off and running!
Welcome to Capel and the entire Sailthru team.
Image credit: photo of Sailthru’s NYC office used by permission of Sailthru.
Read more on: CRM and customer experienceDigital and content marketing 