
Please join me in welcoming Neptune Software to the diginomica family of content partners.
Neptune punches well above its weight and for me, is the poster child for the scrappy enterprise focused startup that proves that with the right product/market fit, you can take on the Big Boys and win.
Based in Norway, Neptune represents the outgrowth of meeting requirements in the enterprise world when the mega vendors don’t make the cut. In this case, Neptune is primarily focused on the huge SAP market and the need for what we used to call RAD – Rapid Application Development. Today that means developing for any device, anywhere and in any modern SAP environment but with a focus on a great user experience.
Check this out:



diginomica typically partners with vendors we have come to admire and Neptune is no exception. I’ve known one of the founders for a number of years and especially in his role as an SAP Mentor, which encompasses passing on his experience and knowledge to the wider SAP community.
Last year, the company invited me to their annual user event. I made it clear from the get go that my priority was authentic user stories. To their credit, Neptune opened the doors and was happy for me to have unsupervised access to customers. Without exception they were wildly enthusiastic about the results of their Neptune deployments. That is incredibly rare and all the more important because developers don’t fight shy when things are going south.
Here’s an example:
Don Cleek, EMN Maintenance Financial and Special Projects Manager at Eastman Chemical, went through a considerable amount of detail covering the problems his group faced over the years in managing a $300 million maintenance budget that has had to deliver the classic ‘more with less.’ Apart from the monetary aspect, the scale – 275,00 work orders completed per annum – is staggering.
Cleek showed how his team evaluated the short list according to known service requirement needs for a mobile-first project designed to streamline the plant maintenance supply chain.
And here’s another:
Equally enthusiastic, Aravinda Boyapati, Supply Chain Manager, Advanced Tech (UX, Mobility, Block Chain, IoT, Voice/Bots) at J&J said that when first launched in 2017:
We immediately saw that Planet9 would be critical for getting modern applications into users’ hands. We’ve been an integral part of that development. We put 20 contractors onto development for the last year, helping Neptune build and squish bugs.
Again, to provide context, J&J has 350,000 business users and more than 700 SAP instances of various kinds. One of Boyapati’s objectives in adopting Planet 9 is to ensure that the current interest in low-code doesn’t lead to application sprawl.
And just to cap this off, my trip to the event did not require me to sit through a series of talking head briefings designed to make me feel good about the company. In short, Neptune is a vendor that lets its customers speak for themselves and as a reflection of what it delivers. No overt marketing required and we like that immensely.
I am looking forward to hearing from more Neptune customers and in the run up to our on boarding them, the company offered a tasty sounding smorgasbord of use cases we will be exploring over the coming months. And of course, I am expecting that this year’s user event will, once again, showcase some of the most interesting examples of how SAP customers can get from underneath the perception that app development in SAP landscapes needs to be a long and tortuous exercise.
Image credit - via NeptuneDisclosure - SAP is a premier partner at the time of writing. Read more on: DevOps NoSQL and the open source stackUX and application design 