
We’re delighted to welcome Deskera as diginomica’s newest partner today. This latest addition to our roster of enterprise software partners has established its reputation in South-East Asia and joins diginomica as a premier partner to support its continued expansion in the US market.
Like many of our partners, Deskera is a cloud-based software vendor that wants to help enterprises simplify and automate their operations so they can serve customers better in a fast-changing digital world. But it’s likely to be a less familiar name to many of our readers, as it is part of that growing trend of businesses first established in Asia that are now expanding their reach into other global markets such as the US.
Now headquartered in San Francisco, the fast-growing company currently has over 3,000 customers, with offices throughout India, in Malaysia and Indonesia, and a data center in Singapore. Its customer base includes well-known US brands such as Google, Grant Thornton, Intel and Starbucks, as well as south-east Asian businesses including StarHub, Sushi Tei, SIDC and Senwan Group.
Designed for rapid deployment and low cost of ownership, the fully integrated suite spans ERP, HRMS including payroll, CRM, project management and learning management. It complements its flagship Deskera ERP product with a full set of MRP functionality. Its customer base therefore encompasses the manufacturing and engineering sector as well as trading, distribution, and construction.
Deskera’s founder and CEO Shashank Dixit likes to describe Deskera as “committed to championing the cause of small and medium sized businesses.” The company publishes a Better Business Blog that promotes information and advice for business leaders, and that outward-looking approach to the market is one of the reasons the company decided to become a diginomica premier partner.
The first article to appear in the Deskera partner zone fits with our emphasis on diversity, and celebrates five women who have made notable contributions in the field of artificial intelligence. We look forward to sharing more Deskera content in the coming year.
[Updated — this article originally gave Singapore as the location of Deskera’s HQ].
Image credit - via DeskeraDisclosure - Deskera is a diginomica premier partner at time of writing. Read more on: Cloud ERP financials and supply chainContent marketing 