
In a remarkably clear and unambiguous judgment that surprised no constitutional lawyer but which Nigel Farage saw as yet another opportunity to talk nonsense, a UK court decided emphatically that the British government cannot use its prerogative powers to trigger Article 50 – the start of the Brexit process with Europe – without the consent of the British Parliament.
The ruling was made on the basis that the Leave/Remain referendum was advisory only and that triggering Article 50 would have the effect of changing current British domestic law. In the court’s view, the British constitution has long since established that it is only Parliament that can change laws.
The British pound jumped as much as 1.2% but gave back most of its gains when it became clear that the government plans to appeal the ruling and that while the judgment did not stipulate what happens next, it is thought that the British government will prevail in creating law that allows for the triggering of Article 50.
Most observers believe the British government will lose on appeal. However, it is thought that the government will be able to garner enough Parliamentary support to ensure that an act which bestows the powers it needs will be passed. I am not so certain.
While the arguments over Brexit have raged on, it has been clear from the day of the referendum that voters were largely registering a vote of protest at a government which it saw as leaving many of its citizens behind in terms of economic benefit. That protest has since spilled over into a surge in hate crimes. As the Brexit topic moves forward, I would be surprised if British members of Parliament didn’t bring those matters up in debate, seeking to focus government on the UK’s problems of economic inequality rather than the mechanism surrounding Brexit.
Perhaps of greater importance to diginomica readers though is the impact on technology investment.
A clutch of indicators suggest to me that while large scale projects may be off the table for the time being, this ruling does little to ease concerns but will play well for certain types of spend.
For example, the dramatic fall on the value of the British pound against other currencies and especially the US dollar has, on the one hand made exports more attractive, but has increased the cost of manufactured goods. This from the UK’s National Statistics Office:
Factory gate prices (output prices) for goods produced by UK manufacturers rose 1.2% in the year to September 2016, compared with a rise of 0.9% in the year to August 2016.
Core factory gate prices, which exclude the more volatile food, beverage, tobacco and petroleum products, rose 1.4% in the year to September 2016, unchanged from last month.
The overall price of materials and fuels bought by UK manufacturers for processing (total input prices) rose 7.2% in the year to September 2016, compared with a rise of 7.8% in the year to August 2016.
And this from the Bank of England:
In its latest round of forecasts the Bank projects consumer price inflation rising to 2.7 per cent in the final quarter of 2017, up from 2 per cent in its August forecasts.
In other indicators, I regularly follow UK house price changes and over the last three months, have seen an acceleration in the number of advertised prices being revised downwards by between 5-15%. House price reduction is usually a leading indicator of whether the economy is moving into a period of recession or stagnation.
Earlier on this year, we saw Infosys hit by the cancellation of a large contract with RBS, and while we have not heard explicitly from other vendors experiencing the same problem, a number of vendors have reported significant revenue headwinds arising out of currency fluctuations and Brexit in particular.
Short of a dramatic turnaround by the British government in the dying months of this year, that trend will continue, likely making it much more difficult for vendors to close the end of year large deals those same vendors normally expect at the prices they would like, especially where those deals are denominated in US Dollars or Euros. That, in turn, means just about every major vendor to the enterprise.
This week I have been asked by several people whether I think there will be a slow down in technology spending in the UK in the coming months. The very fact this topic has been raised should be a matter of concern to any vendor.
It is very hard to predict how spending will shape up overall because much depends on the type of technology we’re discussing. My sense is that with companies like Rimini Street continuing to see solid double digit growth for its third party maintenance solutions, there is at least a mood for releasing maintenance dollars for technology innovation from legacy implementations in large IT landscapes.
Having said that, I am reasonably certain that we will see a continued trend towards subscription based spending because that offers a better way to manage operational spend than the traditional up front licensing spend that characterized past investments.
And while there is considerable hype around omni-channel, AI and VR/AR, there can be little doubt that British retailers need to improve the customer experience in the face of Amazon’s relentless march. That means focused spending.
Elsewhere, Brexit provides the conditions where I am almost 100% certain that discretionary spending inside operational departments will be crimped by IT departments that need to get their IT landscapes under control.
What seems more likely, based upon conversations with analysts and others, is that UK based companies will think more about operationalizing devops and using open source technologies as a way of moving their specialist processes or business technology requirements forward but without needing to add much to current IT expenditures.
If all of this sounds like ‘uncertain’ to you then I’m not surprised. Business hates uncertainty but then for as long as the Brexit affair continues to run without clarity about what will happen, then I believe tech spending will be in the cross hairs. We will know more once we see the Q4 earnings results of bellweather vendors like SAP, Salesforce and others in the early part of 2017.
But what do you think? Let us know in comments.
Here is the summary judgment:
Summary r Miller v Secretary of State for Exiting the Eu 20161103 by Dennis Howlett on Scribd

Image credit - UK flag Brexit stormclouds from EU balloons below © meatbull - Fotolia.com, and via CorbettreportDisclosure - Infosys, SAP and Salesforce are premier partners at time of writing. Read more on: Cloud ERP financials and supply chainCRM and customer experienceDevOps NoSQL and the open source stackRetail e-commerce and the omni-channel 