
Today’s brain teaser is inspired by a brilliant analysis of what Donald Trump has successfully tapped into that has confounded his critics. That analysis comes from Mohanbir Sawhney, McCormick Foundation Chair of Technology & Director, Center for Research in Technology & Innovation at Kellogg but is augmented by a Gartner reality check which talks to topics that have been at the heart of what diginomica stands for since…forever. Let’s go.
Sawhney kicks off his ‘7 marketing lessons’ story with:
You need to focus on customers, not your product and your competition. The GOP became product-centric (pushing a rigid ideology) and competitor-centric (obstructing Obama blindly) and lost sight of their customers (white, blue-collar, rural, less-educated voters who are hurting economically).
You can argue whether Sawhney is right to restrict his analysis to this group of ‘customers’ because as others have pointed out over this electoral period, Trump has appealed to many different people and more broadly the lower and middle class in America who are seeing their standard of living dwindling away. Nonetheless, the focus on customer pain points is bang on the money.
For its part, I recently rediscovered a graphic that Gartner put out in 2013. Here it is:

In 2014, Hank Barnes of Gartner said of B2B sales:
Now customers are deciding when and where the sales engagement will actually begin as well as how and where that interaction will take place in more of a pull model.
For our part, we frequently say something along the lines of ‘customers speak louder than anyone else.’ Here is a great example from City Year that demonstrates how customers draw value from fresh approaches to problem solving. Play that back as part of the marketing and you can see how an appeal to value translates into an emotional connection.
On the flip side, remember how, in 2015, SAP customers were questioning the value of S/4 HANA and struggling to get answers they could buy into? You can probably add into the mix the more recent phenomenon of buyers not just researching but deciding whether their proposed vendor will be a good match and fit, long before the final buy decision is taken and over which vendors have little or no control.
Sawhney had other things to say that fit well with what we see in the market:
Trump is a brand with emotional appeal. You don’t counter emotions with logic. When you try to talk logically to people about Trump’s positions or his infamous utterances, you don’t get through. Its like telling people why your Android phone has better features than the iPhone. You get laughed at. You counter emotions with emotions. Bernie has a better chance than Hillary of battling emotions with emotions.
There are some parallels in the enterprise software market although they are few and far between. Workday for example, makes great use of co-founder Dave Duffield’s charm and customer commitment to both create interest and, at times, seal deals. He appeals first to the person and their needs, something its customers enjoy. Again, check out the City Year case study to get a better sense of what I mean.
This one got me thinking:
Disruptive challengers don’t play by the incumbent’s rules, they don’t target the same customers and they don’t offer the same value proposition. Trump does not compete on ideology or policy (he makes it up as he goes along), he doesn’t bother with facts or positions, he doesn’t appeal to traditional “Conservatives” or “Evangelicals” and he doesn’t position himself as a politician. His coalition is unique and crosses all traditional party and ideology lines. Democrats, take note!
Uber anyone? The parallels look awful similiar to me. Going back in history, I can also argue the same for Salesforce, which in its earliest incarnation avoided the IT shop in favor of appealing directly to the salesperson’s pain. It doesn’t get much more visceral than that in enterprise land. Fast forward 15 years and you don’t have to go far to meet thousands of adoring fans who just ‘love’ the Dreamforce experience and everything Marc Benioff CEO Salesforce puts into his shows.
Sooner or later, value has to be delivered and there will be continue to be plenty of discussion around what Trump stands for and how that gets translated into action. But I like the lessons that Sawhney draws because they put into stark relief some of the more radical changes we are witnessing but which often leave competitors befuddled.
Image credit - Featured image: Small Fish With Ambitions Of A Big Shark - Business Concept © Romolo Tavani via FotoliaDisclosure - Salesforce, SAP and Workday are premier partners at the time of writingRead more on: Content marketingCRM and customer experience 