
Joe Lubin
The European Union’s announcement that it had chosenConsenSys, a small, four-year-old, Brooklyn-based startup as its principle partner in creating a blockchain observatory and forum, may have raised a few inquisitive eyebrows among mainstream organizations. But within the small, fast growing, demimonde of blockchain innovators, ConsenSys is already a bonafide rock star.
Launched in October 2014 by Joe Lubin, a former vice president of technology for the private wealth management division of Goldman Sachs, among other less glamorous jobs, ConsenSys describes itself as:
…a decentralized blockchain production studio, a “hub” that coordinates, incubates, accelerates and spawns “spoke” ventures through development, resource sharing, acquisitions, investments and the formation of joint ventures. These spokes benefit from foundational components built by ConsenSys that enable new services and business models to be built on the blockchain.
What does that mean? Lubin’s full-house address to the mover and shakers at Davos in February expanded on the decentralized aspect:
ConsenSys was formed three years ago to explore what it means to build decentralized applications, what it might mean to wrap companies around decentralized applications. We came to the conclusion early that it made sense, and we started to build out many different projects: Developer tools, dev ops infrastructure and processes.
His breakthrough “ethereal moment,” (as Lubin describes it) came on January 1, 2014 when he obtained a copy of a then 20-year-old Russian-Canadian programmer named Vitalik Buterin’s first version of the Ethereum White Paper.  (If you want to feel really dumb, consider that Buterin co-founded Bitcoin magazine in 2011 when he was 17.)
Since that day, January 1, I — in conjunction with many gifted thinkers and technologists — have labored obsessively to help bring Ethereum, and elements of the decentralized economic and social ecosystem that we are building on it, into existence.
Buterin’s brilliant conception was a platform that would go beyond the financial use cases allowed by bitcoin, which is really only useful as a peer to peer electronic cash system that enables online Bitcoin payments. His 2013 paper described an alternative platform designed for any type of decentralized application developers would want to build. The system was called Ethereum.  Ethereum made it easy to create smart contracts, self-enforcing code that developers can tap for a range of applications.
On Thursday July 30, 2015, the distributed public blockchain network Ethereum achieved genesis, with Joe Lubin as a proud co-founder. The project was bootstrapped via an Ether (a type of crypto token that fuels the network) presale in August 2014 by fans all around the world. It is developed by the Ethereum Foundation, a Swiss non-profit, with contributions from great minds across the globe. Lubin said:
Vitalik had the vision to propose a scalable way to build the promise of decentralization, the promise of blockchain–scalable in a human sense. Instead of needing protocol priests to build new applications one at a time at the client layer of a blockchain system, Vitalik’s vision enabled millions of software developers around the world to identify their own problems and build their own solutions. We are starting to see an explosion of that technology.
Today, Ethereum is second only to Bitcoin in cryptocurrency blockchain value.  Much of the activity on the Ethereum blockchain is driven by ConsenSys projects. The company is building core components like self-sovereign identity, and about 30 other projects that are testing the hypothesis that the nature of business is changing. As Lubin describes it:
Where currently business offer services to consumers in a somewhat adversarial context, Web 3.0 turns everything upside down, changes the nature of identity, enables protocol-based open platforms where you can create n-sided markets that emerge with a set of services where business used to operate.
Over the past year, ConsenSys has been growing at a feverish pace.  At last count, the company now has over 600 employees in over 28 cities worldwide, and counting. Over the past two months, it has opened its largest operation outside the US in the Dubai Design District, and also set up shop in Paris.
My take
The EU Commission’s selection of ConsenSys to help “highlight key developments of the blockchain technology, promote European actors and reinforce European engagement with multiple stakeholders involved in blockchain activities,” not only affirms ConsenSys’ status as a clear leader in the fast-growing space, it is further confirmation that serious people see a serious future for blockchain technology.
The European Commission has been funding blockchain projects through the European Union’s research programs FP7 and Horizon 2020 since 2013. Up to 2020, it will fund projects that could draw on blockchain technologies for up to €340 million.
As Joe Lubin puts it:
Blockchain has come a far way from its basement days as a cypherpunk pipe dream. It is a global initiative and making a difference on the ground.
Quite whether that difference goes much beyond proofs of concept is another matter.
 
Image credit - via YouTubeRead more on: Financial services and fintech 