
We happily assure ourselves that “data is an asset.” The reality is: it can be. But it can also be as valuable as a half-finished screenplay in a basement box. So when M-Files approached me with a different take on addressing “dark” or elusive data, I took them up on a chat.
M-Files doesn’t use the term “dark data” for insecure or sinister connotations. As Greg Milliken and Matthew Meigs of M-Files explained to me, they define dark data as data that is essentially hidden or unavailable when users are attempting to make decisions or build accurate reports. I wanted to know how structured AND unstructured data fits into this conundrum.
Before we dig in, a word about M-Files: though analysts often classify them as an ECM (Enterprise Content Management) vendor, M-Files finds that classification a bit limiting. With more than 5,000 customers, their sweet spot is SMB (small and medium-sized businesses), which M-Files broadly defines as companies under 5,000 employees and under a billion in revenue. That means some of their high-end customers qualify as enterprise-level, which brings them into competition with OpenText, Documentum, etc. That said, here’s eight points from M-Files on the problem of dark data, and what companies should do about it.
1. Accessing enterprise data should be as easy as accessing music on an iPhone. To explain their take on dark data, Milliken and Meigs started with a surprising analogy: they contend that enterprise data should be an easy for the user to consume as music files on an iPhone. The goal is a network of related documents that can be pulled from wherever they might live. As Milliken put it:
You don’t put music in a folder on the iPhone. Music is stored in the device, and the phone is capable of determining lots of stuff about that music. It’s all based on the actual metadata. It can now show up by artist or by song or playlist or genre or date very dynamically, regardless of where the file is located. It’s based on the users need to consume it or desire for how they want to consume it.
2. Data becomes “dark” and less useful over time, resulting in missed business opportunities. M-Files defines “dark data” simply: it’s data that isn’t accessible to the user when they need it. And it gets darker over time. Milliken:
Data becomes dark over time, and that dims the business to continual replication of data and missed opportunity. If you don’t find some important thing that would’ve helped you close the deal or deliver better customer service, that’s a missed opportunity.
3. A one-size-fits-all approach to data access doesn’t work. Users with different roles need a dynamic way to find data based on their needs. As Milliken says:
Back to that iPhone metaphor, users want content that can now show up in a dynamic way based on your role, in the form they want to consume it. If I’m in accounting, I might want to see proposals by date or by quarter. If I’m in sales, I might be focused on what’s going on with a particular customer, so I’d be looking at that same information in a different way.
4. If data is organized based on document relationships, then users can “discover” valuable info/insights. Rather than searching a folder or location, if users can explore data based on relationships, they’ll make useful discoveries. And progress against dark/useless data will be made:
Once we’ve created these relationships between documents, and we’ve classified this information like that, now possibilities open up for people discovering things they didn’t necessarily know were there, and they weren’t even necessarily searching for. A case in point: you search on a document and find one kind of document, But you see it’s got a relationship to a customer.
Now I open that up and I say, “Wait a minute, there’s ten other documents associated with that customer. I see that two of those were proposals or contracts that are coming up for renewal, whatever it might be.” That’s why you want to be able to expand that object, and see its relationship to other documents. That builds a network of connection that starts to break down the barriers to dark data.
5. A good system to access dark data allows for search AND discovery. A combination of meta data and full document search is ideal. Tags that must be applied by user are NOT ideal as that places too much burden on the user to classify their own data before it’s useful.
6. Illuminating dark data means combining unstructured and structured data. ERP and CRM vendors may claim there is no dark/elusive data in their systems, and that they do a good job of tying in unstructured data also. However, users may not be skilled in all the different interfaces needed to access that data. And:
7. To avoid a dark data problem, ERP/CRM and ECM systems must be connected. Milliken and Meigs told me that AIIM, the Association for Information and Image Management did a study on the percentage of ECM systems that had an active integration with an existing core business system with structured data, such as ERP, CRM, HR, or finance.Less than 40 percent of companies had that connection.
8. A good “dark data” test: see if you can access content that isn’t attached to a record or transaction. Data needs to reveal itself in the context of how you need it. And that’s where some structured data systems fall short. Milliken:
One of the traditional ways that an ERP system or a CRM will store unstructured content, such as a sales proposal, is to attach the content to a customer record. Let’s say you need to search on that information. What is your ability to find that content when it’s not associated with that record?
The wrap – solving the dark data problem
M-Files believes their solution addresses these problems. On the ECM integration to CRM/ERP many companies lack, Meigs says 90 percent of their deployments involve such an integration.
What I found most compelling about M-Files is their push towards that iPhone analogy for enterprise data. I am running into this a lot lately: the convergence of next-gen UX and analytics. Given that M-Files doesn’t (yet) offer a complete analytics solution, there is still work to do connecting the dots.
We ran out of time for a full ROI discussion, but Milliken and Meigs did point me to useful resources, including a case study from Krogius (an insurance company), which cites a 150 percent improvement in data collections speeds, as well as global access by their agents to more accurate data.
M-Files has an extensive customer case study library which you can sort by industry (downloads require a short sign up each time you visit the site, so make sure to download all the ones you want at the same time).
Integrating data between ERP and ECM is one thing, but the hot ticket would be pulling in ALL relevent unstructured data – wherever it lives. As Milliken put it:
Imagine unstructured content could actually be anywhere. It could be in Box, it could be in SharePoint, it could be in Documentum. Imagine you can unify that now with a mobile device. You search, you find a file, you see it’s got a relationship with a customer. Now you’re looking at that customer information. That’s the vision that we see coming as a direct connection to what we’re doing today, which I think is really exciting.
Most business users would say their search for data is more like rummaging for a buried DVR manual than pulling a Beyoncé track from their phone. Let’s see where M-Files goes from here.
 
Image credit - Hacking © BillionPhotos.com - Fotolia.com.Disclosure - Diginomica has no financial ties to M-Files. M-Files PR approached me on this topic and I found the story interesting. Read more on: Analytics planning and data analysis 