
I was fortunate enough to be taught from a very early age that reading is a prime way to open up the world. Those were in the days when travel was nothing like it is today and an adventure consisted of traveling 200 miles to an unfamiliar part of the country. Today, the world is a plane ride away. Even so, there’s much t be learned from reading widely and deeply, a discipline I’ve never lost.
With that in mind, it won’t surprise to know that reading other people’s stuff is high on my daily ‘to do’ list. When reading, I’m looking for two things.
First, I want to get an expanded view of topics in which I’m already immersed in some way by people who are far smarter than me. Note that I am not looking for confirmation of a point of view. Second, I’m looking for entirely fresh thinking that takes me into challenging areas. That second category provides me with a framework around which I can pose fresh questions of my own.
Each day I put aside at least an hour for what I term ‘discovery.’ I use Instapaper to dump things I find from a variety of aggregation sources like Nuzzel, XiQ, Refind and Medium. I also tap into Jon Reed’s Pinboard. Other sources include the FT, The Guardian Washington Post, and the NYT. I also get a few newsletters each week that provide even more content. If you’ve not already subscribed then I thoroughly recommend The Exponential View, TechDirt and Axios Login .They are consistently on point. From time to time, links to great content turn up on my Twitter and LinkedIn feeds. Facebook? Not so much except for light reading.
I often go down a rabbit hole of links inside stories that are interesting to get additional perspectives on a topic. This is particularly true for stories that have an academic flavor where there may be multiple and competing views. The same goes for stories that are contentious. Example topics of the latter are the blockchain, the future of work and economic theory.
Each day, I share what I term Six of the Interweb Best on the digiDaily. These are what I  hope will prove thought-provoking to regular digiDaily readers. Jon does something similar with his ‘Best of the Rest’ when he writes up Enterprise Hits and Misses. If you’ve not subscribed to the digiDaily or digiWeekly then the subscription form is available at the top of this story.
With that preamble out the way, what have I been reading recently that’s interesting? I’ll share just a handful that I included in Monday’s digiDaily to provide some context:

Bloodhound; One Small Step – Debra Lilley, one of my favorite all-time people tells this wonderful story about the curiosity of children and where their thinking takes them. Us grownups would do well to learn from children.
Economists Are Obsessed with “Job Creation.” How About Less Work? –  Peter Gray. This may be a tad utopian for my market driven friends but it makes a very good set of points. It’s a topic I’m mulling.
Fundamental challenges with public blockchains – Preethi Kasireddy. This is a VERY LONG read but absolutely worth the time investment. I worry that the frothiness around the Blockchain could lead to deep disappointment. This story contains enough clues for folk to at least ask questions.
1.4 Billion Clear Text Credentials Discovered in a Single Database – Julio Casal provides chapter and verse. TL;DR – if you’ve got 41GB to spare on disc somewhere, you too could be mining for passwords. Me? I’m clamping down on the 112 passwords I use.
‘The Shed at Dulwich’ was London’s top-rated restaurant. Just one problem: It didn’t exist. – Eli Rosenberg walks us through a simple piece of social engineering that utterly fooled the TripAdvisor algorithms. Absolutely brilliant. Exposes what happens when the algos aren’t looking for the right thing.
Never Under-Estimate the Immune System – Because John Hagel says it, people take notice but the age-old problem of ‘institutional anti-bodies’ as I call them are right there waiting to derail ANY project.

As always, I love to hear about new sources of information so if you have some recommendations, then please drop them in comments. They don’t have to be solely on topics that diginomica writes about. I’m quite partial to cookery recipes (hint) and especially if they are ones that allow me to bake gluten-free.
Image credit - public imagesRead more on: Productivity 