

Do you use Google Apps for Work? If so then you now use Google G Suite following a rebranding of Google’s cloud based productivity suite that includes Gmail, Docs, Sheets, Hangouts etc. At the same time, Google is ramping up its use of machine learning to bring some interesting new capabilities to Drive users. they’re not all fully baked across all platforms but they are coming at a fast clip.
Over the coming weeks, you’ll see our new name and logo appear in familiar places, including the Admin console, Help Centre and on your invoice. G Suite is still the same all-in-one solution that you use every day, with the same powerful tools – Gmail, Docs, Drive and Calendar.
Are you serious?
At an invite only event held earlier today, Google showed off some new capabilities such as facial emotion analyzer and a spreadsheet populated in real time with government data sets. The Quick Access capability is touted as ‘knowing’ what documents you might be searching for before you begin typing in a search term, based upon past behaviors. How well this works in practice is yet to be determined but the idea certainly makes sense to me as someone who has hundreds of Docs held in a shared diginomica folder.
During the Q&A, Diane Green, Google’s enterprise cloud chief conceded that the most common question she gets asked is: ‘Is Google serious about the enterprise?’ This has ben a question on many buyer’s minds for as long as I can remember. When you look at the reality behind Google’s business model, enterprise apps remains a rounding error, accounting for less than two percent of all Google revenue, according to some estimates.
Over the last seven months, Google has been sending increasingly strong signals that it is much more serious about the enterprise than at any time I can remember. Google is in a dog fight with both Microsoft Azure and Amazon Web Services for infrastructure as a service (IaaS.) Right now, it is thought that Microsoft is making the stronger play whereas in 2015, it was thought that Microsoft and Google were at level pegging. Both Microsoft and Google lag a long way behind Amazon on IaaS.
Green claims that Google isa growing fast in the enterprise cloud business but didn’t put any actual numbers on the topic, preferring instead to talk about the rates of growth. From this perch, such commentary is somewhat disingenuous because without knowing the baseline figures it is impossible to say whether claimed growth of  4x in compute applications is anything more than the result of a company that had virtually no revenue the year before.
Machine learning to the fore
Regardless, the new features that Google is adding into the productivity portfolio will be welcome additions to a suite that ostensibly has seen little real progress the last few years. So what’s new? Here are some of the major announcements from today:
Quick Access – which shaves 50 percent off the average time it takes to get to the right file by eliminating the need to search for it. It uses machine learning to intelligently predict the files you need before you’ve even typed anything. Quick Access will be available globally for G Suite customers on Android.
Explore in Docs, Sheets and Slidesto bring you insights, design tools and research recommendations so you can create better work, faster. Just ask Explore — with words, not formulas — to get answers about your data. You can ask questions like “how many units were sold on Black Friday?,” “what are the top three items by sales price?,” or “what was the total cost of jackets last month?” Less time crunching numbers + crafting formulas = more time to find key insights and use them. Explore in Sheets is available on the web, Android and now on iOS, too.
Smart Scheduling in Calendar – If you’re using G Suite, “Find a time” already lets you set up meetings much faster in Calendar on Android. Today it’s coming to iOS and by the end of the year, the web. We’re also adding smart room booking, so you can easily find a place to meet as well. “Find a time” suggests meeting times and available rooms based on your preferences.
Team Drive – For early adopters only. Google is providing more granular control over team access to content.
Many of these features will be welcome additions but I wonder the extent to which Google IS serious about enterprise. Perhaps a better gauge of that was the announcement that Google has teamed up with Accenture for service delivery. This from Silicon Angle’s Robert Hof:
Google also announced an alliance with Accenture to develop cloud-based solutions for customers specific industries to develop better digital experiences for customers and manage their own operations better. And it said it has formed a Customer Reliability Engineering unit and announced a number of new customer support services.
My take
We are avid users of Google services internally but it is a fact of life that Office rules the world. Microsoft’s recent Office 365 announcements that include important alliances with Adobe and Workday, along with the acquisition of LinkedIn provide a much more visible show of strength than that demonstrated by Google today.
It is also a fact of life that we have yet to get our own external contributors ‘trained’ or using Google Docs for their own submissions. We are still in ‘cut ‘n’ paste mode out of Word docs.
Even so, for those enterprises looking too drive efficiency that relies upon machine learning capability, G Suite is an interesting place to start. Google has been in the machine learning business for a very long time and so functions like Quick Access and Explore should work pretty smoothly. the proof of course will come in the eating.
I can also see that these new capabilities will be useful for businesses of all sizes. I can, for example, imagine how Quick Access will help SMBs get their Drive spaces under control I can also see how Explore will help SMBs work better with complex spreadsheets.
Image credit - via GoogleDisclosure - Workday is a premier partner at time of writing.Read more on: Analytics planning and data analysisCloud platforms - infrastructure and architectureCollaboration sharing and digital productivityFuture of workMobile 