
Dave Hart, ServiceMax
Most of us have probably lived this scenario: the air conditioner, TV, or internet fizzes out. You call customer service, a repairperson comes out to fix it a few days later, and eventually you’re on your way.
Keyword — eventually.
Fast-forward to present. That scenario, especially applied to large industrial manufacturers, is getting completely upended thanks to technological disruption in the industry. Those consumer examples are just a microcosm of a broader industrial revolution underway.
We’ve seen our field service industry go from years of traditional ‘clipboard and toolkit’ service, where technicians reacted to outages after the fact and hoped for the best, to today, where many service-oriented companies are taking a proactive — and increasingly predictive — approach to servicing their machines through Internet of Things and cloud-based platforms.
Fast-forward a few years more, and we may even see an entirely different future of field service. The industry is already testing technologies like drones and augmented reality in the hopes of bringing better, quicker service to more people.
A new mindset
For technicians, the move toward all of this technology ushers in a full-on macro change that has daily impacts. With more advance warning before heading out into the field, engineers can be armed with an intimate knowledge of what they’re walking into — machine diagnostics, repair history, warranty information, and performance data, to name a few.
That’s great, but all this brings with it changes, challenges, and evolutions — chief of which is how it’s evolving the profile of service engineers themselves. Engineers will be forced to completely evolve their mindset from reactive to proactive, as service offerings move from emergency or break-fix work to preventative and predictive. This changes the day-to-day of a technician’s job drastically, as they move from triage toward being an overall ‘health provider’ — out of the comfort zone for many.
But the largest change will come at the hands of technology. Today’s technicians are beginning to embrace the power of technology to better serve customers. Many sign into iPads on the job to receive diagnostic information, real-time and historical data, product warranty information, and part availability, which enables them to be proactive about addressing issues in the field.
The modern engineer will need to become more tech-savvy overall, with a tremendous amount of data at his or her fingertips that can inform better and more efficient repairs ahead of time. Data is becoming the most valuable asset to a field service company, and using it the right way means a proactive advantage before field techs even set foot on the scene.
Field service evolves
IBA, one of the leading makers of medical devices, services dialysis machines and heart monitors without any tools at all — all techs need is their laptop and they can identify and solve any issues through the software on-screen. And at another customer, a fitness equipment manufacturer, field service engineers receive alerts when treadmills or elliptical machines are headed toward an outage — and with iPads and laptops in hand, these techs can get background information on parts, usage, and warranty before digging into the problem with actual tools.
Thanks in large part to the industry’s move toward technology and technical skills, instead of being viewed as a handyman’s profession, the field service technician has evolved into an actual career path. Think back to sales jobs 20 or 30 years ago. Nobody wanted to go into sales; it was tough work for low pay, and it was known as a fallback career by many.
That’s just not the case anymore.
Hordes of graduates are heading into sales each year with companies rewarding them financially and career-wise. Sales-focused degrees and classes are even being taught in university classrooms. The reputation of sales has evolved into one of smart, technical, successful professionals — and I predict the same shift is starting to break ground in field service.
Empowering technicians
Field service jobs are now data-focused, specialized, and take a great deal of technical skill — but still afford technicians an opportunity to interact with customers, contribute to bottom-line success, and grow job satisfaction.
Take ATM service provider FTSI. For years, field techs at FTSI — 75-80% of the company’s workforce — were faced with limited information when it came to keeping machines running and customers satisfied. They relied on paper and pens to stay organized, and reacted to machines after an outage — and for a naturally mobile company, this simply wasn’t working. COO Michael Wilson then enabled his technicians to leverage cloud-based and mobile service. The result? Cutting response times by an hour and maintaining 99.97% uptime on machines. That’s an industry-leading stat.
FTSI’s field technicians were empowered with the information they needed to fundamentally evolve the organization’s future. No longer are engineers stuck with misinformation or lack of knowledge. They’re now hand-selected for jobs, prepared before they head into the field, and more efficient and effective while managing the asset. At the heart of this all is an understanding that field service is inherently connected to core business — without the technicians, our machines wouldn’t be able to serve our customers and could seriously impact the bottom line of our organizations. Now that’s an important job.
A new school of field service
As we continue to see field service embrace technology in myriad ways, a new school of service is beginning to displace the old. Tools and clipboards have been replaced by iPads and data, much to the benefit of field service organizations and their customers. And as this technology continues to grow in the industry, field service is shedding a long-held reputation, instead becoming a viable career opportunity for technical, specialized, and successful workers, young and old.
I for one can’t wait to see how this new school of field service continues to advance the industry for the better.
Image credit - Fixing problem with screwdriver on digital © Sergey Nivens - Fotolia.com; portrait by ServiceMaxRead more on: Customer service managementFuture of workPartner ZoneServiceMax 