
Data sharing in the public sector is a thorny topic. We’ve seen examples within the National Health Service, where due to poor communication with the public, potentially hugely beneficial data projects have had to be scaled back out of fear of how well that personal information is being looked after.
And as we know, well organised, clear and structured data, which can be easily and securely shared, makes it much easier to build and deliver digital services.
Which is why data is a huge focus for this government. We’ve recently taken a good look at its plans for introducing data registers, but this week Cabinet Office Minister Matthew Hancock also proposed new data legislation for government bodies.
An eight week consultation has been launched, calling for feedback from experts and stakeholders on whether the plans are appropriate.
Minister Hancock said:
Data is the fuel for the digital revolution. The very best policies and services are developed around information that’s current, relevant and makes sure you can access government services just as easily as iTunes.
There is huge potential for improving citizens’ lives through data sharing in the UK. The consultation we launch today will help make sure we get data right and bolster security whilst making people’s lives better.
So what do we know? Whilst I’m not a huge fan of ‘list journalism’, given the length and complexity of the consultation document, I thought it might be easier to pull out a few key areas of interest.
The focus – The proposals intend to support two things. Firstly the delivery of better targeted and more efficient public services to citizens. And secondly better research and official statistics to inform better decision-making. As part of this, there is a focus on using data to tackle fraud and debt, which includes plans to allow authorities to pilot projects to both identify where individuals have debts with a number of agencies and to spot conflicting information across different public services that would suggest patterns of fraud.
Assurances – The proposals state that the new legislation will “simplify a complex legal landscape” that slows the pace of government’s work to modernise and and improve services. But it is also quick to offer assurances that these new laws will “improve the safe handling of citizen data” and that they are not about “selling public or personal data, collecting new data from citizens or weakening the Data Protection Act”. It goes on to say that the sharing or linking of data (which is an area of concern, given that in the past it has been argued that this can lead to data becoming identifiable) should be both proportionate and purposive.
 Security – The legislative proposals state that the data programme has “security at its heart” and that it “includes proposals to expand the use of appropriate and ethical data science techniques”. This will mostly focus on a shift towards querying datasets through APIs in place of the typical practice of using bulk data shares.
Repercussions – It’s clear from the proposals document that in addition to using modern security techniques to ensure that data is protected, the government also wants to introduce an element of fear if you get things wrong. For example, it says that where data is connected there will be clear processes and greater transparency about how that data is used, but if you break these codes of practice there will be “repercussions”. Equally, it states that to protect against the unlawful disclosure of data, it is proposing a new criminal offence for unlawful disclosure to be introduced. Those found guilty of an offence will face an imprisonment term of up to two years, a fine or both.
HMRC and health are special – Despite the desire to make these plans as flexible as possible, the consultation recognises that data held by both HMRC and health organisations is going to need extra care. The document states that to reflect that there is “greater sensitivity” with respect to data held by HMRC, additional safeguard will be used to protect HMRC data once it has left the department. Equally, it notes that for health and care data to be included in the plans, “additional safeguards regarding confidential personal information” are likely to be required.Cabinet Office and Health officials are going to work together to find a way to incorporate an extra layer of safeguards for this data.
Not the default – The new legislative gateway should not be the go-to to meet every objective or for every public service to be delivered. The proposed powers should be used in situations where: a. The objective could not be met without data sharing; b. It is not realistic and practicable to use consent to achieve the intended outcome or use of consent would not meet the criteria of free and informed decision making; and c. Sharing and analysis of de-identified data would not achieve the intended outcome.
Sharing with private companies – It’s clear from the proposals that plans to share data with private companies could very well be introduced. The consultation document notes that civil society groups “expressed the view that the scope of powers should exclude the sharing of information with non-public sector bodies that fulfil a public service on behalf of a public authority”. However, it goes on to say that public authorities felt this reaction failed to recognise that significant parts of public services are delivered by non-public sector bodies. As a result, “the effectiveness of the power to help improve the lives of citizens would be limited”.
Plans for the whole of the UK – Finally, the document also notes that new data sharing powers impact on matter that are devolved to the governments of Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland. Discussions have taken place with officials in devolved administrations about the proposals and how they might allow for UK-wide coverage, should their Ministers and legislatures wish to adopt the legislation. However, it notes that there are “clear benefits to citizens and the devolved territories if powers to share information are extended across the UK”.
My take
These proposals are necessary and a good start. However, how they are communicated is going to be vital. As we have seen before, if the public feels like they are being duped with their data, there will be a backlash and plans will have to be scaled back.
I don’t see anything too shocking in the document on a first read – although the attempt to include private companies in the data sharing plans may worry some, even though these companies are delivering public services.
That being said, data reforms are a sensitive business. And I expect there will be some attempts to block in the coming months. Although this is a complex area, clarity will be key.
Read more on: Data privacyDigital government and public servicesRegulation

