
In a week that will focus heavily on the World Economic Forum in Davos, here’s an interesting stat to get us started. This year’s gathering has put climate change higher up the agenda than ever before, with 15 sessions dedicated to the subject. Add to that a further nine sessions on the topic of clean energy and that’s a strong statement of intent. 
Inevitably there will be the usual sniping and accusations of hypocrisy about the impact on the climate of the number of private jets flying into Switzerland this week, but it’s nonetheless a timely reminder of the corporate, political and societal ramifications of climate change. 
That’s particularly the case as the week will end with the inauguration of US President Donald Trump, a man who famously once called global warming a Chinese hoax to undermine US manufacturing and whose Cabinet nominations include a number of outspoken climate change deniers. 
With Trump committed to bolstering the traditional coal industry, it’s safe to say that pressure on US firms to implement climate change improvement programs isn’t going to be as overt – if at all – as it has been over the past eight years of the Obama adminstration. 
From a tech industry perspective, this could have some interesting implications. Under heavy criticism from environmentalists, tech firms have made some significant improvements in cleaning up the damage done by ever-larger data centers. In part at least, this has been driven by awareness of the damage done to corporate image by being perceived as a polluter by an environmentally-savvy public.
Changed priorities ahead
But if the prevailing political wisdom turns towards a Trump-ian worldview, that may give pause for thought for some. Or is it too late to turn the tide? The likes of Apple, Facebook and Google made 100% renewable energy commitments over four years ago and have since been joined by more than 20 leading hi-tech firms in setting that goal. 
In its annual report just published – Clicking Clean: Who is winning the race to build a green internet?  – Greenpeace identifies three powerful incentives for the tech industry to stay on its current course:


Customers who have carbon or renewable energy goals are demanding that their digital infrastructure is powered by clean sources of electricity.
The rising cost competitiveness of renewable energy, with long-term contracts increasingly at cost parity or even beating fossil fuels in many markets, while also providing long-term price security.
Competitiveness among IT companies and the linkage of brand identity with a renewable supply of energy, given the growing concern on climate change among employees and customers.

But while those are compelling motivators, Greenpeace warns that some of the tech firms now committing to renewable energy goals are potentially after a quick hit of good PR and not seeking genuinely transformational change: 

 These companies are erroneously seeking to receive similar recognition as did the more impactful leadership of Apple, Google, Facebook, and others in the marketplace for being green. Shortcuts threaten to undermine the high impact efforts set by leaders within the sector, reducing pressure on utilities to shift their investment to bring new renewable energy onto the grid and creating a longer path toward a brighter and more sustainable future.

Such firms aren’t going to object a more skeptical regime in the White House and fewer lectures from the top on putting their data centers in order: 

Faced with a lack of access to renewables in monopoly markets, there are increasing signs that some companies are resorting to status quo shortcuts to reach their claims of being renewably powered, increasing the demand for dirty energy and undermining the continued leadership and momentum of market leaders who are legitimately driving additional renewable investment. 

Without naming names (yet), Greenpeace makes a clear distinction here: 

A company whose strategy focuses on maximizing impact and changing the grid over the long-term can serve as a powerful catalyst in driving investment in renewable generation, as well as moving both utilities and policymakers to prioritize bringing more renewable energy on the grid. The leaders—Apple, Google, Facebook, and now Switch—have shown a commitment and ability to remain focused on longer term plays to open monopoly markets to renewables.
Conversely, a company primarily motivated by securing the right to claim a renewable energy supply, but not in actually changing the mix of the electricity on the grid that is powering its operations is more likely to result in reducing the pressure on utilities to shift to renewables, and increase the demand for fossil fuel and other forms of dirty electricity in its supply. Without stronger standards of reporting and commitment to additionality of supply, there is a real danger that the growing number of shortcuts being used by some companies to advance toward their 100% renewable goal will weaken the resolve of current corporate renewable leaders to pursue high impact strategies. 

The good and the room for improvement
So who’s getting it right? For the third year in succession, Apple comes out top of Greenpeace’s rankings, closely followed by Google: 

Both Apple and Google continue to lead the sector in matching their growth with an equivalent or larger supply of renewable energy, and both companies continue to use their influence to push governments as well as their utility and IT sector vendors to increase access to renewable energy for their operations. 

Source: Greenpeace

At the other end of the spectrum, Oracle still has much room for improvement, according to Greeenpeace’s rankings.  Of Oracle, the environmental group states:
Oracle is seeking to expand its enterprise database business model into one that is much more cloud focused. Oracle has performed consistently near the bottom of our evaluations of US data center operator since 2012, with little signs of improvement this year. Oracle’s renewed focus to become more of cloud focused company to compete with AWS has led to rapid expansion in Virginia and Chicago that rely almost exclusively on dirty sources of electricity.
Amazon Web Services (AWS) is praised for having made steps forward, but Greenpeace argues that the renewable v hydro-electric mix in its data centers has actually fallen from 23% in 2015 to 17% in 2016.  It also notes that Amazon essentially doubled its data center capacity in Virginia, which outstripped the benefits of additional renewable energy investment:


Given AWS’s continued lack of transparency and its rapid growth in Virginia and other markets largely served by dirty energy, it remains unclear whether the AWS cloud is actually on a path to becoming renewably powered. 

This lack of transparency angle is one that climate change skeptics in the Trump administration may well pick up on, particularly if a trade war with China ensues. Greenpeace’s report notes that data on Chinese firms energy use and commitments just isn’t available: 

Among emerging Chinese internet giants such as Baidu, Tencent, and Alibaba, the silence on energy performance still remains. Neither the public nor customers are able to obtain any information about their electricity use and CO2 targets.

Why then, might the argument run in some circles, should US providers be put under pressure when their Chinese counterparts are not held to the same account? 
My take
What practical position the Trump regime ultimately takes on climate change remains to be seen. As with so many of the more lurid promises and commitments from the campaign trail, there has been a small degree of walking back on climate change. That said, the Cabinet nominations leave little room for doubt that skepticism and denial is going to be the order of the day. Certainly, climate change isn’t going to be a flagship agenda item in the short term. 
It’s to be hoped that tech leaders are set on a path that won’t be interrupted here. There will inevitably be opportunists who will welcome the change in prevailing political wisdom as a chance to be seen to tick the right boxes, but not actually do very much in practical terms. Those who do need to have this highlighted. 
As AWS gains more of a foothold in the public sector, governments around the world need to pay special attention to its continuing efforts on the renewable energy front and insist on more progress. Other providers to government have made significant progress or commitments. For example, last year Salesforce signed a 12-year wind energy agreement for 40 megawatts (MW) of a new West Virginia wind farm through a virtual power purchase agreement (VPPA), while UK provider UKCloud boasts of delivering Carbon Neutral services and provides customers with a monthly carbon offset certification. 
The climate change debate is about to enter a new phase. Progress has been made among tech providers. It cannot be allowed to slip.
Image credit - Freeimages.com/ pakize öztürkDisclosure - At time of writing, Oracle, Salesforce and UKCloud are premier partners of diginomica. Read more on: Cloud platforms - infrastructure and architectureDigital government and public services

