
A good number of brands and media are putting their faith in the claimed ubiquity of Facebook and its global reach. We are not among them. Mostly. So imagine our surprise when an otherwise fairly ordinary story (from my perch) suddenly went nuts aka viral courtesy of Facebook. There was something of a perfect storm in the sense I had been mulling whether to run a couple of Facebook ad experiments when the story started to take off. Admittedly, our Stuart used a catchy headline, (we like it when he does that), something with which some readers took umbrage, but that’s not the point. Here’s what we observed.

The original article was published at 3.41am PT, 11.41am UK time on 7th March. On that day the story got a reasonable amount of traffic but nothing out of the ordinary.
On 8th March, we started to notice a general spike in traffic but at that point I was not thinking about any particular story. Coincidentally, I place a Facebook 2.37pm PT, targeting book lovers. By that stage, the story was garnering a good number of comments that spoke specifically to the consumer elements of the story.
By close of play on 8th March, our various stats packages were telling us that the story had been hit around 100,000 times and had been shared on Facebook about 15,000 times.
9th March and the flow of traffic eased up considerably, as you might expect given that most individual stories have a half life of 48 hours at best. Facebook told us the ad had reached just shy of 5,200 people and pulled an engagement rate of 3.8%. Digging further into the engagement metrics, we found that several relatively high profile authors who use Facebook as a means to tell their stories had picked up on our story and acted as an amplifying flywheel. That (mostly) explained the extraordinary traffic spike we saw over the 48 hour period.

By the time the ‘show’ was over, the story had gathered 98 comments, well in excess of 160,000 views and 25,000 Facebook ‘shares.’ A cause for celebration? Not so fast. Under normal circumstances we would have been very happy but we were not. If anything, we were worried. Spikes of this kind are instructive at multiple levels. In our case, we care about an enterprise audience and while the original story was meant to to convey a sense of the issues around an omni-channel strategy for a company we have been following for some time, it clearly hit a nerve among consumers, concerned they might lose content.
Learnings
It is this last point – the consumer impact – that worries us at one important level. We don’t aim our content at consumers and so one interpretation might be that the skewing effect of the massive spike plays havoc with our data when we look for trends. Another view might be that the fact the story hit the consumer nerve should act as a red flag for a company executing against a strategy designed to reign in losses.
My view is, that among other things, the $30 I spent experimenting with Facebook was money well spent. We saw and could identify a flywheel effect that helps inform us about topics about which a tangental audience might be interested. We also learned something about consumer habits we had long suspected. The bounce rate for that story was an insane 96%. In short, virtually all those visiting the story could care less about anything else other than the potential impact of the story’s central thesis. We also saw that a large proportion of those Facebook impressions came from mobile devices. That lines up well with what Facebook tells us about consumption. Does that combination of factors make those engagements valueless form our perspective? Probably – because it is highly unlikely that we will have a story that creates a similar impact anytime soon. In short, there is no ‘stickiness’ factor we can use to bring readers back. Which brings me on to the second Facebook experiment.
Experiment no.2
We recently ran an in depth analysis of the Zenefits debacle. It was largely well received and, as expected, did well on the LinkedIn channels where we contribute to certain of the HR related groups. Given what we had seen with the earlier story, I decided to run a similar Facebook campaign, this time targeting HR related people. Facebook told me the potential audience would be somewhere in the 6,000-32,000 range. I had to smile because given the size of the Facebook universe, it struck me that those numbers were awfully small.
The ad ran from yesterday through to a few hours ago. Lo and behold, Facebook sent us some traffic but this time it was meagre, with an engagement rate of 2.8%. That happens but then I started to look at who Facebook said it had sent. Without wishing to be rude, the answer is (almost) no-one who could possibly have been interested in the topic and, predictably, nothing by way of flywheel traffic. We’ve seen this before. We call it out as Facebook click fraud, in large part because while Facebook claims engagement, it is not real in the sense that we understand the term.
Analyzing Buzzfeed on Facebook
We have a long running series of stories covering how media is changing, the impact of networks and how both brands and media have to become smarter not just about content creation but also about how it is delivered and distributed. In that context, Jon Reed’s recent analysis of how Buzzfeed is changing the way it measures what matters is instructive to enterprise ad buyers. The Facebook problem as I now view it is more nuanced. If we are to believe what Buzzfeed is telling the world, then video has become their main source of ad revenue generation, albeit the company spends 10-15% (depending on which numbers you read) of all revenue getting that content to go viral via Facebook and other channels.
I recently undertook an analysis of Buzzfeed content because, among other things, it tells us something about the kind of readership/viewer they are attracting and the extent to which they rely on Facebook. The results were staggering. Since the beginning of March until the date of this story, I discovered that Buzzfeed shared March content of 1,654 pieces accumulated 3.3 million shares of which Facebook accounted for 97%. But when you look at the top dozen or so pieces of content, which account for 15% of traffic, these are the titles you discover:

The Wizarding World Of Harry Potter May Host A Yule Ball, People
23 Jokes That Are Both Stupid And Smart
23 Hilariously Accurate Tweets About Trader Joe’s Parking Lots
150 coisas para fazer em São Paulo pelo menos uma vez na vida
10 prazeres que só quem tem a memória horrível pode sentir
21 Pictures That Prove Hipsters Should Be Banned From Food Forever
What Per Cent Northern Are You
What Is Your Bitch Percentage
You Should Probably Adopt One Of These 20 Mini Donkeys
Who Need Forever Homes
Netflix Will Pay You $4,000 To Travel And Take Instagram Photos
The Trailer For “Game Of Thrones” Season 6 Is Finally Here And Oh My God
A Black Man Wore Different Kinds Of Clothing To See If People Treated Him Differently

Hardly brain food. But it is when you analyze for Facebook promotions that things get more interesting. 32% of all the content shared relates to Facebook promotions. Facebook accounts for 42% of content shared. The top 12 Facebook shared pieces account for 28% of all Facebook shares and guess what? That content is almost exactly the same line up you see above. And curiously, the top story exhibited share and view characteristics that were very similar to our runaway story.
The only sensible conclusion I can draw at this time is that Facebook clearly works for consumer content, although it is equally clear that the content that works best as measured by shares and views is of what I call ‘drive by’ quality. Buzzfeed succeeds because it relentless pumps out an ongoing diet of content that provides instant gratification and which can be consumed in seconds. How that works for its advertisers is a mystery although I suspect that advertising content gets liberally co-mingled with what passes for editorial.
It is less clear why video is proving to be the growth engine. That part of the business is under the leadership of Ze Frank who pretty much defined the art of short, snappy and engaging streamed video content that was often silly and off beat. The linear nature of video makes it far easier to include ads that get noticed than is possible with written content. Ergo, the attractive nature of video as a medium for delivering ads, especially on mobile devices where the state of the art is improving all the time.
My take
My experiments have been helpful in better understanding the place that Facebook takes in the panoply of distribution channels. Some of my colleagues will argue that when something we do goes viral in the direction of the consumer then we are giving ourselves an unnecessary burden when running our own analyses. I am not so sure and especially when that content includes a strong message back to enterprise about its technology strategy. But we do have to be careful about how we interpret the results of these outliers and especially when they have such a large skewing effect on the data patterns.
For the future, I’d like to see how such stories develop and run additional experiments to see f Facebook does help amplify content on a vial basis. As a rule of thumb though I’d argue the answer must be ‘no.’ The only way to truly test this however is to throw a lot more money at Facebook ads because a limited experiment will always likely throw up unexpected results. But even so, I think we’ve proven once again that Facebook ads for the kinds of content we generally produce is an out and out fail.
Image credit - via FacebookRead more on: Analytics planning and data analysisContent marketingSocial 