
UK-based hospitality chain Whitbread – which owns popular brands such as Costa Coffee and Premier Inn – released its first quarter financial results today following a change in leadership, in which it emphasised the importance of changing customer expectations, said that it was going to invest in its IT systems and in-source many of its digital capabilities.
Chief executive Alison Brittain took over from Andy Harrison in September last year, when she committed to “innovating more” and “staying ahead of the competition”.
Like-for-like sales grew 3 percent for the year to March 3rd, which was down compared to the 6.5 percent growth in the previous year. However, the company has proposed a 10 percent increase in its full-year dividend and Brittain said she was confident about the year ahead. But she added that customer expectations are changing. Brittain said:
The world around us is shifting, with rising customer expectations, an evolving competitor landscape, rapid technological developments and changing cost structures. In responding to this change, I am especially keen to reinforce our relentless focus on our customers and on innovation to develop our brand propositions ensuring we stay ahead and become more productive.
I have identified three key strategic themes to develop our business: grow and innovate in our core UK businesses; focus on our strengths to grow internationally; and build the capability and infrastructure to support long-term growth. This strategy will enable us to deliver our significant growth ambitions, grow earnings and dividends, maintain good returns on capital and create further value for our shareholders.
Whilst it is only six weeks into our new financial year we remain confident of making good progress this year.
With this in mind, Whitbread gave some key insights into its plans for future technology and digital development.
Sharpening focus
 Whitbread said that it would spend approximately £9 million net incremental revenue spend in 2016/17 to improve its digital and technology capabilities, as well as deliver process improvements.
The company noted that the environment in which it operates is evolving and said that it must “evolve with it”. Whitbread highlights that customers are demanding more, both in terms of a traditional service offering and in terms of a digital experience. It said that this is directly linked to shareholder value.
The results state:
In addition, the competitor environment, cost structures and skills requirements are changing shape. In order to continue to deliver sustainable shareholder value in the longer term, it is important that we meet the challenges of this evolving environment. We must retain our core strengths, but we must also sharpen our customer focus and enhance our brands with new propositions to ensure that they remain market leading in the eye of the customer. We must also build new capabilities to strengthen the business and deliver an efficient platform from which to grow.
Whitbread believes that it has already done a pretty good job of blending the online and offline experience for its Premier Inn brand, where it points to a growth in its direct digital distribution from 69% in 2011/12 to 86% in 2015/16. It says that through this it has been able to provide a better service to its customers, “offering them the lower price channel along with the most comprehensive information regarding their stay”.
At the same time, Whitbread in turn benefits from a lot cost booking channel and receiving greater customer insight.
Moving forward
However, Whitbread and its leadership team do not want to stand still when it comes to the technology platforms upon which it operates and the digital capability it uses to build customer-facing products.
The company said:
In order to build bigger and better brands that maintain their market leadership positions we need to develop the capability and platform from which we operate. This will enable us to grow effectively towards our milestones and beyond.
To achieve this we will need to invest across both brands in a number of common areas:
teams, IT infrastructure, digital and productivity and efficiency.
As with any organisation looking to lead in digital, skills (both in terms of hiring and retaining) are fundamentally important. Whitbread notes that it must employ, train and keep the best teams in higher labour cost environments and provide them with the “optimum technology” to do their jobs. It believes that this will differentiate its customer proposition by offering a superior service.
It also said today that it will update its IT systems, look to suppliers for help, but will also be in-sourcing a lot of its digital capability – which is something that we are seeing more and more of. Whitbread said:
We will upgrade our systems infrastructure to give us greater resilience as we grow, build faster networks, introduce better data analytic tools to improve insight and upgrade systems such as our tills and finance applications. We will also look to build IT supplier partnerships to support us in developing new customer propositions and to get the right technology and service for our customers and teams at the best price.
As our customers’ demand for a greater digital experience accelerates, we will improve our
engagement with them by bringing more digital capabilities in-house so that we can work in a
faster, more agile way, developing and continually enhancing our websites and loyalty
platforms.
The company added that it will look to simplify its operations:
Alongside our investment plans we will also move productivity and efficiency up the agenda. Through investing in our infrastructure and systems we can build a better and more efficient platform for the future, with greater automation of processes including dynamic hotel pricing, product management and better labour management tools, to ensure our teams can deliver great service in the most efficient way.
We can see opportunities in procurement across the Group by simplifying our operations, being smarter at refurbishments and focusing our restaurant offering through fewer brands. Finally, supply chain and logistics efficiencies will be reviewed given the size and scale of the business today and in the future.
My take
As we’ve seen with other companies operating in the retail/hospitality space, it’s incredibly difficult to get the right mix of online and offline customer service. Getting that blend right is crucial and customers want the choice to use both – and it’s hard to predict when that might be!
Whitbread is making all the right noises, but execution isn’t easy.
Read more on: Digital skills and trainingRetail e-commerce and the omni-channel 