
Joshua Browder
In 2016, Den profiled DoNotPay. At the end of his story, he cheekily put in a Tweet from Kevin Marks suggesting that the next evolution could be as an AI lawyer getting into a plea bargain with Watson’s government regulations AI. Guess what, Marks wasn’t far off the mark because a couple of years on and DoNotPay founder Joshua Browder strikes again.
The precocious British-American wunderkind, 22, and a senior at Stanford, proclaimed by no less than the BBC as the “Robin Hood of Internet,” has just launched a free chatbot that allows American users to sue someone with their smartphones and claim awards from class-action lawsuits as easily as kids these days hookup on dating apps. “Swipe right” and your very own Watson-powered ‘robot lawyer’ is on the case.
To recap, the genesis of DoNotPay began in London when Browder was 18 and began getting a lot of parking tickets. He discovered that challenging them was a pain that involved getting an attorney to file a lot of forms to the court and charge a hefty fee. More importantly, he realized that the process of filing these standard forms and filings could be easily automated. As Browder explained in an interview with Amrit Sharma:
We’re getting driverless cars today and sending people to space, how is it that we haven’t yet automated a few documents yet. It’s really such a low-hanging fruit. All you have to do is figure out how these documents are constructed and then use technology to automate them. I think we’re already doing far more complicated things successfully.
Thus, DoNotPay was born.  Browder created a bot that helped people fight parking tickets in New York, London and Seattle.  Last year, he created another bot to help people sue Equifax after a data breach left 143 million American consumers vulnerable to identity theft.  Browder claims that more than 225,000 tickets have been successfully voided so far and the average settlement of an Equifax claim is $7,000. All of which, of course, explains the Robin Hood nickname.  Said Browder:
I’m lucky. It’s such an honor. When you do this sort of thing, you get pigeon-holed with a nickname. I’m not making any money. All the services are free. There is no advertising. It sums up the service well. It’s taking money away from lawyers and parking authorities, or if you’re fighting your landlord.
How does DoNotPay work?
You’ll need to download and install DoNotPay, which is currently only available in iOS, from the Apple app store.
The bot will then ask you a few basic questions about your legal issue and then uses the answers to classify the case into one of 15 different legal areas, such as breach of contract or negligence.  With that information, DoNotPay draws up all the documents specific to that legal domain and fills in the specific details. You just print it out and then mail it to the appropriate courthouse (all 50 states are supported), and now you’re a plaintiff. If you have to show up to court in person, DoNotPay even creates a script for you to read out in court.
Claims are allowed up to $25,000. Users keep 100 percent of what they win in court, according to the company’s privacy policy, all user data is protected with 256-bit encryption, and no third parties get access to personal user information such as home address, email address, or information pertaining to a particular case.  Said Browder:
I’m not saying bots will be arguing in the Supreme Court. But for things like landlord tenant disputes, or if you buy something and it doesn’t work, or if you’ve been a victim of a data breach—there’s no reason why that’s not a clear-cut case and you will win, if you have the evidence and the damages.
The company is backed by $1.1m in investment from Andreessen Horowitz and Greylock Partners
My take
The lawyers will scream.  The legal societies will moan but this is one of those “so obvious, I wish I had thought of that” kind of applications.  Unless you have a complicated or unusual case, there is no reason to hire a $150 an hour lawyer to pay a $25 an hour paralegal to pull the right forms and fill them out for you.
More importantly, it could help close the huge gap between people who can afford legal services and those who can’t. According to the Legal Services Corporation, a nonprofit that studies access to legal services in the US, nearly three-in-four low-income households had a civil legal dispute, and the overwhelming majority of them—86 percent—had no lawyer or legal help to help them through the process in 2017. DoNotPay has the potential to radically alter that appalling statistic.
It’s worth noting in passing that Browder is the son of Bill Browder, a hedge fund manager and a founder of the Magnitsky Act, a bipartisan bill passed by  Congress in 2012 which was intended to punish Russian officials responsible for the death of Russian tax accountant Sergei Magnitsky in a Moscow prison in 2009.  Browder has been described by the New Yorker as “Russia’s most wanted man.”
Image credit - via YouTubeRead more on: Future of workMachine intelligence and AI 