

Recently, I was on the receiving end of two examples of the ‘arms race’ approach to marketing, so I thought I’d share my experiences as a customer with you. The lessons should be relevant to digital marketers everywhere.
Before Christmas, I emailed the singer in my band links to a couple of products we could buy from a local music gear retailer, which also runs one of the UK’s leading online music equipment portals. No Google search was involved.
Over the next few weeks, I was plagued by constant ads for those items: they appeared daily on Facebook and on most other sites I visited. On a popular news service I was even forced to sit through a 20-second video for one of the products before being allowed to watch the clip I wanted. The barrage was endless and inescapable.
This cluster bomb of targeted advertising was interesting for a number of reasons: I regularly clear my browser of the junk of a day’s research, including cookies and history; my browser requests sites not to track me; and I’ve opted out of being followed by advertisers. Clearly, none of those approaches work once you’ve expressed an interest in something.
But most interesting is the fact that I shared links to the products in a private mail. The advertiser may have picked them up by pingback. Nonetheless, the correspondence was private – or should I say ‘private’: I used a popular cloud-based email service.
Or perhaps the merchant simply grabbed my IP address and opted to associate it with two products for the rest of time, rather than a couple of days.
That’s a bad strategy, as it encourages shoppers to hide their identities, forcing prospects underground to shelter from the marketing blitzkrieg.
Either way, that one private message turned into an exchange of fire from which I was unable to escape, as all the routes open to me were already stored as preferences. Occasionally, I still see ads for those products on Facebook today, weeks later.
This is a problem. Not for me as a prospect – the barrage is irritating, not fatal – but for the portal concerned:-

The site’s decision to force advertising on me for products I was already interested in buying from them has undermined my longstanding loyalty to the shop.
Every day the ads appear they become more-powerful disincentives to do business with the company, as a sledgehammer approach is off-putting to the type of discerning, informed, free-thinking customers that personal-service-based retailers seek to attract.

Arms race
This arms-race approach to the clicks end of the business risks damaging those relationships, because it resembles a completely different business model: ‘pile ’em high, sell ’em cheap – by any means necessary’.
That’s a poor fit with the ‘bricks’ side of the business, loyalty to which the company has built up over decades.
As a prospect, I gain nothing from being plagued by incessant, repetitive, identical ads: it’s a one-way relationship designed solely to benefit the advertiser: no price reductions or special offers are being pushed my way, so there are no incentives to click through and hit ‘buy’ . Except (perhaps) to silence the explosions.
Indeed, in many cases brand loyalty online is becoming a high-risk game for customers: spend too long surfing for something and you’ll see the prices creep up, as anyone who regularly shops online for air tickets or hotel rooms knows.
But is the implicit offer of ‘buy from us and we’ll stop bothering you’ what digital marketing should be about? Or ‘look at our stuff and we’ll put up the price’? And should the digital side of the business actively undermine the values of a high-end brand? As marketers, that’s for you to decide.
From a customer prospective, it’s almost as if some companies are actively trying to undermine our loyalty, to punish longstanding customers, or to alienate new prospects. And as many transactions become automated through devices such as Amazon’s Echo, some consumers may be getting worse and worse deals the longer they stay loyal.
If that’s the case, then consumers’ next move is an easy one: we’ll be loyal to no one and just seek the best deal on our terms. Is that what marketers really want?
I’d say it’s time to give something back.
Analytics
My other bad experience came via a well-known marketing analytics company, whose head office is nearby.
A local college had asked me to carry out some skills research among employers in the area, and so (among many others) I contacted the marketing analytics agency using the email address on their website. I asked a simple question that would have taken them a few seconds to answer.
Here I was, a well-connected business and tech-sector journalist, writing to a local digital employer with a request to help a community college offer better training to our city’s young people: surely an opportunity to build new relationships and start some good conversations.
However, the company’s initial response was rather different: they ignored my request for help and simply added me to their marketing database, after which I started receiving daily doses of spam: videos, unwanted articles about analytics, and so on. Information I’d – surely – not requested by emailing them at their contact address.
The irony of a ‘social listening’ company, which sells insight and depth, scraping prospects from their contact address to send unsolicited marketing to someone who doesn’t meet their customer criteria is astonishing. Hardly the best advertisement for a business; indeed, it’s the opposite of what this company claims to offer.
So I emailed them to complain and asked them to take my name off their list. They replied that they were “far too busy to help” with my original query. The spam continued.
The next day, I named the agency in a polite version of the story that I shared with a closed Facebook group of journalists and PR people. Within 24 hours the phone rang, and a very contrite company apologised for their mistakes, and promised to look into what went wrong. More, their PR manager proved to be very helpful with answering my original question – something I thanked her for on the phone.
So: full marks to them for saying ‘mea culpa’, taking the trouble to put things right, and for admitting that the problem should never have occurred in the first place. (It seems that ‘social listening’ is their business after all – just not in quite the way they promise.)
Yet social platforms shouldn’t just be used to identify and correct the mistakes you make online. Your customers will talk about you, so why not ensure that they only have good stories to tell from the outset?
My take
What other lessons might digital marketers learn from my customer experiences? I would suggest these:-

Just because technologies allow you to do something – in this case, blitz prospects daily with intrusive messages that they haven’t requested – doesn’t make it a good idea.
More, how you use the digital world should never depart from your stated brand values. And, above all, it should never contradict them and make your customers angry.
And finally, think about the ways in which marketing can be a conversation – a two-way relationship that benefits both sides – rather than a declaration of war on your prospects.


Image credit - Freeimages.com/Nic KilbyRead more on: CRM and customer experienceDigital and content marketing 