
Lucy Adams
It’s time to rip up the HR rulebook.
Out goes the obsession with policy and process and in should come putting the human back into human resources, according to Lucy Adams, founder of UK HR consultancy Disruptive HR:

Whilst HR are doing this compliance-heavy, process-oriented role, playing policeman, they are not creating space to think about the future.
What we’ve typically done in HR is tinker with the mechanics. So, if we look at our appraisal schemes, we move from five boxes to three or introduce another process or write another policy, and actually it requires a fundamental rethink of the relationship with employees.

This rethink owes much to the effect of technologies such as social media, mobiles and the cloud which are changing the way people can interact.  But there wider disruptions to the way we work, such as the much talked about (some would say over-inflated) expectations of a millennials in the workplace, the rising number of contingent workers and an increasingly dispersed workforce. 
Added to the mix are financial volatility and the changing relationship between companies as they can both compete and partner their rivals in different circumstances.
All these influences mean that HR must step up, both in terms of the technology it uses, but more fundamentally in the way it operates. Too many organizations are stuck in the old “command and control” approach to their employees, notes Adams, who has 10 years board-level HR experience, most recently at the BBC.
Such paternalism snuffs out innovation, the very thing that companies need most in an uncertain world:

If we think about the way we have traditionally employed people, it’s been a very parental relationship. You come and work for us, we’ll look after you and we’ll discipline you and tell you off.
What that tends to do is it stifles productivity, because people are not necessarily thinking for themselves and challenging themselves. It stifles innovation because they are basically told what the next idea is rather than coming up with things in their own way and challenging and creating for themselves – why would you take the risk?

Although rogue employees are just a tiny percentage of the workforce, companies typically design processes and policies to militate against that minority misbehaving, but that obsession comes at the cost of innovation. 
Instead, suggests Adams, organizations need to treat their employees like the adults they are and, above all, to trust them: 

What you get then is a release of greater productivity creativity and those are the things that everyone is after:  greater innovation and greater productivity. You’re not going to get that if you’ve got a very command-control company.

Consumer thinking
Another key shift in HR thinking is to treat employees as consumers, says Adams:

If we’re a consumer-facing organization, we know everything about them.  We are able to segment, target, we have a level of insight into their buying behaviors and how they think and behave and yet in HR we tend to have the annual engagement survey. No organization dealing with consumers would see how they were once a year.

HR feedback tools and mobile apps are filling this need for more constant communication and dialogue with employees, but there are still too many organizations relying on the yearly check-up.
Instead, HR needs to begin to think more like retailers and try to find out as much about their customers as possible. Retailers strive to understand what it feels like for customers at the checkout or in the changing room. They want to ensure the customer is happy at every step of its interaction with their company.
So HR needs to think in terms of ensuring the best employee experience at the organization, rather than buying the best recruitment or performance management system. 
The third, related element Adams feels HR needs to address is this idea of putting people back in the heart of human resources:

A lot of what we do in HR actually doesn’t bear any resemblance to how human beings actually think, feel and behave, how they  learn, how they are perform or how they are motivated.

So in learning and development, for example, the traditional workshop and classroom approach is being superseded by bite-sized snippets of learning, accessed by people right when they need it.  Learning is also becoming more diverse, acknowledging that people have different learning styles and preferences. 
It‘s a rejection of the one-size-fits-all approach to something far more personal. 
This shift to a more trusting relationship between employer and employee for many companies will require a fundamental overhaul of company culture and engrained behaviour. Cultural change is never easy to make, particularly for larger companies which tend to have more highly integrated systems and processes they need to dismantle. 
Adams suggests HR begins slowly. Pick one business issue to solve – such as increasing collaboration or encouraging innovation – and involve people in the design. Pilot the changes in one or two areas and then, adds Adams, let people play and experiment: 

What we find is that those organizations that do that learn from their mistakes and are much more comfortable about rolling it out.

But she cautions: 

This stuff has taken decades to be embedded in organizations and you’re not going to change this overnight. It’s very hard for human behavior to change by changing a process.  But look at how human beings actually think and behave, just like consumer organizations do, and then launch something rather than think about the process you need first.

While Adams doesn’t discount the work needed by HR to make the changes it needs, but she is confident that the effort will be well worth it.

It’s such an exciting time. For years we’ve been following a manual which has been very prescriptive about everything: you recruit this way, you manage performance that way and reward behavior that way and actually the rulebook has been torn up.

My take
Trust your employees, try to understand as much about them as your customers and acknowledge all have different behaviors and needs. 
It’s simple to follow the logic and understand the value of this approach. The trouble, of course, is actually doing it. 
It’s far easier to put in a process or new technology platform than change company culture. But if HR truly wants to look beyond providing basic headcount data and instead focus on the future strategic talent needs of their company, then it’s time to adopt this new ‘rulebook’. 
Image credit - Lucy AdamsRead more on: HCM and the digital future of work 