
Digital thinking Trumpton-style
OK, here’s the pitch – it’s 2030, the UK’s been out of the EU for over a decade  and a wave of regional devolution has rippled across whatever set of nations makes up the UK by then.
As for you, you’ve just been appointed Mayor of one of these super-regions, set up to follow in the successful footsteps – and learn from the mistakes of? – Devo Manc, Devo Cornwall, Devo Tees Valley and the other first wave resulting from the (pre-June 8th) 2017 government’s devolution policy.
That’s the to-do list for any potential next generation British ‘digital mayors’, according to a set of suggestions being put forward by IT supplier group techUK this week.
As part of a week of debate and promotion of the potential benefits of AI (artificial intelligence) on the UK public and private sectors, the body’s published what it calls ‘Digital Devolution: A Guide For Mayors’.
The guide comes in the form of a series of questions for any new devolved regional Mayor to ask their team in their first 100 days in past to “engender change [and] build capacity across the eco-system of the place”, and was compiled after consultation with stakeholders including Coventry Council, BT and the Royal Borough of Kingston.
Key questions include:

What do you want digital to achieve for your city region?
What mechanisms are in place to exchange thinking, best practice and innovation between private and public sector?
What shared platforms are currently in place?
Is a digital ecosystem mapped out?
Has a smart city strategy also been articulated?

In terms of specific recommendations, techUK says devolved regional Mayors should be looking to achieve these aims by a combination of in-house digital leadership, committing to aggressive use of data to craft digital policies, a push to aim for ending any kind of digital divide in their region/a ‘citizen centric’ informing all their actions – and a plan to attract and train up sufficient local tech talent to maintain momentum.
For techUK’s Programme Manager for Local Government at techUK, Georgina Maratheftis, the motivation to do all this is clear:
Digital devolution presents one of the biggest opportunities to do things differently and break down traditional barriers to service delivery to drive improved outcomes for all.
In parallel, her colleague, Programme Manager for IoT & SmarterUK, Aimee Betts-Charalambous, predicts:
With a trend towards urbanisation cities of the future are going to have to work in a very different way to how they work today. Leaders will need to rethink not just essential services but also determine a strategy for economic growth and improved quality of life.
Mayoral duties
But what are Mayors actually for as far as Whitehall’s concerned?
All this is very timely, as next month sees the official kick off the whole campaign, which seems to have been a George Osborne idea the current PM has decided worth seeing out.
Central to all the first seven regional plans – bar Cornwall, which passed – is the idea, after all, of a new directly elected Mayor.
The problem is that these Mayors seem to be there to be mini Boris Johnsons or Ken Livingstone, not mini Elon Musks.
The stated main mission of these new Mayors is set out by the government as to:
Represent their regions across the country and around the world. They will work with leaders of local councils and businesses to create jobs, boost skills, build homes and improve travel.
And, as it stands, creating digital urban nervous systems or creating new tech talent hubs seem to be a bit low down the agenda government has set out for the Devos.
For example, in the Cambridgeshire and Peterborough one, we get precisely one mention of digital in the whole document, where the two imminent devolution partners say they’ve been busy:
Creating an area internationally renowned for its low-carbon, knowledge- based economy, including life sciences, information and communication technology, creative and digital industries, clean tech, high-value engineering and agri-business.
Which is great – but is hardly putting IT at the centre of the plan.
Perhaps rather astonishingly – ‘digital’ does not even get a single mention in the Cornish, Liverpool, Tees Valley, West Midlands and West of England plans as set out on the DCLG site.
Manchester’s, the most high profile Devo idea of them all, is also completely bereft of the word, too.
But that could just be down to those fuddy-duddy  old mandarins, who don’t see much value in this computer stuff.
What about the most devo-hungry constituency of them all, that of  Nicola Sturgeon’s SNP? If, as part of some post-Brexit #IndyRef2 compromise, would the kind of tech vision techUK’s stakeholders see as vital have a central place?
You may remember that when this last came up – supposedly the last time for a generation, but never mind – Scots were promised charge of “almost all” tax-raising and policy-making apart from defence, foreign affairs and currency.
But apart from saying it’s doing lots of good work delivering superfast broadband to 95% of properties across the country by the end of 2017, and 100% by 2021, the SNP also doesn’t seem to be prioritising digital for any kind of future either.
It’s not one of the areas in its core policy list, for example. Nor is it in its employment sub-section either. And where you might expect it most, in its economic policy area, while we do get some talk about funding to support research and innovation, there’s basically nothing at all we can see about smart cities, use of data or anything like the Devolution Guide’s recommendations.
My take
techUK’s ideas deserve attention, but seem to be a very small voice in something of a digital-free desert when it comes to practical Devo planning so far.
Waiting until 2030 to start amping up digital competence – ten years after a possible Hard Brexit, with all the challenges that could mean for UK industry and employment – will simply be too late.
Action this day, please, on getting some useful ideas about our actual future into these proposals.
 
 
Image credit - BBC/YouTubeRead more on: Digital government and public services

