
Andy Campbell
The workplace is great…but only if you’re a manager or above. Meanwhile the rest of the workforce feels let down by the technology, guidance and feedback they are given to do their jobs.
This disconnect between workers and managers is revealed in a European Oracle study “From Theory to Action” which examines the effect of company culture on the attitudes and performance of their workers.
Overall, employees feel lower loyalty and pride in their organization and are less satisfied in the level of training and tools given to them at work. Among the worrying findings are that:

Only 37% of non-managerial workers feel proud to work in their organization versus 70% of manager/directors.
Just 39% of non-manager employees see a long-term future with their current employer.
A quarter of non-managers believe their learning and training is tailored to their personal development needs, compared with over 60% of senior staff.
Only 22% of non-management employees think their company arms them with the collaboration tools and technology to promote their development.
In contrast, three-quarters of directors feel they have what they need.

Clearly something is going very wrong to create such a profound disconnect between the views of people working in the same company and culture.
Andy Campbell, HCM strategy director at Oracle, believes that the answer lies partly in the differences between talent management and engagement:
You can’t move in the HR press for articles about employee engagement, but it does seem to me that we are missing a trick and there’s something that’s going slightly awry.
For me it’s almost a comparison between a focus on engagement and a focus on engagement, Talent management has always historically how we develop our people and how they go from role 1 to role 2 to role 3 and their goals and objectives, which is all very well and good but perhaps it’s selective. It manages only a part of the workforce, whereas employee engagement touches on everybody. And of course there are more in that second group than the first.
The focus has been on developing that management group at the expense of providing the tools and information requited for people to be fully innovative and creative and productive in their existing roles.
Flat-lining
Failing to encourage innovation and creativity is potentially very damaging for business. This is evident in the UK market where productivity has “flat-lined”, according to Campbell, over the last 10 years:
If we want to improve the productivity in the UK plc then it has to come down to enabling everybody rather than just a select few developing a few ‘uber’ leaders who are going to make everything better for us.
Technology – or lack of – plays a role here. Expectations, particularly among digital natives entering the workplace, are changing. Part of those expectations involves the technology available in the workplace.
It’s become a familiar complaint that consumer technology is often more advanced than its clunky work counterpart. As HR has suffered from being what Campbell calls the “poor relation” in technology investment, this gap yawns even wider.
So, while at home learning to do something like change the spark plugs on your vehicle will be solved by a quick visit to YouTube, in a corporate setting you’re more likely to be sent on a training course where only a small portion of it is actually relevant.
This perceived lack of investment in technology to do their jobs effectively and to collaborate and share with co-workers coupled with a wider disillusionment among works is eroding success.
Overall, says Campbell:
People are less willing to work for an organization that isn’t congruent with their values and are less loyal.
My take
Interesting to see such a stark contrast between the views of managers and the rest of the workforce, particularly when we’re deluged by messages about employee engagement’s importance.
Andy Campbell’s point about the difference between engagement and talent seems key here. The focus should not be about developing the few, but improving the contributions of everyone.
While it would be naïve to think that technology can solve all these differences in perception of the workplace, it definitely play a role. Give people the right tools and technology (and the right culture) to support their jobs and they have a better chance of being able to perform better,.
Image credit - Oracle Disclosure - The findings of this survey were based on the views of 1,200 workers in France, Germany the Netherlands, Spain and the UK. At time of writing, Oracle is a premier partner of diginomica. Read more on: HCM and the digital future of work 