
Enterprise CIOs need to track, secure and enable enormous amounts of information. They rely on a team of IT experts and competent employees to attain their enterprise data objectives – especially now that many people carry computers in their pockets. The title ‘CIO’ itself reflects today’s reality that every part of a business runs on data and relies on it to grow. Automation and new connectivity to devices in the field extends to previously offline parts of a business like customer relations, scheduling and field service. With increased technician access to information through cloud, web and mobile software, service leader concerns now mirror some of those top-of-mind for CIOs.
Indeed, one might argue that the CIO hasn’t had much interest in field service in the past other than operational support for mobile security endpoints, validation of cloud provider application or IT governance and project support. CIOs have traditionally focused on integration support between back office systems and service systems, parts and logistics. Until recently.
Connected field service
All of a sudden field service, and Internet-powered service generally, has become strategic and tied to revenue. Today, a CIO is more likely to recognize the opportunity to work more closely with a service leader and execute IT strategies that deliver immediate value. Field service organizations connected to data through technology offer immense customer value within what once was the backwater of maintenance and warranty. The data generated from field service assets and machines informs fleet-wide maintenance, adjustments to current service relationships and scope of future work. For companies with other operations and business priorities, field service is a great place to explore new business insights from customer service data.
In fact, companies like GE – in the process of connecting manufacturing business units to the industrial internet – understand that accessing and strategically utilizing information is the holy grail of service. The ability to understand a customer’s business model, challenges and maintenance requirements sets service organizations apart from the rest and builds trust. Across the enterprise, spending time and energy with sales and marketing is not sufficient enough to win new business and link company information with growth. CIOs now need to reach out to service to find new opportunities, growth and business value.
Data-enabled operations
In the latest Gartner CEO survey, 25% of CEOs name a technology issue in their top three business priorities. Those priorities cascade across enterprises to become company-wide goals and enlist the involvement of CIOs and service leaders. A recent Gartner conference featured a session under the theme “the creation of new business designs by blurring the digital and physical worlds.” During the event, Gartner pointed to IoT as a natural and immediate place for CIOs to gain this experience in working with R&D and service organizations within their companies.
Moving forward, I believe that many service leaders will join CIOs in identifying organizational opportunities to better understand the value of newly established data-enabled operations. They will partner to explore the use of smart machines in field service and examine how the information analyzed impacts relationships between customers, products and services. Ultimately, the area of study and genesis of improved business value through connectivity will fall squarely between people and machines for both CIOs and service leaders.
Image credit - Figures silhouetted by sun push jigsaw pieces together © Sergey Nivens - Fotolia.comRead more on: Customer service managementInternet of ThingsPartner ZoneServiceMax 