
John Taschek
There have been no truisms in software. Everything changes. The technology that has been created to make people or companies more productive became the primary obstacles to their success.
Technology sociopathically had discriminated against the have nots, while segmenting the haves into those who can use it and those who cannot. In other words enterprise software has made people feel dumb — and not only that, these miserable people were forced into using mandated applications that clearly were designed by those fascinated by labyrinths, vacuum tubes, control, and arbitrary rules.
There are many proof points, but anecdotally one can simply look at the hugely popular books aimed at Dummies and Idiots, which isolated their readers without any sense of irony. It became a false badge of courage for a person to admit that he or she needed a Dummies book. One can also recall the Geeks, Gurus, and Nerds as terms that were once subversive terms of endearment. You might remember the famous four-letter acronym from these same people who when asked simple questions simply retorted with RTFM.
Nice.
An intense and urgent need for change is what I believe, drives people to Dreamforce, which we humbly call the largest software conference in the world. Dreamforce, however, does not resemble any conventional “software” conference. Dreamforce is a gathering of those who want to end the digital elitism created by the world of legacy software vendors.
I have been to every Dreamforce, which no more than 1500 individuals can claim, because that was about the size it was in November 2003 (including employees) . Even then, it had a theme greater than any point in time. It was “Imagination that You Can Use.” It was stunningly different to me– a technology journalist who probably went to 500 or more different conferences in just the previous decade.
With Dreamforce, we had a goal. We wanted to be inclusive. We wanted people who were ordinarily segmented at conferences to serendipitously meld with others. We wanted to show that philanthropy was far more important than a statement. We also wanted to show our technology as not just tools but solutions to provide an aspirational path to more substantial engagement between customer and consumer.
We have greatly expanded these themes and aspirations with Dreamforce 2015. No one will ever articulate this in the same way, but the ultimate and deeply ingrained theme of Dreamforce is that people have a greater relevance to their world than the technology they use.
Dreamforce is ultimately about transformation, a word that anyone can use and unfortunately few believe. It is so obvious that transformation is alive and well when looking at some of the great businesses of the world. Today, these businesses are not just customers of technology, they are technology providers themselves. But would they ever want to be the same kind of technology provider to their customers as their historic technology vendors were to them? I hope not.
Different
It’s different and better today. Technology companies don’t have to recreate the tools required just to develop new kinds of software or APIs. Consumers are more powerful, more intelligent, and all companies are app providers in some capacity. This is real transformation.
In a very interesting report, “2015 CIO Survey and CEO Survey: As CEOs Commit to Digital, CIOs Must Flip Their Leadership to Deliver”, Gartner identified the main initiatives for CEOs as being focused on Customer Experience Management, Digital Marketing, Business Analytics, Cloud, and Data Science.
Source: Gartner
Gartner suggests that the CIOs should flip the priorities to become the key stakeholders in the business transformation. The report suggests also that CIOs currently don’t focus on the customer; instead they focus on infrastructure and providing some tools.
This relates to Dreamforce in substantial, overt, and nuanced ways.
The first is that our Keynotes are not just Salesforce. They include Microsoft’s Satya Nadella; Jessica Alba with her amazing The Honest Company; Susan Wojcicki’s YouTube; George Colony, a visionary leader of Forrester Research, who has the the theme of the Age of the Customer; the Golden State Warriors’ President and CEO; Goldie Hawn. There are too many fascinating leaders of global influence to mention without erroneously excluding someone.
And while many Dreamforce posts will focus on technology announcements, it’s more important to me to convey the reasons why we are doing what we are doing. Software once forced its bound “users” to learn their system and input data, whether it was usable or not.
More companies are realizing the trend that software is not a productivity tool (any software can make a person highly efficient at choosing the incorrect path). Solutions today have to provide intelligence, actions, learning. They cannot make consumers feel dumb or an idiot.
I’m fully aware as Faulkner said “The past is never dead. It’s not even past.” It’s a brilliant quote that matches the changes and transformation of the technology industry. No matter how much we can improve — we’re still fighting entropy.
Therefore, technology has to be intelligent and beautiful, mobile, distributed and accessible at scale (i.e., cloud). Intelligence and data science is not a hermetically sealed adjunct to business. It is a core part of business.
Our announcements have a vast range of potential to anyone who is alive, but the most important thing we will do is bring the intelligence of one’s own data to the tool in a way that is effortless to use.
I’m looking forward to Dreamforce. It’s amazing. It is a statement that there can be passion, insight, technology, and relevance in a world that was once a foreboding place. I hope that it represents something more than a truism.
My hope that whatever path you choose, Dreamforce represents some elements of relevance, improvement, and…transformation.
Read more on: Cloud ERP financials and supply chainCloud platforms - infrastructure and architectureCRM and customer experienceMobilePartner ZoneSalesforce 