
A recent discussion on current and future trends for the Industrial Internet side of IoT, with Harel Kodesh, the CTO of GE Software, showed the importance of one important factor in the development of the sector that is often forgotten in the examination of the details of the associated technologies themselves. The Industrial Internet is fundamentally just a part of something much bigger and all-encompassing.
Though some of the technology is, in and of itself, extremely interesting ‘stuff’, the real point is that the Industrial Internet has to be an integral part of everything that goes to make a ‘business’. This may seem to be a self-evident observation at first, yet there are those within and without the industry – including commentators on business and technology issues – who seem keen to make it just one more technology silo, with entrails that can be examined and pontificated upon in total isolation from their part in the bigger ‘whole’.
For example, Kodesh acknowledged that, when it comes to delivering all the data collection, manipulation, analysis, management and control that large enterprises now need to unify their business operations across increasingly diverse activities and markets, it is highly unlikely that any of them can now do that as an on-premise operation all on their own.
In other words, third, fourth and even fifth party support, delivered through the cloud, is the only practical solution. That is why GE Software has started delivering its own Industrial Internet offerings as a cloud service, Predix. And this is not just as a delivery mechanism in isolation, but also as the interface to other cloud services that will be required to make up that `whole’ service that enterprises will require.
As an example of this Kodesh did acknowledge that the expectations set out in diginomica following the recently announced partnership with NetSuite map on to his own thoughts as to the way the Industrial Internet/business systems relationship will develop.
The pair cannot, indeed must not, be allowed to operate in isolation. Industrial services have to be part of the whole business operation, feeding in operational and supply data in real time, taking in demand data as it is available, adjusting production processes accordingly, and feeding back current and predicted production problems to the business systems so that sales, stock holding, customer relations management and a host of other business services can run smoothly and in real time.
So the connection with the core business management system for a business is essential, the two have to be intrinsically linked. And in overall business management terms this is far more important than details about the technology being used. That will always change and develop, but its ability to integrate with – become one with – the business management tools such as ERP, stock management and accounting systems will be the primary requirement.
The cloud and IoT are the important combination for the future. To Kodesh, it is the proof of the cloud and what it is good for, especially its capability of building and linking communities.
Community thinking
This ties in with the recent comments of Huawei’s President of the Enterprise Networking Product Line, Swift Liu, about cloud communities – that there will be different types of cloud services required for different processes and that this goes in spades for IoT and Industrial Internet applications. There will be a need for a range of different cloud service types depending upon the tasks required.
Users will get significant advantages from being part of a community of common interest, and the benefits will outweigh the potential disadvantages of giving away company secrets in how things are done. It will be a way for industry generally to ensure that best practices are always being used by all of them.
And when it comes to industrial processes in particular, there is a real advantage here because the reputational damage done by one business screwing up can and does soon spread to whole industry sectors. An excellent example of this, of course, is the way that the Fallout from VW’s machinations with data manipulation of diesel engine emissions results is now spreading to all diesel engine manufacturers and users.
He also agreed that there is a significant security danger in the proximity of Industrial Internet systems and company staff using wearable devices of all types. Security – especially in the form of process integrity – is obviously going to be one of the biggest frontline issues with Industrial Internet services. And he does see wearable devices posing a real threat as a means of infection. Defending against this is one specific area that he is already working on.
But again, this is also going to be one of those security areas where breaches are inevitable and therefore being part of a community and  sharing information about attack vectors and best practices on defence and breach management will be far better  than as a group of individuals.
My take
The de-niching of IT continues apace, and by and large it is good to see.
Read more on: Internet of ThingsIoT robotics and AI 