
Entrepreneurs and office workers from London’s Silicon Roundabout district were getting so fed up with the lengthening lines at their local Post Office last year that they started posting photos on social media. That gave the organization’s social media team a chance to show its mettle, as social media manager Darren Jones explains:
I was able to feed back to our head of network and have some discussions back and forth. They could see from the photos which we’d given them that it looked bad, because people were queuing for ages.
Next day, the head of network was able to add overtime. We saw a significant decrease in complaints about [that] branch’s queues. That was quite quick, that action, it was literally within 24 hours.
What made the difference was that the team were able to use their social media analytics tools to show that the cluster of complaints originating at that branch at the same time each day was having a negative impact on overall brand sentiment.
We used that to tell a story to the business, that this particular branch was causing an issue for our reputation nationally.
Reacting to local communities
Since that episode, it’s become routine to pass on social media feedback about branch service issues to the operational teams.
One of the nice things with us being on social media is we do surprise people I think. They don’t expect to hear from us. Through social listening we can tap into people who maybe aren’t talking to us directly and are just mentioning us.
Suddenly they get a reply from us, and that’s one person’s perceptions changed. You’re not only listening but you’ve also taken action quite quickly.
This year the team has embarked on a program to roll out access to the analytics tools to their 7,000 colleagues across the business.
What we’re really saying to colleagues is, look at the data, have a look around, get a feel for what people are saying about us as a brand in your local area. Use it to identify opportunities to grow your own business.
It’s important our postmasters are reactive to the local community they serve.
Connecting with a new generation
In the UK, the Post Office is literally just the retail network where consumers go to drop off parcels and mail. This year, the organization completed a 4-year-long spin-out from the Royal Mail, which operates the country’s national postal service. And although it receives a government subsidy to provide certain over-the-counter services, its ability to thrive as a business depends on growing its financial services products such as foreign currency exchange, insurance, savings and loans.
But although the Post Office is still seen as a valuable community asset — any threat to close or move a local outlet invariably stirs a protest campaign and often leads to questions in Parliament — long gone are the days when the local Post Office was at the heart of a community’s everyday life.
Like many other institutions whose heyday was offline, social media allows the Post Office to reinvent itself as an online brand and connect with a new generation of customers. It is already providing the services, says Jones, it is just a matter of building engagement:
We have 16, 17 million transactions a week in our branch network. That’s a lot of data about customers. We also serve a quarter of all small businesses in the UK. Again, even more data, but from a more B2B perspective.
One of the challenges we have in order to build that relationship with customers is, to understand them and to understand who our customers are beyond just a number of 17 million.
The other obstacle it has to overcome is that most of its products are provided by third parties.
We only own one product, which is our postal order. We have data about our customers in lots of other businesses, like our partners such as Bank of Ireland, which are great to work with, but it becomes fairly hard to get that single customer view which is important for building that relationship and understanding our customers.
Testing new ideas
Social media analytics from Crimson Hexagon gives Jones’ team the ability to analyze not only its own customers and their sentiment towards the brand but also those of its competitors. Lithium, which taps into Klout data on social media influence, supports its outbound social media campaigns.
Jones’ team has used Crimson Hexagon to test the affinity of celebrities with the brand before signing them for campaigns. It also tests out promotions, such as this summer’s Travel Money campaign, which featured video clips of magicians posing as Post Office counter staff, magically transforming notes into foreign currency. Jones is a strong advocate of using social media to test ideas:
I think what social media does is, it gives people a platform to talk back and voice their opinion. It’s always something that brands should consider when planning anything really, even products, proposition development. Capture those thoughts as early on as possible, because it’s a great focus group.
It’s quite effortless to get those opinions. It takes just 20 minutes to get a quick sound bite.
But he’s also wary of its limitations. While the Post Office’s future prosperity may depend on appealing to a digitally savvy generation, he acknowledges that many of its most loyal customers remain cut off from the digital world.
You can make assumptions. You can treat the online customers as a view of the whole population, where actually it’s just a portion.
My take
The Post Office was the future once — the hub of postal communications and early telecommunications — but now, like banks and other former stalwarts of the local retail scene, it must reinvent itself online and find new ways to build engagement with customers. As this story shows, it’s taking a pragmatic approach to building a friendly, approachable brand image that complements its historical role.
But with a portion of its staff today voting for industrial action in protest at job cuts in the face of slow revenue growth, it still faces obstacles on the road to reinvention.
Image credit - Screengrab from Post Office travel money videoDisclosure - Darren Jones spoke to me during an event organized by Crimson Hexagon earlier this year.Read more on: CRM and customer experienceDigital and content marketingRetail e-commerce and the omni-channelSocialUse cases 