
Boskalis is a global dredging and maritime services business with €3.1 billion ($3.4bn) annual revenue, operating in 75 countries and employing more than 11,000 staff. Among its many assets it owns the world’s largest dredging fleet. You can’t get much more physical than that. And yet, like so many other enterprises, Netherlands based Boskalis has decided to put all of its IT in the cloud. As Rien Krijger, ICT director, put it at a briefing in London earlier this year:
I think the question now is not if but when you go. On-premise will disappear over time. If there is a moment in time you have to make a decision with your ERP platforms, that is the moment to go.
There are several factors propelling Boskalis towards the cloud. Much of the impetus stems from the need today to extend IT resources to the whole workforce, rather than restricting access to those who are office-based. On top of this there’s the faster speed at which all organizations have to both add new capabilities and drive efficiencies. The demand for agility is stronger than ever.
Global, mobile, agile
Krijger gave a powerful illustration of the need to take advantage of a cloud provider’s global infrastructure with the example of the company’s project to widen the Suez Canal. This is a huge project where it is moving one million cubic meters of soil per day. A large on-site contingent of staff and local contractors need access to its systems, but the local telecoms infrastructure offers limited bandwidth. Setting up a dedicated connection back to an on-premise datacenter for the lifetime of the project doesn’t make sense, he said:
It’s in the middle of nowhere. If you have to connect to your central infrastructure in the Netherlands, it costs you a fortune and it’s not ready in time.
It’s much more practical to rely on Amazon or Microsoft’s existing global infrastructure to provide access from here, or from other locations such as offshore windfarm construction sites. Boskalis is upgrading its existing on-premise ERP systems to Infor CloudSuite, which is hosted on Amazon Web Services. It will also be moving its Sharepoint collaboration infrastructure to Microsoft’s cloud.
Support for mobile device access is another factor that’s becoming more and more important. Using mobile devices makes it much easier to capture information and to provide management information wherever people are, said Krijger. Even the Philippines crew on the company’s vessels are bringing their own smartphones on board these days, making it feasible to offer self-service functionality for enterprise applications, such as HR.
The third factor is the need to stay agile and ready for the next wave of technology or business automation, whether that’s greater API-based integration or increased use of data science to enhance productivity. Working with a cloud provider shares the burden of keeping pace, said Krijger.
We have more components that we are using, so we have more complexity in what we are using. I have chosen to leave it to the real experts.
The scale on which our ERP system is used is higher. I needed a higher service level.
Who’s responsible?
Yet despite the weight of all of these factors, the decision to go cloud represents a significant change in control that many enterprises are still reluctant to undertake. Those that are taking the plunge are not rushing in — Boskalis is not yet live on the Infor CloudSuite system, for which it has signed a five-year contract. It has completed a 10-user pilot and subsequent testing, but the production roll-out will not start until 2016 in the Netherlands and it will take several more years to complete the global roll-out.
The company has a longstanding relationship with Infor and predecessor companies as its ERP supplier, which provides a strong basis for trust. But the cloud relationship places a far larger burden of responsibility on the vendor than a conventional licensed software model. Instead of delivering a product that the customer installs and operates and may or may not choose to upgrade, a cloud provider takes on all of those roles: installation, operation and continuous upgrades.
The commitment to keep pace with new technology and expectations is an especially onerous one to deliver. Boskalis is moving to the cloud because it realizes it cannot keep pace any longer by relying on its own resources alone. The corollary is that it will expect its cloud provider to keep pace once it has made the move. It will be disappointed by any deceleration in the rate of technology improvement and functional innovation.
My take
There’s growing acceptance of the need for enterprises to upgrade to a better connected, more agile technology infrastructure in order to keep pace with the demands of doing business in a digital world. Even among enterprises whose core business is firmly rooted in the physical world, people still need anytime access to up-to-date information and the ability to progress workflow wherever they are.
The catch is that few enterprises (perhaps none) have the scale and resources to wholly build that kind of infrastructure themselves. Therefore, at a time when they are relying even more on technology, they must also learn to rely on a third party provider of that technology. And they must evaluate the provider without having had any experience of this new kind of technology partnership (and often where the provider itself is only beginning to build a track record).
You can’t blame those who are nervous of making this leap of faith.
Disclosure: Infor is a dignomica premier partner.
Image credit: © Paul Fleet – Fotolia.

Read more on: Cloud platforms - infrastructure and architectureFrictionless enterprise 