
Decoupling
In pursuit of clarity, the time has come to muddy the waters a bit.
Let’s start with the conceptual cloud, which is not necessarily the same as the distinct, implemented cloud. In fact, there are increasing signs that the latter, for many large enterprises, will quite possibly not really happen. The conceptual cloud, on the other hand, will be everywhere and anywhere.
Two sources now, Cisco and Nutanix, have recently suggested to me that that the rapid growth in the market for hyper-converged hardware architectures and micro-services, could create a situation where enterprises move from an on-premise infrastructure and operating environment, to a largely on-premise infrastructure and software-defined environment, and never quite make it out into the ‘cloud’ as an implemented entity.
This is not to say that they will not be using cloud services, either in the here and now or the future. The conceptual cloud will be present and directly responsible for just about every corner of their operations. It is just that the so-far accepted ‘truth’ – that large enterprises will join SMEs and consumers in running the vast majority of their information processing and management out in the cloud – may go there only conceptually, but will remain very much physically based on-premise.
Yes, there will be many services used that are themselves fully cloud-based and cloud-delivered. For example, running multiple NetSuite systems as Tier 2 divisional ERP and management environments into the primary enterprise-wide ERP system,  is an obvious example of just such an environment.
But having the entire information management out there in the cloud?………..its very unlikely.
And the reason, though their detailed assessment of environments and architectures may differ, is shared by both Cisco and Nutanix. The growth of hyper-converged environments looks like it is now laying the foundations for on-premise environments of prodigious power, performance and flexibility, such that enterprises no longer have to consider taking that ‘giant leap’ into almost total cloud-based resource delivery.
On-premise is dead. Long live on-premise
So the chance is there for enterprises to undertake a major re-think of that strategic direction. Rather than thinking that moving the majority of their IT requirement out into the cloud, even if it is largely as bare metal or co-location operations, there is now the option to move from on-premise – AKA the traditional one (or more) server-per-app model of a million legacy data centers – to on-premise in the form of hyper-converged, software-defined data centers. They can skip the move-to-cloud bit altogether.
There are still some arguments as to how much this move will really take hold, but it does play to a couple of underlying factors and trends. The first is the most obvious – there is still a good deal of fear and doubt amongst enterprise users about moving to the cloud. It’s the ‘out there, out of our direct control’ factor at play.
Security, service management and a host of other issues have long served to unnerve many enterprise CIOs and IT managers. It has only been the increasing pressure for digitalization across the business which has pushed them to start paddling in the shallows of cloud computing.
But if they can still move towards digitalization yet maintain a level of (possibly fictional in practice) ‘management control’ over the actual systems doing the work then maybe a new level of compromise can be established.
This is certainly the thinking underpinning the recent developments by Cisco. The key components in the Cisco portfolio for this task are CliQr, a technology-agnostic service orchestration tool that is intended to be able to connect any application to any other, which was acquired on March 1st, and the introduction of Hyperflex, the company’s hyper-converged systems management piece, introduced at the same time.
The key difference between the Cisco approach and that of Nutanix is how to provide for enterprises looking to bring legacy applications into a digitalized, collaborative environment. The Cisco approach is to view, for now at least, hyper-converged systems as being largely for new applications only. Bringing existing legacy systems into the digitalized world is then the task for CliQr, orchestrating the old and the new into a digitalized whole.
The Nutanix approach is based on the notion that a new hyper-converged and software-defined data center environment is more than capable of running both legacy and new applications in the same system, with each being provided with the resources they need, when the resources are needed.
The company has already been certified to run most of the leading big business back office systems, with one of the big feathers in that cap being last year’s certification by SAP to run end user applications as they stand. Using APIs to build collaboration between old and new is, according to the company’s VP of Global Alliances and Business Development, Venugopal Pai, the way any required digitalised environment can be created:
Using APIs means enterprise users can now do anything with anything, and in anything. The architecture lends itself to building these into webscale architectures which can run collaborating, digitalised environments, using legacy and new applications together. We are looking to be the iCloud of the enterprise.
Cisco, on the other hand, is restricting itself to early conversations with legacy software providers about moving their wares to Hyperflex. The combination of CliQr and the company’s existing certifications for running legacy applications on its existing data center systems means that it does not see too much reason to rush in that direction.
The advantage for enterprise users of course is that this situation now gives two fundamental options when planning a move into the world of digitalization. Both can achieve the same fundamental business and operational advances – building more complex and functionally business management systems that are the ultimate goal of using the concept of cloud computing.
But it also reduces the issues of technology to ones that a business feels happiest with or most assured by.
Those enterprises that want to move ahead fast and take bigger steps more quickly, and perhaps feel the potential risks and security issues of change are within the scope of manageability, then the Nutanix model may well prove attractive. It may also fit those that operate in fast moving, fast changing marketplaces.
For those of a more conservative nature, with more conservative markets, the Cisco approach may well feel a better option.
This could give enterprises a level of choice and flexibility that could open up the rate at which digitalization and digital transformation occur. A recent UK survey conducted by the Cloud Industry Forum suggests that, while only 16% of organisations have any form of digital transformation strategy in place at the moment, 72% expect to have such a strategy in place within two years.
But it also suggests that, so far, only 38% of that 16% say that using cloud has given them a significant competitive advantage: in other words, a smidgeon over 5% of the total. This suggests that the benefits of cloud are still not getting through, which in turn suggests that the core messages underpinning cloud services are still proving to be more counter-productive than beneficial.
This alone could make for one of the key arguments in favour of software-defined, hyper-converged environments.
My take
The growth of hyper-converged architectures does point to a continued need for many enterprises to have their information management resource on-premise, if only for the pyschological reason of simply `knowing where it is’. But the software-defined capabilities of hyper-convergency do not then impede the use of cloud services delivery and the advantages this can bring to business.
It is arguably time, therefore, for the vendors to re-jig their sales and marketing platforms in order to de-couple the cloud concept from the cloud delivery model.
 
Image credit - YouTubeRead more on: Cloud platforms - infrastructure and architecture 