

There are a number of technical capabilities intersecting in 2016 that should allow business a new way of thinking about generating value and getting things done. The techniques we use to look at the business will be the first of these.
2016 will be christened the year of virtual reality, though some may disagree. Technology companies like Microsoft, Sony, Facebook with Oculus have VR and augmented reality products coming out this quarter and throughout 2016. Gaming is an obvious target for the use of these capabilities. Microsoft has shown some powerful demos of HaloLens, for example.
Augmenting the world around us will have the greatest business impact, giving us insight into process, performance and interaction possibilities that just haven’t existed. Microsoft’s first real development kit for HaloLens will be coming out in early 2016, and I expect numerous demonstrations for business by the end of the year.
The possibility of augmented, shared experiences and the immediate and seamless access to deep, detailed corporate information are powerful levers for business function change. Add to that the information collected from IoT as well as the powerful analytics capabilities available and whole new dimensions of information interaction and value will be demanded from our existing IT environments.
In addition to new interfaces, the model of work is changing. Freelance contractors are becoming an alternative in many industries. These freelancers can enable a more flexible and cost effective response to events. Retail stores have been depending temporary workers for the holiday rush for decades. These are not just temps as they may provide a more diverse perspective to the events themselves enabling creative answers. We’re seeing this shift in our personal lives and the services we consume, with expanding platforms like Upwork, TaskRabbit, Uber, Airbnb and other options that connect freelancers to markets. This alternative approach to employment will cause IT organizations to focus on delivering a more dynamic virtual-first approach when architecting their information environment. We can no longer assume the same kinds of networking and controls as the past. It will also require a different approach to security and privacy, defined by different definitions of flexibility and control.
The growth of the freelance economy has been driven by an unstable job market, but it has also been enabled by a decade-long focus on work-life balance. 2016 will likely be the year the pendulum swings back to work, but to a different kind, with an increased focus on meaningful and enjoyable work. For many, an individual’s life is not defined by optimization of leisure. In many ways, they can be compensated with interesting and rewarding experiences at work, where their creativity is valued.
At the same time that freelancers are coming into the working environment there is a whole other dimension of ‘worker’ entering the scene.  The use of automated virtual assistants based upon machine learning approaches, is becoming common. This technology is driven by the scarcity of time in our lives and attention of the skilled workers in the business. Simple tasks can consume our lives, so automating them away enhances our ability to do what’s really important. Creative technologists have been doing this for years.
In addition to supplementing the employees, these robotic operators will define a “no-sourcing” model, in which jobs will not be moved offshore, or to freelancers, but instead automated out of existence by making the existing workforce more productive. For a long time I’ve talked about the need to separate out the normal from the unique, then automate normal and focus the human creativity on the unique. In 2016, we’ll see that blossom at work in many new and exciting ways.
One area where machine learning will be applied is security, where behavior recognition and automated response techniques are being used to identify and address abhorrent situations and inform the business of risky activities.​ Some of the areas where this has been applied are the recognition of software viruses, improper financial transactions and terrorist activities, to name a few.
Although reality may not be as advanced as seen in the movies and television — it’s not far behind. All enterprises need to do a proactive assessment of value per effort hour expended in their various processes. Understand which areas are well understood and actively drive people toward the areas their creativity is needed then automate the rest.
Image credit: Futuristic smart glasses © dragon stock – fotoilia
Read more on: Future of work 