
Who shops at Poundland online at Christmas? Very soon, the value-based supermarket group will be able to answer that question in detail as it dips its toes into the world of ecommerce for the very first time, 25 years after opening its first UK store.
But what the retailer can tell you is that last year in its UK high street outlets it sold five and a half million boxes of Maltesers, two and a half million umbrellas, three million lightbulbs, 18 million cans of Coke, 250,000 garden gnomes – and three million metres of tinsel. Online, the opportunities would appear to be huge.
Yet more evidence, if it were needed, of the rise of price-conscious shopping across every demographic group in the UK, and of the polarization of bricks-and-mortar retail as customers favor stores that focus on low cost, speed, and convenience at one end of the market, and those that offer higher-end, more exclusive fare at the other. In that scenario, any brands in the poorly differentiated middle ground lose out, which is the real reason why many established supermarket names, such as Morrisons and Tesco, have been struggling to reassert their identities.
What might surprise many, however, is that Poundland itself has not extended its longstanding web presence into e-commerce before, and so the extended festive period will provide the first real test of both the business model and the underlying IT infrastructure as visitor numbers ramp up for one of the biggest and most sustained seasonal spikes of the year.
Paul McDermott, Poundland’s head of e-commerce, explains:
We launched on 1 September, and we are seeing this very much as a trial. But we are pretty confident that there is customer demand. We know that the economics are different for us [as a value-based retailer] – we may have to adapt our offer, or adapt our range online – but we have launched with our eyes open; we want to be a full multi-channel operation.
It’s no surprise that the new site is optimized for mobile devices, but as yet there is no app – something that McDermott says he is keeping “an open mind” about for the future.
Poundland is currently offering a broad range of Christmas items online, not to mention other lines that can also expect spikes of interest, such as merchandise from the new Star Wars movie, which opens this week. But unlike most of its competitors in the Christmas retail market, Poundland has no transactional data from previous festive periods against which to benchmark its performance.  McDermott explains:
We don’t have online transactional data or history to go on, but we have had a strong website for years, even though it has not been transactional, and that has given us some insight into customer behaviour. We anticipated a peak at launch/go-live, and we anticipated others at Halloween and Christmas, which have been at about the levels we expected. Another peak we hoped for was on Black Friday, and we offered a range of products especially for that, and we got a good spike of traffic.
Hosted platform
In order to ride out the peaks and troughs in customer demand and grow the digital business over time, Poundland has chosen Rackspace to host the new venture. The website is run on a dedicated facility, which provides a 100% network uptime guarantee, high-performance bare-metal servers, and enhanced security. McDermott says:
Having a dependable and scalable solution in place is incredibly important. The 24/7 support offered by Rackspace is a key element of achieving our goal to provide a great browsing and shopping experience for customers, many of whom will be using the site for the first time.
When we looked into software platforms and developments partners, we chose Magento from [multichannel ecommerce retail solutions provider] Ampersand, and when we got to the hosting question, we knew we were not going to host internally and we wanted to outsource it. Ampersand led us to have conversations with Rackspace and recommended them very highly.
“Then we got great reference studies and calls; it seemed like Rackspace were going to take problems away from us rather than introduce new ones to the organisation – we were starting from scratch, remember – and the suite of products they had available meant that we knew we could grow with them into the relationship. In short, Rackspace could grow with us.
But of course, ecommerce isn’t just about sales, it is also about data, analytics, and establishing new relationships with customers. So what has Poundland learned from its first quarter as an ecommerce platform? McDermott says that the company can already identify different types of customer behaviour:
Customers are coming to the website with a specific and different mission online to what they would have in our stores. For example, there is a lot more pre-planned purchasing online, some of it is in bulk, and some of it is around events and parties. We have also seen differences in what people are buying and how people are shopping via the website, compared with in store: Christmas and Halloween shopping takes place earlier online than it does in store, for example.
In all, we believe that online shopping is complementing people’s shopping in our stores, and our approach is about knowing that there are differences. We’re looking at segmenting our customers, but we’re not getting carried away with analysing our data – or getting into anything as grand as big data – just yet.
The company is working with commerce marketing automation provider Bronto to deepen its relationship with the customers that Poundland does manage to ‘capture’ online.
So is the new venture working? Understandably, McDermott declines to put any figures against online visitor numbers and sales to date, but he offers a glimpse of the future as evidence of how well the new transactional presence has been performing so far:
Visitor numbers to the site have been growing year on year [from the pre-transactional site], but we are now looking at how multichannel will grow and develop for us. So we’re looking at beginning ‘click and collect’ trials in 2016.
But McDermott accepts that the company needs to tread carefully rather than take too many leaps into an untested market for a ‘budget’ retailer. Poundland certainly faces key challenges before it can realistically contemplate a more ambitious online presence, because when most items cost a pound [$1.50] or less, there is an effort/cost to profit ratio involved in fulfilling those orders and delivering them to people’s doors.
But McDermott is resolute about digital’s potential to improve the business:
We do think it will be sustainable and profitable, but it won’t change the business overnight. In the long term it might attract new customers to Poundland, so we see it more as adding to the overall business rather than creating a distinct channel.
The retailer has a long history of outsourcing non-core processes – in 2013, it outsourced its internal IT infrastructure and data centre needs to NextiraOne, for example – and so it came as no surprise that Poundland outsourced the door-to-door deliveries component of the new ecommerce business to Hermes during trials earlier this year, at a flat £4 ($6) rate to customers, with orders over £50 being delivered free.
Meanwhile, fulfilment and customer services have been outsourced to Entertainment Magpie, which already supplies the Replay range of CDs and DVDs to Poundland stores.
McDermott says:
[We outsourced] so that we could leverage on someone else’s expertise, and it wouldn’t distract our in-house team from important in-house projects. So far, customer satisfaction rates [for deliveries] have been very positive. But we are not naïve, we’re learning new things every day. And we send customer feedback forms to all customers who have bought online with us.
In summary, McDermott says that there are tactical as well as a strategic advantages to moving into ecommerce in time to capitalise on the holiday period’s boost to the retail market. He says:
This is a critical differentiator for us.
My take
A bold move at the right time. In the current climate, few would bet against Poundland and its value-based competitors, which have attracted shoppers from every demographic – customers who no longer see commodity items, even from big-brand names, as goods for which they should pay a premium.
That said, there are both unique challenges as well as unique opportunities. Since acquiring 99p Stores earlier this year, Poundland may need to rationalize both its high street and online estates, which may send out confusing signals to the market if both brands are based on the same street, as they are in some city centres. Any sign that branches are closing might be seized on by the more established players, such as Tesco and Morrisons, that have borne the brunt of the supermarket shakedown.
And while bulk orders may be profitable to deliver to people’s doors, ad hoc purchases and smaller orders may need to be loss leaders – although the delivery charge may remove the cost advantage to customers of buying a small number of goods. But the flipside of that may pose a real threat to the Tescos of this world: why not order in bulk online, rather than pop into your local store for a basket of low-cost items?
Read more on: Analytics planning and data analysisCRM and customer experienceDigital and content marketinge-commerceRetail e-commerce and the omni-channelUse cases 