
Last week Derek du Preez reported on bookmaker Ladbrokes success in exploiting digital technology to expedite a financial turnaround. It’s a success story that stands in stark contrast to rival William Hill, which has had three years of online and digital difficulties to put behind it. 
Last month the firm ousted boss Jame Henderson citing his failure to revive the group’s online business. which makes up 34% of total revenues, as the reason. Late last week, the company announced that revenue at the onilne division dropped 3% while operating profits were down a third to £43.4 million. 
That said, the company says it has made early progress on its online turnaround with its mobile platform redesigned in time for Euro 2016, and mobile web and apps localised for four markets. Interim CEO Philip Bowcock says tech investment is a priority: 

Looking ahead, our immediate priorities are to continue the recovery in online, to leverage our technology improvements across the business and to advance a focused approach to international growth.

He explains:

Q2 was all about our mobile Sportsbook, where we’ve massively overhauled our user experience. We’ve delivered faster than ever before. Whereas last year saw only two app releases, this year has seen seven and also multiple web-based updates every week.
We’ve significantly improved the app-loading time, closing the gap on key products like Cash In and fixed problems like the football journey. We’re also innovating again, giving customers an experience they can’t get elsewhere. We’re making it easy to surf for different bets, with a search function, encouraging customers to stay on the app longer, with TV and engaging scoreboards, pushing relevant and interesting bets to them and then giving them longer than our competitors, to decide to cash in. 
And we’ve launched four language sites with four fully translated Sportsbook apps and the app has gone live in the German app store. 

All of that has been an enormous transformation for customers, he argues: 

What our app looked like last October and what it looks like now, after a complete overhaul of the design before the Euros. So, Sportsbook is now competitive and fit for purpose, so in order of priority H2 is about the customer experience, gaming and then further sportsbook innovations. We’ve got to get the journey of how customers navigate around the site right. That’s about the landing pages, the registration process and the deposit systems for a start.
For some customers it’s easier to reregister than it is to reset your password. As Crispin will tell you, it’s about making navigation as quick and easy as possible. Just to give you one example, we’ve just launched an automatic address look-up facility for the registration process. In the first few days we’ve seen the drop-off rate fall from 4.4% to 1.8%, which will translate into thousands more registration processes each month being successfully completed.

Front foot
The need now is to “get on the front foot” when it comes to technology strategy, adds Bowcock, which has been knocked off track by the launch of its in-house developed Trafalgar betting platform last year. Bowcock admits: 

We spent a lot of time doing Trafalgar and took our eye off the ball in other areas. We built a good technological platform that means we can change at speed, but we delivered a poor UX. So we have re-assessed and brought in the right expertise. The level of activity and the ability to turn around ideas and requests from the Sportsbook team have massively improved. Now we’ve put two further pieces in place, the means to build a new back end platform and the resource to support both the front end development and the back end project.

Crispin Nieboer, Director of Corporate Development & Innovation, adds that there have been a number of contributors to the online decline of recent times, but concedes that Trafalgar’s roll-out has been an issue: 

If I was to pick one and hindsight is obviously a great thing, if I was to pick one it would probably be the execution of project Trafalgar, not the strategy, I think the strategy was spot on. From an execution point of view, I think there’s some lessons learned there and I put it into three buckets, really. 
The first is around UX. I think we focused very much on the not insignificant technical challenge of project Trafalgar, particularly when you’re looking at the very high traffic levels that we deal with. I think the team took a view that the UX was something that could be dealt with second to that, which I think was a mistake. 
The second issue is in terms of insight, the old site we had wasn’t tagged properly. It meant we didn’t have really strong data on how customers were using our previous mobile products and therefore the way that they would use our new one. 
I suppose the third area is on prioritization. Whilst we were working on Trafalgar and Trafalgar took slightly longer than we all hoped, it meant other things were de-prioritized, things that were working on now, things like the player journey, top end of the funnel, things like gaming and things like desktop. Those are the areas of pain that we took as a result of Trafalgar. But, having said that, we now have this fantastic platform that’s enabling us to go at a very high speed and very high quality of releases and the team.

Away from Trafalgar, there are fresh technology initiatives, such as last week’s acquisition of industry software development firm Grand Parade for a reported £13.6 million combined cash and shares deal, with a view to bolstering its digital development capabilities. Bowcock explains: 

I think of this team as a large technology cell and they already do a lot of work for others in our space, so can hit the ground running. With around 200 people they can backfill our 75 or so IT vacancies, plus another 85 roles currently outsourced to third parties and in addition catch up on the backlog of innovations online want to deliver. They bring proven expertise to the UX, will help us realize the potential of Trafalgar and support other projects across the Group, including the omni-wallet, for retail.

That will build on April’s £90 million investment in gambling technology business OpenBet. Bowcock says: 

The OpenBet deal will give us a bespoke platform tailored to our needs. It’s likely to take around three years from the time we start, to deliver all the pieces, but it’ll be a platform that supports our long term needs.
When we come off OpenBet 1 to OpenBet 2, it needs to be as seamless as possible and the approach we’ve taken will help us achieve that. With many of our customers also using the OpenBet platform it means we get there before others and with a degree of exclusivity.

Bowcock argues that despite all the problems, William Hill is still well-placed for the future: 

We’ve got an iconic brand that’s not only the most trusted bookmaking brand in the UK, it’s also proving successful in other markets. Retail is still demonstrating its strength. It’s generating cash and it fits well with online. Online is a big UK business. It’s still very profitable. It delivers high quality revenues from regulated markets and it’s getting faster and slicker now we control our technology.

My take
William Hill’s big bet on technology hasn’t delivered the returns it might have hoped for to date, but the right investments are being made. The question now is whether the firm can execute on its vision more effectively. As interim CEO, Bowcock has a lot to do.
Image credit - William Hill Read more on: Digital and content marketingDigital transformation - frictionless enterpriseRetail e-commerce and the omni-channelUX and application design 