
UK bookmaker William Hill delivered a disappointing set of half-year results today, where it saw its pre-tax profits shrink from £121.8 million a year ago to £78.7 million for the first six months of 2015. CEO James Henderson has blamed the numbers on hikes in certain betting taxes, but took the opportunity to highlight the rate at which the company is investing heavily in online and technology platforms to drive future growth.
However, shares in William Hill dropped by 4% in early trading.
The betting market in the UK is becoming increasingly competitive, with most companies looking to technology investments to drive differentiation, to get into new markets and to attract new customers. We have also written previously about similar efforts from William Hill competitors, such as Paddy Power and Ladbrokes.
And despite William Hill’s disappointing results, online revenue grew 16% for the period and now represents 35% of £808.1 million in total group revenues. Equally, mobile staking grew 28% for the period and accounted for 54% of Sportsbook amounts wagered in the first half of the year, and mobile new revenue in gaming grew 42%.
The company told investors that it spent £27.5 million of capital expenditure in the period, which “reflected an acceleration of investment on intangibles, particularly software, as the online technology agenda unfolds”.
CEO James Henderson also made specific reference to the company’s ‘Project Trafalgar’, which it has been working on for two years and focuses on how its online team manages the customer-facing end of its websites, by inserting an interface between the front-end website and the back-end engine. It hopes that this will allow it to rely less on third-party developers to make changes and, supported by agile development, can focus on rapid innovation.
Henderson said:
We are making excellent progress across our three strategic priorities, particularly in technology where Project Trafalgar will give us the ability to bring our customers a faster and more stable online service, a much improved mobile experience and an enhanced in-play product range on mobile devices.
Meanwhile, innovations such as our industry’s first Accelerator programme will allow us to further our strategy to bring customers a differentiated and personalised service.
I am particularly pleased with our move into the emerging online lotteries market, which will support our international diversification and gives us exposure to an exciting growth market in a gambling vertical which is new to us.
We remain committed to working with the industry and the regulator to promote responsible gambling and ensure that the marketing of gambling is socially responsible.
 Part of William Hill’s international growth plans and diversification strategy includes an investment in NeoGames, an online lottery service provider that mostly operates out of the US, in which it now owns a 29.4% stake. It paid $25 million as part of the acquisition, which it hopes will give it more visibility in the US markets.
It is now legal for some states in the US to sell lottery tickets over the internet, which William Hill hopes will be an area of growth for the company. It said:
NeoGames won the contract for Michigan’s iLottery in 2013 and holds a number of other contracts in Europe. William Hill has an option to acquire the remaining 70.6% of NeoGames, exercisable after three and five years. The option is at our full discretion and the price payable will be determined at the time of exercise using a valuation methodology agreed as part of the initial stake purchase.
This is an exciting new opportunity in the gambling sector and NeoGames is a disruptive technology operator offering customers a great experience and lottery rights holders a compelling alternative to established lottery operators.
The results also gave a more detailed insight into Project Trafalgar, which was described as a “key enabler of the Group’s recent growth” and will allow it to bring customers a “differentiated – and increasingly personalised – service”. This is very similar to what we have seen happening at the likes of Paddy Power. Personalisation seems to be the name of the game.
Investors were told:
While the most visible aspect of this project will be the new look for williamhill.com, the greater benefit comes from the new infrastructure that underpins the site. Trafalgar gives us the ability to bring our customers a faster and more stable site, a much improved mobile experience and an enhanced in-play product range on mobile devices.
By controlling the front-end ourselves in-house, we benefit from quicker development timetables which, combined with vastly improved data from the site, enables us both to bring innovations to market faster and to continuously improve our existing customer journeys by releasing changes potentially thousands of times a year instead of 10-12 times under our legacy infrastructure.
Our roll-out of the new site is gradual, aiming to reduce the impact of a ‘big bang’ change and to adapt rapidly where necessary. The major changes will be complete by the end of 2015.
William Hill also explained that it has invested in an ‘Accelerator’ programme, as it believes that not
all innovation will come from within the Group. Part of this will include an incubator programme run out of London and Tel Aviv during the second half of the year, for which it will provide £25,000 funding to eight start-ups to deliver innovative products and technologies. A further £150,000 will be made available to the winning proposition.
Finally, the William Hill said that technology will be key to delivering future growth. It told investors:
Over the last couple of years, we have been evolving our longer term technology strategy. We strongly believe both that differentiation drives revenue by providing a compelling customer experience and that owning the customer journey drives differentiation.
This has led to us taking control of our sports betting user experience and core product through Project Trafalgar, developing a highly competitive gaming platform, improving our ability to leverage pricing and event-creation across the Group via Central Feeds and creating flexibility through the William Hill APIs.
Looking forward, we remain focused on building our technological advantage, including our back-end capability.
My take
Similarly to the financial and retail sectors, online gambling and betting gets high investment in technology to drive differentiation. Technology use is often cutting edge and the companies involved are often willing to shell out cash on new tech if they think it will give them a slight edge over their rivals.
However, this makes the market tough and the pace of innovation is incredibly quick. William Hill seems to recognise this, but execution will be key.
Read more on: CRM and customer experience 