
For UK fans of a particular kind of holiday experience, the Caravan, Camping and Motorhome Show is a big deal. This year’s event in February attracted over 91,000 people over six days to the National Exhibition Centre (NEC) in Birmingham.
For one show exhibitor, Willerby, it was an opportunity to show off some new additions to its range of static holiday homes and lodges – and, in particular, the Rowan. With this new ‘bespoke’ lodge, buyers can request a wide range of customizations, prior to manufacture.
They can make alterations to the Rowan’s layout; decide whether to have two bedrooms or three; and choose from a wide range of options when it comes to fixtures, fittings and design flourishes.
Increased personalization
Increased product personalization is a definite trend right across Willerby’s product range. It’s the UK’s largest manufacturer of static holiday homes and lodges, selling to both private owners as well as companies running parks on which homes and lodges are installed. Some units are used solely for holiday accommodation; others support full-time residential living.
Either way, the push to give these products a more personal touch is changing not only the company’s manufacturing processes, but also the systems it needs to run its business, according to head of IT, Howard Dawson.
Willerby recently announced that it has selected Infor CloudSuite Industrial (Syteline) to support its changing business model. Deployment is now underway, with a go-live date set for August. Infor was chosen for its ability to support a more ‘made to order’ style of manufacturing, says Dawson:
The bespoke systems we have today were designed for a very different market to the one we’re facing now. Like many business, the way we manufacture has changed a lot: we used to produce in batches of 100. That’s 100 holiday homes, all the same, with the same materials and layouts and fittings and so on.
But today, there’s a big opportunity for us in terms of offering lots of options, lots of ways to personalize the unit – and the way we organize and run manufacturing needs to reflect that. Designing and manufacturing bespoke lodges is completely different to our traditional volume business, involving scope to change specifications as customer preferences dictate. So really, the issue here is that we had outgrown our existing manufacturing systems.
Selection criteria 
Infor was chosen from a shortlist of two vendors – Infor and IFS – and a big factor in its win was the Infor Configure-Price-Quote (CPQ) software. This captures engineering and pricing knowledge in a way that enables sales representatives to guide customers step-by-step through the process of choosing different customization options for their holiday home or lodge.
From there, he adds, captured requirements flow directly through to employees working in design, production and delivery.
With personalization, one of the things we’ve seen is this need to provide more guidance to customers – because they might not know what’s standard in a unit and what’s optional, so they might be asking for things that are already included in that holiday home or lodge. So with CPQ, we’re aiming to take them through that journey in a ‘guided selling’ approach and make sure they have all of the necessary information to hand when they’re making decisions about their purchase.
But above and beyond CPQ, Willerby’s main priority was replacing a hotchpotch of custom-built, disparate software products, with a modern, integrated suite of business applications. In order to take its digital transformation journey further, says Dawson, it’s vital the company has a ‘single version of the truth’, which will also help the company up its game in business analytics, where it already uses Qlikview as a front-end tool for some analyses.
A new approach makes sense given that Willerby is showing healthy growth and, in 2017, took on a majority-stake investor in the form of private equity company Equistone. In its most recent financial year for which figures are available (to September 2017), revenues hit £166 million, up 13% on the previous year. Over the two years, 200 new jobs were created at the company’s headquarters in Hull.
Standardizing on Infor, says Dawson, should provide a digital platform on which Willerby can build for the future – and a big part of his vision includes the integration of Infor CloudSuite Industrial with its computer-aided design (CAD) and product lifecycle management (PLM) systems – Autodesk Inventor and Autodesk Fusion PLM, respectively. He concludes:
Once we can bring all this information together, we’ll have a one-stop source of all information, data, imagery and design files, ready to be provided to whoever is going to need them and use them in the business. Design is really key for our whole business and the ability to get customers involved in the design of products right from the start is going to be a really important way to distinguish our products and our company from others in our market.
 
Image credit - WillerbyDisclosure - At time of writing, Infor is a premier partner of diginomica. Read more on: Cloud ERP financials and supply chainCloud platforms - infrastructure and architectureDigital enterprise in the real worldUse cases 