

Traffic remains an issue.
That’s what we might call an understatement from Art Peck, CEO at GAP, whose struggles with the realities of the omni-channel retail world have been well-documented.
Last week it turned in what look like some nice numbers, particularly given the poor performance of so many in the retail sector, with overall sales of $3.44 billion and a profit of $143 million. That’s essentially flat revenue year-on-year, but in the current climate that counts as a win.
But, and it’s a big but, the problem for GAP is that it is a three-headed beast, made up of GAP itself, the higher end Banana Republic and the cheap-and-cheerful Old Navy – and it’s only the last one that’s showing signs of life. While overall same-store sales were up 2%, that was the result of an 8% increase at Old Navy, with the average dragged down by a 4% decline each at GAP and Banana Republic.
While Peck aknowledges there is a store-traffic issue, he’s adamant that it extends beyond GAP:
Clearly, the industry has a traffic issue, but I’m inclined to turn this around to say that headwinds are only headwinds if you’re facing in the wrong direction. And the way we’re really approaching this issue of conversion is turning on its head and saying that we have a conversion opportunity, not a traffic problem.
What he wants to see is what he dubs “a high touch and frictionless experience”. He explains:
I have a strong philosophy that we need to run our stores to enable 100% conversion and I’ll be the first to say that’s not going to happen on the back of shoveling mass quantities of inventories into our stores. It starts with the fundamentals, it starts with staffing, it starts with replenishment models, it starts with respectfully displaying our product, but it also means layering in and continuing to layer in digital capabilities and allowing our customer to frictionlessly purchase at our stores, even if the style, color, combination isn’t there on the shelf.
That’s omni-channel theory 101 – easier to articulate than deliver upon. But Peck is admanant that GAP can strike the balance between offline and online:
I’m a big believer in stores, but I’m also a big believer in digital. We will continue, as we always have, to manage square footage where our customers are to support them on digital, to support them in our stores and to meet them wherever they are.
Digital basics
But it’s around digital capabilities that the firm needs to convince. Peck says:
We continue to do what I call foundational work on our digital experience. There was money to be made by improving your page load speeds by modest personalization, by enhancing your search capabilities and, as much as we talk about many of those other things, we’re proud of the experience that we offer our digital. We have an exceptional digital business and everyday we’re committed to making it better.
To that end, for the coming year, GAP will spend over $300 mililon on IT and supply chain to support out its omni-channel and digital strategies:
We are relentlessly focused on mobile as traffic continues to move to a mobile device. We launched our native mobile apps starting with Old Navy very recently to improve the customer experience and we’ve already seen customers rate those apps as materially better than the experience that we were delivering on a web-based app just several weeks ago.
Where the two worlds, offline and online, meet is around customer experience, adds Peck:
On the customer side, we see a continuing opportunity to improve engagement and build loyalty, really by continuing to be focused on the customer experiences and it’s an experience in our stores where we have a responsibility to deliver a compelling experience that our customers can’t get any place else and it’s the digital experience and it’s how those two things are connect together.
I sort of think about our digital business, our digital store in the same way I think about our physical stores in terms of everyday there is an opportunity to improve the quality of execution whether it’s page load times, whether it’s navigation, whether it’s personalization, which we have continued to put energy and effort in again. Where we even modestly personalize the experience, we see positive engagement from the customers and the financial metrics all moving the right direction.
As for future tech priorities, there are some clear contenders:
Data and analytics is very much on my mind right now hitting number of areas of the business, not the least of which is certainly in e-commerce. About a year ago we brought in somebody whose significant part of the responsibilities is to really pull all the data that we have about our customers across the physical experience and the digital experience, the card program etc together in a way to really provide that foundation for continuing to advance personalization going forward.
But all of that is further down the tracks. There are more pragmatic requirements to be dealt with today, he concludes:
It’s certainly an opportunity that we have, I believe data analytics and AI are going to continue to play an increasing role, but it’s out in the future right now. Right now we have a lot of opportunity just by executing against the basics, but certainly in our future that will continue to see incremental opportunity there.
My take
The fact that GAP is at a point just now where it’s only starting to execute against basic digital/omni-channel capabilities is the real story here. Ironically, I’ve found myself engaging with GAP’s online offerings more this year since the decision was taken to shut down all the Banana Republic stores in the UK, but to continue as a digital-only brand. That’s been a good experience for me overall, with fast fulilment and delivery as well as free returns if items don’t meet expectations on arrival. So there are basics that are being met, just not enough of them across the group as a whole. The bigger issue then becomes whether or not the inventory is appealing enough to attract business – and that’s a whole other story.
Image credit - GapRead more on: Retail e-commerce and the omni-channel 