
Bookmaker William Hill’s online operations pushed up its third quarter revenues yesterday, only two weeks after the firm was one of the victims of a Distributed Denial of Service (DDoS) attack, the latest online issue faced by the firm this year.
Online net revenue was up 4% in the 17 weeks to 25 October, with online Sportsbook revenue up 11% and amounts wagered up 6%. That’s good news compared to the problems experienced by the firm at the start of the month when its online offerings were taken down by attackers. At the time, the company admitted: 
The online services of William Hill were intermittently impacted during the course of yesterday following distributed denial of service activity by third parties. This follows a significant increase in DDoS activity experienced by a number of online companies over recent weeks.
Interim CEO Philip Bowcock says he doesn’t foresee the attack as having any longer term impact on the business: 

We had a couple of outages on the Tuesday and the Wednesday. We still had a return to wagering growth at the weekend, certainly on the Sunday when there actually was a big English Premier League day. It’s always difficult and concerning when you have these sorts of events, but we’ve done everything we can to keep our customers abreast of the situation, and at the moment we don’t see likely to have any material impact on the business going forward.

That was the latest digital development that has seen William Hill trying to beef up its often troubled online capabilities this year. This week the firm has taken action to bring on board more digital experience in the form of three new non-executive directors, all of whom come with varying degrees of online expertise. 
John O’Reilly is an industry veteran who founded Ladbrokes’ digital operations and turned around Coral’s online operation, Mark Brooker is former Chief Operating Officer of betting exchange Betfair, while Robin Terrell has an online retail background from Amazon, John Lewis Direct and Tesco.
Futures
A priority now is to expand the omni-channel capabilities of William Hill with the rollout of self-service betting terminals (SSBT) within branches. Bowcock says:


The priority is just about making sure we get SSBTs working optimally. We need to get more products onto them. So we’re looking to get horse racing onto those SSBTs and expect in the first quarter next year. And once we’ve got the optimal product, then I think we’ll see a drive on the omni-channel going forward.

Bowcock still sees a role for the traditional betting shop in the online age of gambling: 

We don’t see any decline in people coming through in our retail environments. Do I have concern? Yes, I have concern. I don’t have massive concern. What I’m concerned about is making sure we’ve got the best products for our customers, whether that’s both in retail, but also more importantly in online to make sure we’ve got the best online products.

One thing that William Hill will have to be looking carefully at, in common with all its competitors, is the decision by the UK’s Competition and Markets Authority to look into allegations that betting websites have been using “misleading promotions” and “unfair terms” to deceive their customers. 

The sort of thing under investigation is scenarios such as sign-up bonuses to attract customers – eg free stakes, no-lose guarantees or special enhanced odds – but which have ‘small print’ that states that the winnings can only be paid out as free bets or the requirement to make a set number of additional bets before any gains can be collected. 

Nisha Arora, senior director for consumer enforcement at the CMA, said when the inquiry was launched last month: 

Gambling inevitable involves taking a risk, but it shouldn’t be a con. We’re worried players are losing out because gambling sites are making it too difficult for them to understand the terms on which they’re playing, and may not be giving them a fair deal. We are now investigating to see whether firms are breaking the law.

Such concerns are not confined to the UK. The Federal Government in Australia has just published the Interactive Gambling Amendment Bill 2016, which sets out to curtail online gambling activities. It sets out a series of illegal gambling services and provides operating guidelines for legal activities. If passed, the Bill would also give the Australian Communications and Media Authority (Acma) power to issue warnings, infringement notices, civil penalties and injunctions.
Alan Tudge, the Australian Human Services Minister, said: 

Currently hundreds of illegal gambling services are easily accessible on the internet and we know that people are more likely to get into trouble online – 2.7% of interactive gamblers are problem gamblers compared to 0.9% of all gamblers.
 We expect online wagering providers to meet community expectations. The tougher laws will seriously disrupt illegal offshore providers from acting unscrupulously or targeting vulnerable Australians. The government is committed to taking tougher action against illegal offshore wagering providers and this bill does exactly that.

Whether the UK inquiry takes as robust a stance remains to be seen. For now, Bowcock says it’s too early to come to any conclusions:


I think the regulatory review is due to report back sometime in the end of the first quarter. Thereafter, I imagine, there will be another period of consultation, and then after that, there will be a period of implementation. So we can all speculate as to when it is, but I think it’s certainly going to be, depending on how significant that implementation needs to be, towards the backend of next year.

My take
Signs of life in online have helped, but there’s a long way to go yet for William Hill. Who’d bet on what happens next? Well, the next CEO, presumably. The triumverate appointed with online clout this week could all make it into the hot seat next year. The choice of Bowcock’s full-time successor will be a significant choice. Place your bets.
Image credit - William Hill Read more on: Retail e-commerce and the omni-channelUX and application design 