
Last year, bookmakers William Hill launched a proprietary mobile and website platform under the banner of ‘Project Trafalgar’. That is pitched by the firm as: 

a comprehensive overhaul of our entire web architecture; with a new front-end experience (desktop, mobile web and native apps) it gives William Hill complete control over the interfaces our customers’ experience.

After some initial teething troubles late last year, the firm is now in a position to use that platform as the basis for introducing Self Service Betting Terminals (SSBT) across its network of retail shops. 
CEO James Henderson sees this as a major step, arguing that: 

The cornerstone of the omni-channel strategy is the SSBT.

While the online gambling industry has become big business around the world, Henderson regards the current status quo as early days, with lots of opportunities still untapped:

Today, of retail’s regular customers, around 28% have an online account. 13% have a William Hill account, so we are only capturing 45% of those customers who bet online. A massive opportunity and the appetite for multi-channel usage is increasing, with the number of multi-channel customers up 24% over 12 months.

With that in mind, Henderson identifies William Hill’s focus as being retail omni-channel customers and their needs: 

We’ve extensively researched what our customers want from an omni-channel experience, and they have told us they would like more ways to bet and easy ways to transfer cash or funds between channels. So that’s why we are focusing on two big priorities – an SSBT and a single wallet. We will, of course, still look at other areas such as customer service and a consistent look and feel, but in the main we’re focusing on these two big priorities.

Henderson explains the appeal of the SSBT: 

Essentially, what the SSBT will allow is the breadth and depth of product that is online. It’s very difficult to display or make known what kind of depth of products you’ve got. The SSBT allows all that. So, you can use it much like a price finder or looking to see what’s available, being able to access that as well.

He adds that customer particularly like features, such as access to statistics, in-play and cash in functionality: 

By using our Trafalgar platform for our SSBT, we can not only provide this functionality, but also make the football range much broader, the UX easier and provide access to popular functionality like Top Bets. I really believe that we have done all the heavy lifting and therefore have put ourselves in a perfect position to be able to accelerate our rollout schedule prior to the commencement of the Euros [soccer championship] in June.

The hope is to have 500 SSBTs in circulation by the time that football tournament gets underway, with a rapid roll out after that: 

My plan, by the end of the year, is to have one in every shop. Clearly business will dictate as to the actual density, but we have the ability through our hardware supplier to be able to create 150 on an every week basis. So, I’m very confident that we have the right platform to deliver a competition leading SSBT. So, yes, we’re in a position to accelerate that rollout, 500 and probably one in every shop by the end of the year.

Wallets
As for single wallet ambition, that’s somewhat less advanced in terms of concrete detail. Henderson says: 

We already know there’s a big demand for this type of facility, as last year we processed £40 million worth of transactions through Cash Direct, our vehicle for allowing customers to deposit and withdraw online funds in-shop. We also have our Priority Access card, which can be used like a debit card linked to your online account and which currently has around 7,000 users.
If we’re going to do this, it needs to be industry-leading and be joined up across as many different technologies as possible: online, OTC, SSBT, and gaming. Both Cash Direct and priority access gives us the opportunity to assess what appeals to our customers and therefore help shape this complex project, which I believe will be well advanced by the start of the Euros.

There’s considerably more meat on the bones of mobile thinking where Henderson claims a leadership position for William Hill. He points to load times coming down from 3 seconds to 1.5 seconds as a proof point here, as well as: 

the bet acceptance delay being reduced to one second for top European leagues versus three seconds for key competitors; an improved mobile registration process, resulting in a 10% better conversion rate; and cross-sell from the Trafalgar sportsbook into gaming now 7% higher.
We’ve also been able to launch Virtual on Android for the very first time and we’ll increase the number of languages available, which will make our mobile sportsbook much more viable in other markets going forward.

 These improvements have resulted in improved customer experience satisfaction ratings, he adds: 

It’s good to see the app rating has consistently been around 4.5 stars since our second release. Just as important, we’ve been able to massively accelerate our release schedules. We’ve done five iOS app releases since October and we’re averaging 20 web releases a week.

But for all that, there’s still work to be done on the mobile offering, he adds, complaining: 

The user journey is still far too slow. 
Although improved, high-traffic areas like registration and the bet receipt can be optimized further. And the journey for low staking customers to build their accas [accumulators] needs to be easier.
There’s a lot to do. In essence, it’s back to basics for the team to make sure that we have the fastest and easiest to use mobile experience by the Euros. 

Henderson is working to the principle that growth the UK market rate isn’t good enough for the online business. He wants to see the firm ahead of the market and to that end he’s committed to adding 10 to 15 heads in UX to speed up delivery.
My take
The odds are that William Hill’s digital investment is paying off. Henderson is clearly committed to wholesale transformation of the business model. 
The firm has also freshened up its online management team. Crispin Nieboer, who previously led the company’s Shoreditch-based innovation team, was last month named as a replacement for Andrew Lee, head of its online operations. 
The bookmaker also appointed Kevin O’Connor, a former chief information officer at rival Paddy Power, as its new chief information officer.
Don’t bet against this working out well for William Hill.
Read more on: Digital transformation - frictionless enterpriseMobileRetail e-commerce and the omni-channelUX and application design 