
Local government often gets a bad reputation for failing to adopt digital technologies to transform citizen services. Headlines in the technology press – including on diginomica – are often taken up with the lack of collaboration across the sector and the tendency to outsource, rather than adapt.
However, there are pockets of interesting work going on. One example being the Royal Borough of Windsor and Maidenhead, which is slowly but surely transforming commonly used citizen services in the cloud using Jadu CRM systems, which have been procured via G-Cloud.
The aim is to create a ‘touchless digital council’ for the 140,000 residents living in the area, which should both improve the experience of using local government services, but also introduce 40% in savings across all services over the next five years (which will help contribute to the strict funding cuts being enforced by Whitehall).
I got the chance to speak to Jacqui Hurd, head of library and resident services at the Council, who explained that historically 82% of resident contact came via telephone to the customer contact centre (which was created over 10 years ago) and only 10% of contact was made online. Hurd said:
We’ve got good performance, we’re answering 80 percent of our calls within a minute and we still receive around a thousand phone calls a day. But we have a manifesto commitment to move to a 24/7 council, primarily through digital. The big thing was around implementing a CRM system, so chasing progress was a thing of the past – being very specific around customers being able to track what interactions they have got with the council, and knowing where it is in the middle of process.
Ease of use
Hurd explained that the Council wanted to allow residents to choose the interaction that was most convenient for them, whether that be on the phone, or online – but the ageing systems were not geared up for this approach. For example, Hurd said, customers had the option to fill in forms online, but this often meant they were sent across as PDFs or in an email, which then required keying in data, so often the steps were slow and very manual.
Hurd said:
Our customer is referred to as Mrs. Niggins. So, what does Mrs. Niggins actually want to be able to do? Well, she wants to be able to choose how she interacts with the council. She wants to be able to have a secure account, so that she can track progress. And if she chooses that method she might also want to know what other services that she might be interested – you know like Amazon with the “Recommended” or “Also bought” solution. But more importantly, in delivering that we didn’t want to have to rely upon developers, and when I say developers I mean IT/Techie developers.
As a result, Hurd and her team conducted a market test and selected Jadu Customer Experience Management and Jadu XForms Professional from the G-Cloud – where it was established early on that the Council would be sticking to as standardised a deployment as possible. The Council didn’t want to end up with lots of customisations, causing problems down the line.
The selection of Jadu was made in January 2016, with implementation beginning by March 2016 for one of the most complicated workflows offered by the Council – Green Waste – which required that renewals, collections and cancellations be automated.
The Green Waste service had been carried out entirely via Excel spreadsheets, but is now 50% automated. The Council now has over 9,000 accounts online for the service. According to Hurd, simplicity is key. She said:
We’ve decided not to tinker and customize a standard product, because we’re very good at making a good simple product complicated, which makes it very difficult years down the line. So we’re taking it, more or less the out-of-box functionality.
Some of the other services that will be incorporated into the Jadu CRM include school admissions, planning, school transport, housing and social care.
It is expected that the savings will be created by creating a leaner workforce within the Council. Hurd said:
If you set up that channel shift, and if you reduce your calls by X amount, you need X members of staff. We are in the middle of a restructure, a merging of two services. We have to deliver in a system that allows changes in progress to be in the path.
Challenges
However, although it is early days, and although progress is being made, challenges do remain for Windsor and Maidenhead. Primarily relating to user behaviour – both internally and externally. Staff are having to adapt to a new way of working, whilst understanding the citizen user journey sometimes requires more work, in order to enable the channel shift. Hurd said:
[One of the biggest challenges] is the cultural behavior of staff. I don’t mean that in a negative way. For example … staff did not like the green waste solution, because it meant that they previously knew which spreadsheet to go to and how to get it. The data quality of 10 years worth of data on spreadsheets is questionable, but you still have to start somewhere. There were a lot of issues around the data that we imported, so staff dealt with difficult inquiries where the online often hadn’t worked.
And on the citizen side, Hurd said:
We picked the most complicated service to start with, deliberately, because we needed that support to reach out. This is so that our customers automatically use it online. However with bins, staff loved that, it was a choice of one form as opposed to 5, 6, or 7 forms about the size and color of the bin and the date of collection.
But only 10% of customers reporting missed bins online were using it. We have made some tweaks to the form – so that we better understand the journey. Why do customers prefer to ring up rather than proceed with a great online solution? Is it because, when someone misses a bin, do they want to ring up and have an “event”? Or is it that they think it happens more quickly when they speak to a person rather than use an online process. The hard part is, just because you’ve got an online offering, doesn’t mean that it’s going to be used.
My take
Great to see a local council using the G-Cloud to get the systems they need to improve the online experience. Small changes can go a long way, which often helps to get the business buy-in to drive bigger change. Driving channel shift – both internally and externally – is never easy, but there is no point in delaying the inevitable. Good progress being made.
Image credit - Arm holding screwdriver to digital schematic © Sergey Nivens – Fotolia.comRead more on: Digital government and public servicesLocal

