
Content marketing has become a classic case of “out of the frying pan, into the fire.” Just when companies overcome their skepticism and produce content at scale, they find themselves in a noisy media environment where earning attention is a beast. The question of linking content to business outcomes remains, for the most part, unanswered. But: quantifiable answers are starting to emerge.
Aberdeen’s most recent content marketing research, The Future of Content Marketing: the Age of Content Science, advances these questions (the PDF is free with a free sign-up to Aberdeen). During a recent chat with Aberdeen’s Chief Content Officer Maribeth Ross, we debated the report findings and pulled out some high points.
Aberdeen interviewed 277 companies for this survey – a mix of B2B, B2C, and mixed model organizations. That’s not a huge sample size, but what’s of interest here is that Aberdeen applied their own maturity model to identify what the top 20 percent “best-in-class” companies are doing to maximize content versus the laggards. Why should we care? Start with this: the best-in-class companies are getting “five times higher revenue contribution from content efforts than their peers.”
Most companies squander their content marketing resources
When 95 percent of companies are now investing in content marketing, differentiating is a LOT tougher. The report found that:
Most companies squander resources by creating content at volume with little to no visibility into the results.
Ouch! I was skeptical about Aberdeen’s best-in-class designation, thinking it would be based soft metrics, like newsletter sign-up increases or higher traffic volume. But Aberdeen’s top performers were flagged based on incisive metrics:

Percentage of marketing-qualified leads attributed to content marketin
Percentage of revenue generated by content marketing efforts
Year-over-year percentage change in marketing’s contribution to revenue

“There’s a bunch of marketers out there who never close the loop”
The survey’s top performers were also more sophisticated in their content visibility: they were three times more likely to be able to track a piece of content directly to revenue. As Ross puts it:
When you look at the best-in-class marketers in this survey, 52 percent of them are aligning their content to the buyer’s journey, 67% of them are thinking personas, and they’re writing for a target persona. They’re outpacing the all other groups in those categories. There’s still a bunch of marketers out there who never close the loop and look at the performance metrics, like “We intended this piece of content to be for Sally the purchasing agent, but did Sally the purchasing agent really like it and consume it and did it work?” That’s a gap that needs to close.
Aberdeen provided this graphic on the content maturity continuum:
From The Future of Content Marketing: the Age of Content Science
Surveyed companies were classified into three maturity groups:

Best-in-Class: top 20%
Industry Average: middle 50%
Laggard: bottom 30%

Bulky registration forms are out – communities are in
Some companies are still stuck in the outdated volume-for-search-engines approach (stage two). Then it’s a matter of how to distribute the material. Given that best-in-class companies are still only in stage four, I asked Ross what issues must be overcome to move to stage five:
When we looked at the folks that were stuck in the stage four area, we asked them, “What are you doing to get from stage four to stage five?” The things that they pointed out were: “We want to be more like a publisher, so we need to get our audience to be more involved and advocate for our brand.”
So how do you pull that off? Well, you start by reducing sign-up friction:
They’re doing things like setting up communities, enabling readers to share content. They’ve eliminated using the old 17 field registration form of days of old, and they’re getting a lot smarter about using any registration forms to build profiling in a progressive manner. They’re leveraging the progressive profiling technology of the systems that they have in place.
“Progressing profiling,” sometimes considered “progressive sign up,” is the art of getting users to sign up with a simple form, and getting more data from them as their engagement deepens. Pulling that off requires a different marketing sensibility plus an investment in more sophisticated marketing/personalization tools.
Best-in-class performers realize that great content is now just table stakes:
To rise above the fray, it’s got to be special. There’s got to be something else that differentiates it. That means getting better at getting your content in the right places at the right time, and as we’ve heard a million times, delivering personalized experiences. Those are the things that will differentiate in the future.
Debate – are companies really producing great content?
I differ with Aberdeen’s assertion that companies have figured out how to produce great content. I still see very few examples of what I consider to be “great” enterprise content.
Ross pushed back on that point, noting that the best-in-class have figured out how to produce the right content. It’s about understanding the so-called “customer journey” and writing for specific personas. Ross says the best-in-class companies are doing just that:
When we looked at best-in-class, they were not telling us their biggest point was about content volume. They were already producing content and putting it out to market across channels. They were very, very focused on the buyers themselves and making sure that the content was relevant, that they had the personalization in place.
So where are best-in-class companies headed next? What gets them into stage six? Ross:
On their radar for the future was leveraging data to move from just a content machine to much more of a publishing property, where they’re building community and advocacy for their brand.
The problem of community – readers “aren’t randomly showing up at vendor sites”
When audiences spend so much time on social networks, how do you build a branded community?. Ross sees an issue with a chaotic “customer journey” that is anything but linear. But she still believes you can plan your content around it:
In my opinion, there are some thing that are very very consistent. The places people go for stuff at a real high level that’s the communities that they normally go to. It’s their well-traveled palace that they trust for information; it may even be people within their network. Then there’s third-party research content, trusted content that isn’t biased because of a vendor. Then there’s vendor-created content.
If you engage the customer on their terms and impress them with “thought leader” type content, eventually they may take a “trust journey” into more branded content. Then there is search, evaluation and shortlisting, and a need for content that speaks to those phases. But you also need content that isn’t tied to brand. Otherwise, community-building is stymied:
At the beginning of the buyer’s journey, these people may not even be aware that they need to be in the market for something. They’re going to the places they normally go in their community, and maybe reading thought leadership by third party companies. They aren’t randomly showing up at vendor sites.
So where does the “content science” come in? Ross:
This is a term we’ve been using a lot lately. We are firm believers that content marketing has evolved from art to being more of science. You still need great content, which you and I already covered, but to get ahead, it’s going to be about the science of putting the right stuff in front of the right people, and that is going to require marketers to become more scientific. It means consuming more data, understanding patterns, getting predictive about what people want and need and when they want it… That’s something that we’ve dubbed content science.
My (quick) take

I agree with Aberdeen’s assertion about content science, especially the need to harness predictive to deliver the right content to the right readers at the right time. However, without opt-in communities, personalization tech can’t deliver.
I still believe great content is elusive for most companies, but from this data, I’m willing to narrow that to the difficulty of creating “thought leader” content that engages prospects who are brand-indifferent.
Ross’s views on a chaotic customer journey ring true. It still makes sense to map content to the sales cycle, with the caveat that prospects may jump from reading case studies back out to third party material and back in again, etc.

It will be even harder to build a brand community across web sites than it will be to conquer the predictive content challenge (If we define community as driven by passionate, user-generated content. rather than an accumulation of “likes”.). Mobile UX is now directly tied to an online community’s success or failure. This report did not address mobile content implications – that will need attention in future installments. For now, there is plenty here for companies to ponder and benchmark against.
Image credit: girl pointing the microphone © carballo – Fotolia.com
Disclosure: Diginomica has no financial ties to Aberdeen. I was approached by their PR firm and pursued the story because I found the data interesting.
Read more on: Analytics planning and data analysisContent marketingCRM and customer experienceDigital and content marketingSocial 