
I used to define the digital divide as the social inequality created/exacerbated by disproportionate access to broadband and tech resources. But the debate over advanced metrics in women’s sports shows that the data divide is now a big part of the problem. The implications go beyond the obsessions of gamblers and stat geeks.
“Rich data, poor data” – why sports leads the analytically progressive industries
Nate Silver’s piece on fivethirtyeight.com, Rich Data, Poor Data. argues that sports is ahead when it comes to advanced metrics, for three reasons:

Sports has awesome data. Sites like baseballreference.com have compiled ridiculous amounts of stat minutia that can be fed into predictive algorithms.
Sports has a fixed set of rules. Predicting trends is a lot easier when rules are in place. Silver contrasts the struggle to predict earthquakes: “There has been little progress in predicting earthquakes. We know a few basic things — you’re more likely to experience an earthquake in California than in New Jersey — but not a lot more… False positives are less of an issue in sports, where rules are explicit and where we know a lot about causality.”
Sports offers fast feedback and clear marks of success. Silver cites weather forecasting as another case where predictive capabilities are improving: “One hallmark of analytically progressive fields is the daily collection of new data that allows researchers to rapidly test ideas and chuck the silly ones. One example: dramatically improved weather forecasts. The accuracy of hurricane landfall predictions, for instance, has almost tripled over the past 30 years. Sports, especially baseball, fits in this category too.”

“Hey Nate: There is no rich data in women’s sports”
Allison McCann responded on fivethirtyeight.com with Hey, Nate: There Is No ‘Rich Data’ In Women’s Sports. McCann gives Silver a reality check on his own web site: sports isn’t so “analytically progressive” if you follow the money trail.
Underfunded women’s sports (with less lucrative fantasy leagues, lower TV contracts, etc) lead to underfunded stats. To back her point, McCann describes a futile search to find the distribution of WNBA player salaries – readily available info for the NBA (The WNBA is the women’s professional basketball league in the U.S.; NBA is the men’s). And women’s college basketball is so dependent on one site for advanced stats, that when that site went down recently, it took the only source of that info with it.
McCann points out two issues: lack of comparable historical data, and advanced stat disparities. It’s a breeze to look up all 14,260,129 at-bats in the history of Major League Baseball (kind of amazing when you think about it), but you can’t do the same for the five years of the Women’s Professional Softball League. Other women’s softball leagues also have sparse info. McCann: “With such incomplete data, it’s hard to draw as rich of conclusions about how women play professional softball (better, worse, faster or slower than before?).”
As for advanced stats, McCann points out that the men’s PGA Tour site has hundreds of performance stats for each player. But on the LPGA site, there are only eight.
WNBA player Sue Bird speaks out
Then, on March 8, immediately prior to the annual MIT Sloan Sports Analytics conference, WNBA player Sue Bird published a landmark article, Analyze This. Bird has similar issues with the rich data gap between the NBA and WNBA.
But Bird takes the argument further: without rich data, decision-making is flawed. And your ability to create a potent narrative is diminished:
Data helps drive conversations, strategy, decision making. But data on its own isn’t terribly interesting. It needs context. It needs a storyteller. Data helps tell the story of a player, a team, an entire career.
There’s a need to value data in the WNBA because there’s a need to value the stories of our league. Think about baseball, for example, or men’s basketball. Fans, players, executives and media value stats and information because it helps to tell a story that many are already invested in. And if they’re not already invested, then it gives them a reason to be. It helps GMs make decisions. It informs contract negotiations. It enables player development.
When it comes to advanced stats, Bird makes two key assertions:

Advanced stats are resource-intensive to compile, which widens the inequality gap between men’s and women’s sports. Example: the NBA uses the NBA utilizes SportVU, a technology that tracks player movements. It can be used to compile “super” data and advanced scouting reports. Bird says most WNBA arenas aren’t equipped with the camera technology needed.
Advanced stats are changing how we view sports, and how we analze what leads to winning versus losing. She uses the example of the Golden State Warrior’s Draymond Green (Golden State has been the subject of a guest diginomica piece on fan loyalty). There is considerable attention on Golden State as it pursues the NBA single-season wins record. Green is one of those players heightened by modern stats, which show impact beyond points and assists: “It’s the advanced stats that really tell you the story of the impact he’s having this year. You can actually see the quantitative impact he has on the court. Those stats have driven wins, which have driven a story, which has driven fans.“

Bird wraps by arguing that lost data is lost history:
The WNBA is still a relatively young league, embarking on its 20th season. We’re just now entering a generation of women who’ve played for 13, 14, 15 years — long enough to accumulate some data and context. What is data if there’s nothing to compare it to? Which means that now may be the perfect time to embrace more advanced analytics and accessibility. And that’s because now is when the stories and numbers get more interesting, and more compelling. There are stories to tell with some historical context.
My take – and enterprisey lessons
Sports has long been a terrific place for advanced stats freaks to get their fix. The MIT Sloan Sports Analytics conference is now a launching point for analytics that extend beyond sports.
Consider advanced basketball stats such as true shooting percentage (which adjusts for the impact of three point shots and free throws), plus/minus, passing ratings, and per-minute efficiency. These deeper stats don’t just surface new stories – they change the narrative of which players are impactful, and why. And for a coach – just like a CEO – that changes the decision-making process.
The data divide is yet another example of structural bias that leads to flawed decisions. In the public sector, flawed policies based on insufficient data can skew funding decisions. Sometimes the lack of data has life-or-death consequences. Susan Scrupski, a fellow Enterprise Irregular, is the CEO of Big Mountain Data, whose goal is to “apply data science and insights from big data to put an end to family violence and domestic abuse.”
In a December blog post, Who is Keeping Track of the Dead? This woman, Scrupski shares the story of Christine Armstrong, who has spent the last fifteen years – four hours or more a day – scanning news reports to document instances of deaths related to domestic violence. Scrupski writes:
Today in 2015, Armstrong has honed a sophisticated practice of conducting news searches that scour the web using over 27 different keyword combinations that turn up homicide stories every day that the media doesn’t always correctly identify as domestic violence related. This unfortunate practice of “missing” the domestic violence connection to homicides is one that has been well-documented in academic and journalism circles.
Armstrong shows that dedication can help close a data gap where lack of attention/funding is the real culprit. The lessons for enterprise data practitioners are pretty clear. Data has a financial agenda. We risk making bad decisions if we assume all relevant data has been surfaced. If the data is out there, but funding or institutional bias prevented it from being compiled, the consequences are on us. With the sophistication of the analytical tools at our disposal, we must now face the ethical ramifications of data we neglect or fail to collect.
The data gap is a bummer for sports fantasy geeks, but it’s also a bummer for those of us who would like better earthquake predictions than “move to New Jersey.” Perhaps the meteorologists have all the funding they need, and the problem is the elusiveness of weather patterns. But in the other cases I’ve cited, we know that resources could alter circumstance. That should win our attention – and, with any luck, spark the imagination of more enterprising startups.
End note: FiveThirtyEight also published a podcast with more links and info into women’s sports and data science, including an interview with Sue Bird.
Image credit - basketball © meikesen - Fotolia.com Read more on: Analytics planning and data analysisDiversity 