
Aneel Bhusri
Salesforce proved a hard act to follow for Workday yesterday. The firm turned in a third quarter net loss of $77.8 million on revenue up 42% year-on-year to $305.3 million. But Wall Street was downbeat on fourth quarter revenue predictions of $317 million to $320 million.
CEO Aneel Bhusri chose to focus on the firm’s financial management push in the post-results conference call with analysts:
Q3 was our best quarter in company history for Financial Management from an ACV perspective. As compared to the prior quarter, Q2 ACV growth for Financial Management applications was up well over 100%.
As our customer community for Workday Financial Management grows, so does our suite of applications. Our budgeting planning and forecasting application, Workday Planning, remains on track for general availability in calendar year 2016.
Bhusri said that there are now 90 customers live on financials, including Netflix and Unum. The latest to be added to the roster is Aon, the largest customer for financials to date and an existing HCM user:
More than half of the financial customers are live on the system and we’ve got companies like Netflix that have been live for several years now.
The implementations don’t look that different from the HR implementations. They are beginning to ramp-up with our partners and so that’s a great sign as partners begin to do more of the financial implementations that allows us to scale faster.
He added:
The pipeline in Q4 looks very strong and there are several more Fortune 500 companies in that pipeline.
To encourage take-up of financials among large enterprises, Workday is being more flexible in billing terms:
Some of these very, very large customers that we’re signing, the projects are unique and in any new push with a product line and the way we’re pushing financials we are going to be more flexible there than where we have been with HR, which is much more mainstream at this point.
On the HCM front, Bhusri named Fedex as the largest user to date and cited Denny’s and General Mills as new customers.
Customer traction
For both HCM and Financial Management. Bhusri said that Workday is picking up business from end-of-life PeopleSoft and SAP implementations:
It continues to be the largest driver of our opportunity set. I’d say the exciting piece is that that same driver we saw in HR is now beginning to manifest itself in finance and since these finance systems have not moved to the cloud over the last five years they are just five years older than when the HR systems began to move.
What we are finding is finance systems that are outdated on really old versions of the legacy platforms and really looking for a different way to run their business. The idea of a financial system with built-in analytics, with much better user experience and now being able to cover the legacy footprint in terms of functionality, has really lead to the pipeline continuing to grow in a very positive way.
Bhusri argued that Workday has been focusing on technology differentiation against the competition to drive customer adoption:
We’ve really pushed customers to do their homework and prospects to do their homework on reference ability. Neither of our main legacy competitors really have much in the way of large referenceable customers and as the customers do their homework, we tend to win the deal.
The competition is running out of steam, he claimed:
There were no new moves. I think they are running out of new ideas. I didn’t see any moves. I think it’s really important to recognize that when we win a company like FedEx, it’s a phenomenal company and a phenomenal brand that’s the equivalent of 20 or 30 other size companies.
We just continue to win both in the mid-market with our mid-market strategy, but the large accounts we just dominate and the reason is because we have proof points of getting these large companies into production, one after another. We have another big Fortune 100 company that just went live which we’ll announce in a couple weeks.
It’s not just about selling these new accounts. It’s about getting value and getting into production and we have that down and our competitors just don’t.
My take
A solid enough quarter, but one which suffered in comparison to Salesforce’s flashier numbers the day before and which were still fresh in Wall Street’s collective memory.
But there’s a lot to be pleased with for Workday. The Financial Management traction looks healthy and will clearly be the major focus for 2016. The importance placed on customer referenceabilty – and big name customer referenceabilty at that – is also very encouraging.
Disclosure – at time of writing, Salesforce, SAP and Workday are premier partners of diginomica. 
Read more on: Cloud ERP financials and supply chainCloud platforms - infrastructure and architectureDigital and content marketingHCM and the digital future of work 