
Alex Tullett
Organizational values – such has having a ‘can-do’ mentality – tend to be stuck on a chart somewhere and quickly forgotten. Even if they are read, they have little relevance to employees’ day-to-day activities, as Alex Tullett, head of benefits strategy at consultancy Capita Employee Benefits, points out:
People may read them, but don’t understand what that means for the business.
Capita is tackling this head on with the WorkAngel employee recognition and reward mobile app which helps staff to live the values, and rewards that behavior through discounts and cashbacks at retailers. It also acts as a communications tool.
UK start-up WorkAngel is the brainchild of serial entrepreneur Jamie True, whose last start-up, Grapple, was snapped up by Monetise for £33m ($50m). WorkAngel also has some illustrious backers in the shape of ex-Tesco chief executive Sir Terry Leahy and BBC Worldwide chief executive Tim Davie. It was launched in the UK in February and a US launch will follow later this year.
Tullet maintains that there’s “nothing like it out there”. While there may be other products that collectively can provide the same functions, there’s nothing that does it all together and has been constructed to be “mobile first” – a major draw for Tullett.
Currently, WorkAngel is being used by the 2,400 staff in Capita’s Employee Benefits group, . These employees can use their work or personal mobile devices, while the less mobile savvy can also access the system from their desktop. But this is a totally digital initiative – nothing is on paper, as this adds to the cost.
When an employee is impressed by the actions of one of their co-workers they go into WorkAngel, select the person’s name, the value that individual has demonstrated and then write a short piece of text about what they have done. Employees are given examples of how these values work within a work context, otherwise there’s a danger that a ‘can-do’ attitude could be used in a negative way.
Clients can’t as yet directly enter their comments or feedback into WorkAngel, but Tullet believes:
I think that would be a fantastic next step.
Leadership boards highlight the top three performers, adding an element of competition to the proceedings. Tullett adds:
We can see obviously the full list and understand where someone is and that’s important to see where we can put in more effort at communication.
This peer-to-peer recognition has two major benefits, believes Tullett. First, it removes any manager bias. Research shows that the rating given to employees is far more a reflection of the attitudes of the rater than the performance of the employee. Even in an engagement survey it’s difficult to remove bias from the questions, suggests Tullett. But with peer reviews, this bias is reduced substantially.
The aim is that employees’ engagement will rise once employees become more focused on the values and doing a good job and are given a “visible recognition” of their achievements. And greater engagement leads to greater retention. Part of that is making sure that individuals understand their worth, says Tullett:
Peer pressure is a rather greater retention tool than other hard financial incentives like cash.
But there is also a financial incentive. Employees are awarded badges when they demonstrate particular values. Tullett notes that it’s weighted so that it is more valuable for employees to be recognized for 10 different values rather than 10 instances of the same value. A single recognition is not enough to win a reward, but the more badges someone wins, the greater the rewards.
By aggregating deals across the market, staff can earn coupons, discounts or cashback on restaurant bookings.
Of course, there are always people who will try and play the system. But, Tullett asserts, the company is prepared:
There is potential for gaming it, but we have algorithms in place to notice that. Whatever system or approach you put in place, you always have people who try and do that.
Improving communication
The second great advantage of WorkAngel is as away of improving internal communications. It also becomes easy for management to see which groups of people are engaged and committed to the values.
Workangel was only introduced about a month ago. It was publicised using a teaser campaign of emails, a cartoon and using a viral methodology – getting champions to tell their friends about it. Tullett says:
We’re going to see whether this creates its own momentum, but we have ideas on how to incentivize if needed.
It’s still a novelty for employees, but Tullett is watching closely to see how it grows and accepts that for this to work long term, it must keep changing:
It will be interesting to see how things change over time and the proof of that is understanding how those values might change.
Peer recognition is not officially part of the performance review, but Tullett expects that employees will use it as evidence of their performance and engagement at their performance reviews.
Angelic
Tullett believes that this is an invaluable way of opening the lid on what someone is like to work with and the attitudes of their co-workers – not something that is measured in any other way:
We have measures of financial performance, SLA performance but here you have feedback about how people feel about you is a lot harder and if you are being noticed by your peers and are someone they look to.
In the future, Tullett hopes that reward and recognition will be fully integrated and live updates available.
It’s early days, but Tullett is clear that WorkAngel will help increase retention and productivity among staff.
The idea is to use WorkAngel internally, with an eye to offering it as part of their employee benefits service to clients. As Tullett says:
Always a good idea to take your own medicine.
My take
Jamie True has an impressive track record of spotting and filling gaps in the market. This product has the advantage of being mobile native, easy to use and a big advance (according to Tullett) on other kinds of benefits packages out there.

Read more on: Cloud ERP financials and supply chainCloud platforms - infrastructure and architectureFuture of workHCM and the digital future of workMobileSocialTalent management 