
As we have come to expect, Workday Q2 FY2016 beat out analyst expectations for growth, posting revenue up 51% to $282.7 million for the quarter. It also announced having hit the important 1,000 customer milestone. The billings outlook was relatively weak however with the company sticking with past assumptions.
My guess is that the company is taking an ultraconservative view of its forward position as a way to ensure that stock pickers don’t become over exuberant. The share price has been pegged back around 13% this year and given market volatility, I can see no logic in Workday management talking up the price.
By the numbers:

A few points spring to mind:

While Workday continues to invest heavily in R&D, including the odd acquisition, the proportion of R&D spend to revenue is slowly declining. R&D now stands at 51.5% of revenue.
Pretax losses have more or less stabilized, climbing four percent year over year.
Current deferred revenue stands at $601 million which puts Workday well on course to surpass the $1bn revenue mark for FY 2016.
Operating cash flow was $16 million, better than expected due to improved cash collections.
Workday now counts more than 1,000 customers of which ‘more than 70%’ are live.
Recruiting now has 300 customers, 95 live after a year in market.

On the analyst call, Aneel Bhusri, CEO Workday was his usual understated self, choosing to telegraph his points rather than engage in competition bashing. I’ve always liked that about this company but it must be hard to hold back your pride at beating SAP in its own back yard:
New customers in the second-quarter include Pfizer, Cleveland Clinic, and Texas A&M. And as mentioned earlier, our EMEA team had another strong quarter and added Centrica and DS Smith as new customers. We now have more than 100 large enterprise customers headquartered in the European region and are seeing good traction in our newer European markets, such as Germany, Austria, and Switzerland.
Financials is a segment upon which Bhusri places great store. Why? Winning in financials alongside HR puts Workday in a very strong position to repel competitive threats in the service based businesses it chooses to serve. Since people and money are so inextricably linked, implementing both is a logical step towards creating a seamless back office. However, as Workday has discovered, making the mental connection is one thing, getting the customer over the line is another matter altogether. Even so he was able to call out some important numbers:
During the quarter we also surpassed 150 customers who are using our Workday Financial Management suite with more than 80 of them now live with these applications.
These are chicken feed in the context of the large enterprises that Worday targets but once again, the numbers serve as a warning sign to both Oracle and SAP.
As if to emphasize the importance of the financials product line, Bhusri reported that the financials pipeline is growing much faster than anticipated and that he is personally involved with many of those sales calls. Referencing the copmetitife environment, Bhusri made a confident point:
I would say the good piece of all of it; we are all talking about moving into the cloud. There is no discussion any more of on-premise in HR. I would say that the one of the fascinating pieces though on the financials opportunities is we are largely competing against legacy products again, so it is a little bit of a time warp since neither of the legacy vendors really have strong offerings in financials in the cloud. We are up against the on-premise solutions and those are odds I like for our favor.
Where I have greater concern is in Workday’s approach to financial analytics. This has always been a weak spot for Workday. The company discovered early on that its technical architecture doesn’t work for row and column reporting. The company made big changes, flirted with Anaplan, has been in and out of Tidemark and most recently announced its own build. Long story short, Workday has yet to settle on an enterprise performance management solution approach that works well enough for its customers’ needs. Bhusri however remains bullish arguing that:
…the way that we’re designing it and defining it, it’ll be the truly first system where you can operate, you can run your budgeting and planning process and transactional system, same user interface, same data. We already have all the data effectively at a level that would be, I wouldn’t call it quite a star schema, but set up in a way that makes it easy for us to run those analytics against it. And when you want to take action on that budget or on a change on the budget, it’s the same system. So, it’s that unification that customers are really looking for. They’re tired of shipping data across and different user interfaces and different security models, and we can really address that head-on.
I have my own theory about this but my advice has always been the same. Don’t try build this when you could partner or acquire. It is very different to building a transaction processing engine and I have yet to meet the enterprise software company that has successfully achieved that objective. This is one to wait and watch – and to be 100% fair, Workday has surprised me in the past so I won’t say ‘never.’
There was an interesting operational note towards the end of the call that may sound innocuous but is in fact a massive competitive statement. Talking about the way contracts are organized for cash flow purposes, Mark Peek CFO said:
…we originally pushed for multi-year upfront and that helped us finance the business. We are generating operating and free cash flow now and so that’s not a consideration, particularly in this interest rate environment and at our cost of capital. And so, for the long term health of the business, we’re willing to trade cash terms for discount. And sometimes that really helps our customers in what they’re trying to achieve over the short term as they go through the deployments, and to help accommodate them.
Trading cash for discounts puts Workday in a very strong position compared to competitors that are transitioning their business models. The contract deal terms are not changing but the all important cash position is being cleverly leveraged to help customers and win deals.
All in, Workday accomplished what it set out to do – offer a solid quarter and a ‘steady as she goes’ peek into the future. Job done.
Disclosure: Workday, SAP and Oracle are all premier partners at time of writing.
Read more on: Cloud ERP financials and supply chainHCM and the digital future of work 