
The media and analyst corps were only at Workday Rising for one full day but there was plenty to see, listen to and comment upon.
This year’s Rising was a much more laid back affair than has been the case in years past. Workday seems to have gotten past its self conscious adolescence to a point of maturity where it can afford to let its potential critics loose on the crowd. That’s a net good.
The company continues its tradition of not taking itself too seriously in the main keynote, while communicating a lot of information about the future of the product. That spells two things:

If you’re a customer, then we’re showing you why it’s worth sticking with us into the future and what you can plan for
If you’re a prospect, we’re demonstrating that we want you as a successful customer

During the keynote, CEO Aneel Bhusri showed a slide that talked to the many awards Workday has received for being a great place to work. Even though I know of Bhusri’s personal commitment to integrity, I kind of switch off to those things. I view them as a form of indulgence that doesn’t quite work for me. On reflection, that was too much of a knee jerk reaction. Why? Read this Q&A with CHRO Ashley Goldsmith. Other than a link back to a piece I wrote <ahem>, I was taken with this:
Workday didn’t set out to be a great place to work for women—we set out to build a great culture based on strong core values and devoted to customer service. Authentically living those values, putting them into action every day, has allowed us to attract fantastic people at all levels of our organization.
When core values are inclusive then diversity as a distraction is taken off the management issue agenda. That must surely be an example to others. It still leaves open the question of how Workday improves diversity at the highest levels. That’s the next challenge. In the meantime, Sheryl Sandberg, gender equality campaigner and COO of Facebook, who recently published research on workplace inequality, might want to pick up the phone to Goldsmith and Bhusri.
The customer stories I had time to catch were great. Workday adopted a customer presentation format that lends itself to authenticity. Customers presented on their own terms with no co-branding. There was plenty to choose from and not just the usual suspects of Peoplesoft refugees. My only regret is that I didn’t factor in enough time to hear from more customers. If I had stayed for one more day…maybe next year.
On product, Workday did a solid job of making sure that customers got the ‘Workday 25‘ message while also putting out just enough bait about Workday 26 and 27 to keep everyone interested. Having said that I have a few questions about product that could not be realistically answered in the time available:
Learning and Planning — coming next year but what do these really mean for key partnerships that Workday leverages today?
Verticals — how deep will Workday go? Can they get ‘there’ quickly enough to satisfy existing users and encourage prospects?
Billing — is Workday hoping to cover this off so that its reliance on third parties is extinguished? If so then what is the cutoff point for customers?
Procurement — it isn’t clear to me whether Workday is proposing the establishment of a marketplace or whether it is content to concentrate on processes at the point of purchase. The latter is easier to solve but may not be enough.
More generally, I am concerned that Workday is picking off some big areas of functionality such that it may end up stretched. CTO Stan Swete was his usual confident self and has surprised me in the past. He says that Workday’s infrastructure work is sufficiently advanced to support many new initiatives. Microservices figure large in this equation as do efforts to solve master data management issues in an easy manner. Workday also has the advantage of being considered sufficiently cool to attract great developer talent. I just don’t know if those factors are enough to get them from ‘here to there’ in the tight timeframes it has set for itself.
Regardless of my critique and despite the company is poised to cross a crucial revenue tipping point, I maintain a bullish position on Workday’s prospects. Missed by many perhaps, but Workday must be super confident that it could hold its user conference on one of the close of quarter days.
Bhusri’s matter of fact noting that legacy vendors have to start with a blank piece of paper rather than forklifting to the cloud has the ring of truth. It is the ‘one’ vision, strategy and codeline that remains the most compelling story.
Disclosure: Workday is a premier partner at time of writing and covered most of my T&E to attend Rising
Image: via @christinew
Read more on: Analytics planning and data analysisCloud ERP financials and supply chainDiversityHCM and the digital future of work 