
 
Most of the people I work with and around are, these days, self-employed knowledge workers of one sort of another, so most of them are driven by the notion of doing `the work’ anywhere and anytime the mood or muse comes upon them. They all work at home, at least some of the time, and using cloud delivered services with a variety of mobile client devices is second nature to them – and even me – though I do still own a couple of quill pens.
But despite that apparent universality of adoption, plus the ever-increasing capabilities of mobile devices to act as the primary – indeed only – business tool that business people need, evidence is emerging which raises doubts about the acceptance of working at home by working people.
A survey just recently published by UK-based IT managed services company, Phoenix, suggests that the rush to the office door by staff wanting to work at home simply hasn’t happened……yet, at least.
The company conducted a survey of workers, aged 18 and over, from across a wide range of industry sectors and jobs where the use of IT devices, applications and resources was an every-day part of the job. On the face of it, these seem like just the candidates to spend at least some of the time working from home and then, perhaps, hot-desking when at work, allowing their employers to cut some the otherwise inevitable overheads of employing full time staff.
But the survey findings suggest this is not happening to any large extent. Over a third of respondents – 36% – have never yet worked at home, while half of them only do it less than once a month. So only 14% of IT literate staff work from home in any meaningful way.
This is backed up by a second survey, this time of CIOs and IT decision makers, the company has undertaken. This shows that while 76% of companies now have a home working policy in place, only a minority of staff exploit it.
For example, 62% of those sampled said that less than 30% of their company’s employees worked remotely more than one day a week. Of this group of employees, less than 30% of them work full time from home.
This begs an interesting question, particularly for businesses trying to plan whether to invest in such a capability. Despite the technology now being more than adequate to provide whatever depth of resources a user might need without resorting to dedicated leased lines, and with over three quarters of businesses seemingly ready and happy to let workers pop off to their own spare bedrooms, why on earth are they not jumping at the chance?
Unfortunately, the Phoenix survey did not take on such supplementary questions, so that reasons can only guessed at. But the results of such a study could be vital for businesses pondering potential advantages of utilising home workers. After all, as Dame Stephanie (Steve) Shirley demonstrated with F International more than 40 years ago, there is money to be made from using the otherwise wasted skills of those with a need, or liking, to work from home.
Part of such a planning process will need to look at the infrastructure required to support it in action. This can raise several potential problem areas, such as IT departments being overly restrictive with the types of end user devices allowed for the purpose. But it must be assumed that many of the people suitable for home working will already be equipped with company-provided laptops and tablets that carry pre-configured software images – or are configured to work with server-based virtual desktop services.
Extra security may just seem irritating or punitive, but from the employers’ points of view are likely to be deemed necessary, if only to protect business data from the inevitable prying fingers and inquisitive natures of children living in the same home.
Most of these issues should, however, be relatively easy to overcome and constitute less of a problem as time goes on. The other area which could put staff off working from home, however, can be summed up as `human factors’. These can range from personal issues for individuals, such feeling outside the centre of activity – a peripheral component rather than part of the team.
The other side of that coin is the problem may lie with the business itself. It may have a policy to cover home working, but it may have problems in the way it is implemented. If staff are given the impression that working from home downgrades their position in the company or damages their chances of promotion then they are likely to duck the opportunity. If line managers are negative about members of `their team’ working at home, that can put severe pressure on them.
For businesses, the down side of this is that people who could well be far more productive working from home don’t get the opportunity – or don’t feel they can take it –to deliver that benefit to their employer.
My take
The survey certainly offers up a surprising result, and at a time when productivity generally is seen to be declining, it is in the interests of all businesses to think more about how they can make the best work environment for employees, in order to get the best out of them. This does look like an area worthy of some deeper, qualitative research.    

Read more on: Future of work 