
Rod Drury, CEO Xero
Yesterday Xero held their Annual General Meeting in Sydney where the company’s board and CEO Rod Drury laid out their vision of the company’s future to the company’s shareholders and answered some of the questions about their North American strategy.
During what was a very relaxed and laid back AGM, founder and CEO Rod Drury explained to shareholders how the company intends to grow globally on the back on reduced costs and increased flexibility. The company’s US expansion though remains difficult, as flagged by diginomica when the company’s annual results were released earlier this year.
One of the clear messages from both the CEO and Xero’s Chairman of the Board, Chris Liddell, was the company can reach profitability without having to raise more funds. A key part of doing that lies in reducing operating costs by shifting infrastructure over to Amazon Web Services, something Drury explained to Phil Waineright at the beginning of the year.
The shift to AWS is keeping margins high as well as increasing the speed of getting products to market. Drury said:
In a market like the US just having a better mousetrap won’t make the difference. We need to deliver new innovation that changes the game. As far as we can tell we are the only ones who have started that journey.
Drury is mildly irritated with talk about the North American market.
Everyone focuses on the US. The US is going to be great for us but it’s going to take time,
Drury said in answer to a shareholder question. The difference Drury cites is American small businesses don’t have strong relationships with their accountants and US accountants aren’t as cloud savvy as their British or Aussie counterparts. Another challenge lies in the geographic spread of the US economy:
We don’t have the geographic density that we had in NZ, Australia and the UK.
While the US remains the holy grail, Drury sees the opportunities laying in the rest of the English speaking world:
Outside of the US we’re two and half times larger than our closest competitor in the cloud. One of the luxuries we have is the low penetration of cloud accounting in the English speaking world.
In the US, the challenge remains in establishing relationships with banks as the CEO explained after the meeting.
We operate in 180 markets, we have customers all over and have staff in six or seven. What we’ve seen are these patterns so we don’t get a lot of surprises. The US market is very slow and we spend a lot of time with other CEOs so we get to see a lot of B2B software companies. We’re top of the class for a new entrant coming in and selling business software.
Ironically we do best when Intuit advertises, because when they advertise, people look to see what’s happening there. We see those nice little spikes coming through but because we’ve built this geographic diversity and really we’re the only ones who done that globally so that market will take off when the time comes but for the moment it will take a while.
We also truly believe that all of the successful cloud platforms are truly global – Uber, Netflix, Amazon for retail, WhatsApp. If you look at our performance we’ve added two times more customers than any of our international competitors. So we truly believe SaaS is global.
As Drury told diginomica, the next countries for Xero are Singapore, South Africa and Hong Kong:
These are markets where not just coming in and saying ‘let’s go meet the next customer,’ we have thousands of customers already. We already have gold partners with hundreds of customers, we have bank feeds and all of that other infrastructure.
One of the luxuries we have with the low market penetration of cloud accounting in the English speaking world is we don’t have to make that investment right now so when we turn on these other languages we can but right now we’re happy to spend our capital on the markets which we’re already in.
My take
Rod Drury gives a compelling argument for Xero as a global, scalable platform but the US remains a slow grind for the company. The immediate emerging markets in Singapore, Hong Kong and South Africa are nice but relatively small compared to the UK, Australia and New Zealand where the company is reasonably well established.
The vision of applying the rich data gathered by the company is also persuasive but it will probably be some time before the small business market is ready for those tools at price points that make them worthwhile revenue streams for Xero.
Overall though, there was little for Xero’s shareholders to complain about at the company’s first Sydney AGM. Rod Drury gave a good performance and laid out the Xero’s course towards profitability and expansion. The question of North American expansion though clearly remains a mild irritation for company that otherwise is travelling quite well.
Image credit - via Den HowlettRead more on: Analytics planning and data analysisCloud ERP financials and supply chain 