
Xero growth, 2015-16
Yesterday Xero, the darling of the cloud accounting industry and the New Zealand tech startup community, announced its 2016 results with $NZ201 million in revenue and an $NZ82 million loss.
The revenues are two-thirds greater than last year’s and the loss, while higher in dollar terms, is lower as a percentage of operating revenue, falling from 56% to 40% this year.
I spoke with Xero founder Rod Drury just as the results were released and he was keen to emphasise the company’s plans to move out of the never-never land of startup cash burn and into profitablity.
We’ve been demonstrated really good financial discipline and been able to manage the business the way investors want to see it managed without compromising the growth opportunity and we have a pathway to break even.
One of the drivers for the company’s improved profitability were increased revenues per customer with ARPUs globally up just short of ten percent to $NZ30 per user due partly to a weaker New Zealand dollar but also due to increased charges in key regions.
We didn’t just chase customer numbers because we were chasing margins we were able to put prices up in three markets – Australia, New Zealand and the UK.
The UK is one area where Drury is particularly proud of passing Sage with an of increase of 60% on last years numbers. Significantly in the UK, as far as we can tell, we passed the leading desktop product this year.
Adding to Drury’s happiness with the UK results is Xero’s revenue there jumped 88% to $NZ37.4 million from $NZ19.9 million.In Xero’s home territories of New Zealand and Australia, the company continues to dominate the online accounting industry.
Australia is an interesting market where the incumbent doesn’t break out its numbers very well, but we’re not seeing a churn away from our product. In New Zealand about thirty percent of businesses are on our platforms and in both countries it’s about larger companies automating their supply chains.
Having dominated its home market and Australia’s, the company last year set its sights on growing in North America and appointed Russ Fujioka, a veteran of Dell, Abode and the various venture capital companies, to lead its revamped US operations.
Speaking to Fukioka last year he described North America as being the key market for Xero as the accounting profession goes through major changes as transactional work becomes automated. Fujioka sees this as an opportunity for companies like Xero to add value to the industry and help individual firms become more akin to system integrators and technology advisers to their clients.
A year later, the results are good for Fukioka with 77% growth in North American subscribers to 62,000. It is  still a minnow compared to the its biggest competitor Intuit which reported 40% year on year growth to 1.5 million users for QuickBooks Online, as compared to 47,000 last year for Xero.
Drury is dismissive about Intuit’s efforts in moving desktop customers over the online products:
Our competitor has been good at talking to their existing companies and they’ve picked all the low hanging fruit.
Globally Drury remains bemused at the relative inertia of incumbents such as Intuit, Sage and, in Australia, MYOB.
One of the hypothesis was the incumbents would wake up and suddenly wake up, get their act together and compete against us. We haven’t seen that at all.
A key point he makes about Xero is it’s relative lean workforce numbers compared to its competitors although his company also reported a 25% increase in head count, something he sees sees as being part of investing in the business.
Drury sees that investment as key to his target of Xero becoming cash flow positive and achieving a billion dollars revenue year in the foreseeable future – although he was pains to rule it out in the upcoming financial year when asked for timeframes.
Overall, an upbeat Drury was on message in the interview concluding with the summary the yesterday’s filing was
An outstanding result that shows we can drive growth while having great financial discipline and that’s the right type of business to have in this financial climate.
My Take
Xero’s numbers are certainly good and in line with what’s expected from a successful high growth tech company. Rod Drury’s continued emphasis on the company’s ‘being on the path’ to profitability reflects the current investment climate in the Bay Area where it’s striking how the attitude has changed towards companies with high cash burns over the past twelve months.
The concern for Xero’s investors though must be the continued focus on Australia and New Zealand where the two countries still make up nearly 70% of the company’s revenues. While a strong position down under allows them to squeeze more revenues out of the market, it’s questionable how sustainable those smaller markets are in the medium term, particularly given Drury’s plans on global growth.
Drury’s point about the incumbents in his key markets though is well made and it increasingly appears that Intuit, Sage and MYOB are struggling to attract new customers to their online services.
It is notable though that Xero’s results this year didn’t breakout costs by region. This may tell us much more about the progress in the UK and North America. We know for example that Xero has invested heavily in the US which must be bleeding a lot of red ink and has had several changes in top management since the company decided to set up shop in San Francisco.
The challenge for Rod Drury and Xero in meeting their revenue and profitability targets is to capture new customers in North America and the UK. Achieving that is still going to require substantial marketing spend in very competitive markets. Despite Drury’s assertions that suggest an early turn around, profitability is probably still some way off.
Image credit - Main story images via Xero 2016 investor presentation, featured image via XeroRead more on: Financials 