
Ursula Burns
When we last cast an eye over Xerox, CEO Ursula Burns had just announced the  firm’s separation into two publicly traded companies – a $7 billion organization focused on business process services for the digital age and an $11 billion document technology business. 
It’s a sound enough strategy, but not one that comes cheap, as the firm reported yesterday. Xerox intends to transition to its new structure by spinning-of fits Business Process Outsourcing (BPO) arm at a cost of up to $250 million, then continuing with a $300 million restructuring, some $126 million has been spent since January. 
While the end goal is to save $2.4 billion over three years, all of this is taking its  short term toll on the bottom line. For its first quarter quarter, Xerox reported a 4% year-on-year drop in revenue to $4.3 billion, but net income plummeted 84% to $34 million. 
To date, the restucturing efforts have focused on the services business, but attention will now expand to take in the Document Technology business. 
It’s been what Burns calls “a pretty intense engagement” over recent months, but one that she also characterizes as “refreshing”, stating:

Painful but refreshing in many ways, for both our Doc Tech business, Doc Tech with DO [Document Outsourcing] now, and our BPO business. We have found ways to improve three major areas. 
One is how we approach our customers, how we approach them organizationally and in what areas we dive deep with them and that should help us on the top-line. How do we organize that go-to-market in a little bit more efficient way?
Second is how do we adjust our cost base inside, particularly spans and layers, where we’ve done a lot of work, but with the help of some outside resources we’ve been able to look at to find ways to even be more sharp there. 
And then as we separate the two companies, we’re taking this chance to look at just about every other piece of the business that moves and figuring out a way to lean out those pieces of the business that move, lean them out and be significantly more efficient.
The fundamental strategies though of the Doc Tech business and the BPO business are the same. What we’re doing here is we’re rounding the edges a bit to make ourselves even more efficient. 

Pain and gain
Burns insists that the pain now will be worth the benefit later and that this message has support from the firm’s customers and partners: 

We’ve had positive feedback on our plans. Over the last few months we’ve been talking to employees, clients and partners regularly about the benefits of the separation and what it means to them. Our clients see the benefits of increased focus and responsiveness to the market. In fact, I met with the executive teams of two major clients in the past couple of weeks, both in the top 75 of the Fortune 500 and both express their positive view.

Xerox has begun a talent search to find executives to run the two new businesses, with a target of filling the posts by the middle of this year. There’s no further information on Burns own future plans 
Meanwhile the day-to-day business needs to keep underway, with Burns highlighting the lanch of Xerox Health Outcome as a case in point. This is a health management offering to help providers adapt to new value-based contracts. This she sees as an opportunity for Xerox: 

The centers for Medicare and Medicaid services have set a requirement that by 2018 50% of all payments must be value-based, meaning providers are compensated for healthy outcomes rather than each service provided. According to a survey that we sponsored, healthcare providers and payers need to significantly accelerate their efforts to adapt to this standard, so we see a big opportunity for this product.


But it’s likely to be a bumpy road for Xerox for the rest of the year. John Caucis, Senior Analyst at Technology Business Research, notes: 

Xerox’s primary focus in 2016 will be the successful execution of its strategic reorganization though the company may have to defuse client concerns about potential service disruptions from the split. Xerox will also be competing against peers who are not restructuring and who have already pivoted their BPO businesses upmarket with a steady infusion of IP- and analytics-rich solutions delivered in as-a-service models. Despite traction in healthcare and transportation, diminished pricing power and headwinds to growth in some commercial sectors may only be exacerbated by the uncertainties associated with the separation of BPO from DO.

My take
No pain, no gain. 
Read more on: Outsourcing 