
Marissa Mayer
A 64% collapses in profits, a 20% fall in revenues and another write-down from the $1 billion folly of buying Tumblr – Yahoo!’s days may be numbered, but it’s going out on the back of a continuing tide of bad news.
The latest $482 million Tumblr write-down is perhaps the most telling example. When the history of Yahoo! is written, spending $1 billion on a blogging site will be emblematic of the flaws in CEO Marissa Mayer’s turnaround strategy rather than the pivot for recovery that it was intended to be.
On top of that, the progress that was being made in the Mavens space – mobile, video, native and social – has also stalled, with revenues dropping in the second quarter.
Coinciding with the latest litany of failure, Monday also saw the deadline for final bids for a buyer for Yahoo!’s core business. A new owner might well be named by the end of the week, although some analysts still fear that the firm might reject the existing offers. For her part, Mayer told Wall Street analysts:
I want to briefly address the strategic alternatives process, which continues to be top of mind for shareholders, and is a top priority for our board and management team. Although we have no announcement today, I want to restate our commitment to delivering shareholder value with this process.
By separating Yahoo!’s operating business from our equity stake in Alibaba, there is substantial value that we can potentially unlock. To that end, the right transaction could strategically and efficiently achieve such a separation. Our board’s independent strategic review committee, which is leading a well-run, robust process, continues to manage this effort. And we are making great progress.
While we have no announcement today, I can say we are deep into the process of evaluating proposals and alternatives, and will update our shareholders as soon as is prudent.
But she’s determined to carry on with the latest strategic turnaround plan:
In parallel, we continue to strengthen our operating business through the execution of our 2016 strategic plan. As I’ve said before, our plan complements the strategic alternatives process, and is important to maximize the value of Yahoo! in any scenario.
Mozilla and more
Mayer flagged up partnerships with the likes of Microsoft, Google, Apple and Oracle. She also pointed to Mozilla, an elephant in the room since he disclosure that Yahoo! probably owes Mozilla a billion dollars with the chance that payment could be demanded immediately if Mozilla decides it doesn’t like the new owners:
Mozilla is a very important partner to Yahoo! and Search. We have built strong relationships with the Mozilla team, and we are closely engaged with them. While we would certainly like to continue the partnership regardless of our strategic alternatives process, should Mozilla choose not to, our agreement does provide for certain mitigations, which would reduce our exposure. Ultimately, it remains in our mutual best interest to maintain a healthy path forward, and we do hope to do just that.
Mayer insisted that Yahoo! remains a go-to provider for information and news:
For example, as the UK contemplated the Brexit vote, users turned to Yahoo! to follow 37 of hours of continuous live updates that resulted in the highest number of users on Yahoo! Finance in four years. And when news broke of Prince’s passing earlier this spring, Yahoo! experienced an unprecedented surge in traffic with the highest load on the site seen in the last seven years. This illustrates once again that the Internet turns to Yahoo! for the most accurate, fastest, and most in-depth information on any breaking news. Overall, our investment in news have resulted in solid user engagement metrics and really highlight the power of Yahoo! as a trusted news source.
While acknowledging that the quarter has “not been without its unique set of challenges”, Mayer continues to insist – at least in public – that progress has been made, despite all appearances to the contrary and regardless of what the rest of the world thinks:
We set forth a plan to return this iconic company to growth over multiple years, one that would create long-term sustainable growth for Yahoo! and deliver value to our users, advertisers, employees and shareholders. We did go hard honest look at where we were and where we wanted to be and have taken necessary steps to get there.
From building a mobile team from the ground up, to modernizing and simplifying our digital advertising strategy and products, and creating a brand new Mavens business, these efforts are just a few of the achievements that have delivered the far stronger, more modern Yahoo! of today.
And as for speculation that Mayer will soon be looking for a new role herself, again she has her own view:
I remain committed to our team and our company and I continue to be optimistic and passionate about the future of Yahoo!.

My take
I’ve said it before, but this time it clearly is the case that the end is in sight. The next few days will be telling.
Image credit - World Economic Forum Read more on: Collaboration sharing and digital productivityDigital and content marketingUX and application design 