
Yelp has turned in another quarterly loss on sharply higher costs as the company tries to revamp operations following its decision to call off a bid to sell itself earlier in the summer.
Yelp reported a third-quarter loss of $8.1 million, compared to a profit of $3.6 million in the year-ago quarter, while operating costs shot up 58% to $154.3 million.
There were some positives however, including:

Revenues up 40% year-on-year to $143.6 million.
Local advertising revenue was up 36%.
Average monthly unique visitors rose 22% to 89 million.
Average monthly unique visitors on mobile of 83 million.
Desktop user numbers declined 2% to 79 million.

Those mobile numbers are important ones for Yelp’s future direction, says CEO Jeremy Stoppelman:
 Consumer usage is shifting to mobile apps. Our local mobile app experience is second-to-none.
As mobile usage continues to grow, we’re focused on increasing awareness of Yelp and our app. According to ComScore data for September 2015, Yelp has about 30% reach among smartphone users and was one of the top 25 mobile web and app properties in the US.
He adds:
We’re delighted with app growth. It continues to be a major source of engagement and audience. It’s now representing about 70% of page views. So, that’s very dramatic and meaningful. The app is essentially skimming our very best, most highest value users and it’s giving us a direct relationship with them.
So that person that otherwise might have gone to Google to start their search and then found a way to a local business, they are now moving away from Google and directly to the Yelp app. As that trend continues, I think that’s just going to strengthen the company over time.
The firm’s local search and advertising business is also a priority, he adds:
Searching for local businesses is a universal need and therefore we believe we have significant room to grow.
The advertising industry is moving towards native ads which have always been our focus and primary source of revenue. Local businesses find our ads compelling because we deliver valuable leads.
He adds:
According to an August 2015 Nielsen survey we commissioned, Yelp advertises reported more than three dollars return for every one dollar invested in Yelp ads. We drive valuable traffic to business because consumers on Yelp have high purchase intent.
For example, Denny’s noticed that when consumers search for pancakes on Yelp, they’re looking for the nearest restaurant that serves pancakes rather than recipes or other more general information. They recently began advertising with us because they found that Yelp has the potential to generate high-quality leads while converting users to restaurant guests.
Our ongoing commitment to the consumer is the reason people trust us when deciding where to spend their money and make Yelp the ideal channels for local businesses looking to advertise. We continue to see strong interest from local businesses who have historically advertised off-line. And as the number of advertisers grow, we’re building a large base of legacy advertisers and a stream of recurring revenue.
Brand awareness
The firm has been doing its own advertising of late, launching a US nationwide campaign that helped drive up operating costs. But it’s money well-spent, says Stoppelman:
To increase brand awareness we began our national TV advertising campaign in the third quarter. Based on a study of people who saw our ads, more than half of non-Yelp users indicated they are now likely to use Yelp in the future. We’re excited about these early results which demonstrate how our investment in marketing can increase awareness and usage of Yelp.
An area of diversification for Yelp is the food delivery business, fuelled by the acquisition of Eat24. Stoppelman says this type of transactional business is expanding for Yelp:
Consumers come to Yelp when searching for local businesses and are increasingly transacting directly on Yelp, as demonstrated by approximately 170% year over year growth in the number of platform transactions in the third quarter. We’re continually rolling out new features to enhance the transaction experience.
Now you can order food or make reservations directly from search results and this change drove a 10% lift in the number of platform transactions in the month after rollout. Since our acquisition of Eat24 we’ve also continued to optimize that experience. Eat24’s revenue grew 73% in the third quarter and we have been pleased with its performance.
But it’s early days yet:
I’d say the overall transaction volume for food delivered, particularly on Yelp’s platform, while meaningful, isn’t at the scale where we’d be able to see, major moves on engagement per se that It’s just the Yelp app or even the website overall. That said, as it continues to scale and become bigger, I would expect to see that users who are ordering their food through us end up doing lots of other things. And that’s certainly part of the thesis. But at this point it’s too nascent to really see.
My take
Having made the decision to stay independent, there’s work still to be done.
Read more on: Cloud platforms - infrastructure and architectureCRM and customer experienceMobileSocial 