
I can see you
There is still a huge amount of FUD circulating about the Investigatory Powers Act and what powers it will actually end up giving to the authorities to snoop, delve, dig, or otherwise build evidential cases against `bad guys’.
For some individuals, this may bring with it the fear that their porn predilections could be exposed, along with other activities of a more or less embarrassing nature.
But for businesses, the impact could be quite significant. In fact, there is an argument that it could blow a large hole in the security assumptions of many CIOs and business managers – and the sales messages of many vendors of security-related products.
Though details of its final contents are still to be determined, the impact of what is currently being suggested does seem to create a situation where businesses must in future consider themselves as fundamentally insecure by Government edict.
One function the Government is said to be considering is making it illegal to use end-to-end encryption, a capability which makes it impossible for service providers to break into any communications between sender and receiver.
These, of course, are exactly the type of services that the aforesaid ‘bad guys’ are likely to use. It is clear that there will be occasions when it is reasonable, essential and absolutely justifiable that the relevant authorities can have access to the information passed between those points and even break in and listen in real time.
The problem, however, is equally obvious: getting service providers to deliver the authorities with suitable access of this type cannot be achieved in isolation.
As security expert, Paco Hope, observed to diginomica earlier this week:
Experts have long been unanimous, and no new conclusions have yet been reached, that one cannot build a back door in software that only works according to legislators’ intents. Any design that permits Apple, Google, or Facebook to decrypt communications on demand will create a vulnerability that criminals and cyber terrorists can leverage. There is no magic software design that the government can use that cyber terrorists cannot. Legislators cannot make an insecure software design secure by passing a law that says it ought to be possible.
Baddies and goodies
There, in a couple of sentences, is the heart of the problem. For service providers to give the authorities and security services any form of `back door’ access to communications means that there is a back door for all. And given that the ‘bad guys’ are quite likely to be at least as good at hacking into such systems as those ‘good guys’ – and probably better because they never get the back door formally opened for them – there is little chance for any business to consider itself secure from anything but the most simple of malware or Trojan attack.
Given the ratio between known breaches that have occurred and the number of high-profile convictions that have been through the courts, it seems fair to assume the ‘bad guys’ are generally feeling pretty secure at present. And while the authorities are claiming good levels of success in catching those involved in terrorist attacks, it is highly like that many more remain unknown and failed through rank bad management.
Nigel Hawthorn, European spokesperson at cloud security company Skyhigh Networks, was just one of many other security industry people to voice a similar opinion:
Any law which bans end-to-end encryption will break data protection regulations and decrease security on the internet. There’s a complete misunderstanding of how end-to-end encryption works. It’s wrong to assume that forcing technology companies to break their own security is going to please the average man on the street, and this is not even technically possible in many instances. It’s not the first time the government has been wholly ignorant of technology, and despite the inevitable backlash from technology experts, politicians continue to announce these ill-thought-out unworkable proposals.
The announcement also brings into question how seriously the government takes the security of our data. Sure, we’ll hear the `we can’t give criminals a place to hide’ message, but with the number of successful state sponsored cyber-attacks and high profile data breaches ever increasing, is now really the time to lower encryption capabilities?
If this passes into law, businesses will likely get but one option: plan seriously and assiduously for how they will detect and manage the data breaches which will inevitably follow. There is a growing argument that learning to live with data breaches and minimise their impact through the use of best practices in business and operations management is a better solution than being persuaded that adding more technological solutions will solve the security problem.
It also raises speculation on its impact on the security tools vendors. If official back doors exist, those `bad guys’ will find them, and it could be that no amount of super security tools will make a ha’porth of difference to the end result.
As Hope pointed out, there is also a side issue of some importance here: who is going to pay for this? He said:
As written, the law would obligate private firms to spend time and money building something that only the government wants (not the firms’ customers and not the firms themselves) and that only the government is allowed use. Private firms would be obligated to build this capability, maintain it, secure it from unlawful use, and deal with the public backlash, but would receive little or no assistance from the government for all that effort.
And if service providers have to pay them they will be obliged to charge users, so we will all be paying a `tax’ for the privilege of being snooped on with tools that are unlikely to provide any value at all – surely a brilliant vote winner, particularly the vote of old Colonel Bluffandbluster from Tonbridge Wells.
My take
Normally one finds the time to quietly giggle when it comes to mixing Government activity and aspirations with technology. But this one just might prove to be significantly serious and detrimental, and there may well be no way of stopping it. This may be a good time to invest in paper-making and postal services.
Read more on: Data privacyRegulationSecurity 