
Peter Coffee
From our Department of Forests Hidden by Trees, the label of “Fourth Industrial Revolution” is quickly becoming the header on a list of technologies – with risk that their bright shiny novelty will obscure vital discussions of the broader impacts that they’ll have, and of the new understandings and the complementary investments that they’ll require.
It’s typical to define the four revolutions as Steam, Electricity, Computers, and AI. There’s a genuine hazard, though, in thinking of the revolutions as either rip-and-replace successions, or as bells-and-whistles enhancements, of the tools we use today – rather than focusing on the manner in which we organize our activities to use them well.
My own short-form list of The Industrial Revolutions defines them by effect, not by enabler:

First: power becomes scalable (enabled by steam engines)
Second: scalable power becomes portable (enabled by electricity)
Third: power is augmented by information (enabled by electronics)
Fourth: power and information are guided and focused by intelligence (enabled by sensors, algorithms, nanotechnology, quantum computing and robotics)

Unsurprisingly, I’d like to elaborate on those short descriptions.
Steam power meant the difference between horsepower in units of one horse, and horsepower in quantities of dozens or hundreds. The upside was far greater availability of what we today consider basic necessities: the mechanized production of textiles, paper, glass, and other basic ingredients of daily life resulted in massive economies that created huge new demand for what had previously been luxury goods.
Where society had previously consisted, to oversimplify just a bit, of people who owned the land and people who worked the land—an aristocracy and a working class—there was now a brand new thing, a middle class, whose labor was worth more because it was amplified by machines’ power; whose needs were met by the output of other people using other machines.
I said “the upside”; was there a downside? There was, at least, a consequence, which was the centralization of production and therefore of urban populations due to the economies of scale in building steam-powered factories. One massive engine, with overhead shafts and belt drives running machines across an entire factory floor, was among the defining images of the 19th century; these massive concentrations of production engendered concentrations of labor to service them. Manchester, for example, doubled its population twice in the century’s first fifty years, and nearly doubled again in the second half.
Electric motors, in contrast, can be made in a wide range of sizes, and powered by anything from wide-ranging power grids to tiny batteries. If one had taken a 19th-century factory and simply replaced the central steam engine with a comparably powerful electric motor, there might have been huzzahs and celebrations of the resulting reductions in noise and other negatives, but the capital concentrations (and safety hazards) of the overhead-shaft arrangement would have persisted; the potential of more flexible manufacturing in the factory, and of a mobile (or even entrepreneurial) work force equipped with hand-held power tools, would have been lost.
More than merely modernized
In short, merely replacing steam with electricity might have looked up-close like a revolution, but would only have been (in the large) a modernization. “Electricity triumphed only when factories themselves were reconfigured,” wrote economist Tim Harford last summer. The results, he continued, were as much organizational and cultural as technical: “Workers had responsibility for their own machines; they needed better training and better pay. The electric motor was a wonderful invention, once we changed all the everyday details that surrounded it.”
Moving forward into the Third Industrial Revolution, we should logically ask if there was a similar divide between those who adopted technology and those who adapted their ways of work to use it best. Harford makes precisely this point, citing work by Erik Brynjolfsson and Lorin Hitt, who found (for example) that “firms that adopt decentralized organizational structures and work structures do appear to have a higher contribution of information technology to productivity”; that “firms that are in the top half of both information technology investment and decentralization are on average 5 percent more productive than firms that are above average only in information technology investment or only in decentralization.”
Crucially, Brynjolfsson and Hitt also found that “organizational complements such as new business processes, new skills and new organizational and industry structures” have been “a major driver of the contribution of information technology,” representing investments “as much as an order of magnitude larger than the investments in the computer technology itself.”
Let their warning, therefore, be written in letters of fire above every gleeful statement about Moore’s Law making computers increasingly affordable: “As computers become cheaper and more powerful, the business value of computers is limited less by computational capability and more by the ability of managers to invent new processes, procedures and organizational structures that leverage this capability.”
Go fourth and conquer
Moving into the Fourth Industrial Revolution invites us to consider the next transformation of process, procedure and organizational structure that it entails – so that we may invest in taking the lead, and also prepare for the resulting disruptive challenges.
Examples might include the reduction of work involving mere mastery of math skills, but an increase in the need for those who can craft compelling visualizations of the analytic results that we can increasingly afford to produce; reduction in the importance of managing inventories and supply chains for critical but rarely-needed machine parts, but increased need for versatile 3-D printing capabilities (faster processes, wider range of materials and so on) that will let us produce those parts where and when needed.
Using quantum computing to find patterns in enormous data sets is not enough, if the importance of the patterns is not communicated to decision makers in a compelling way by someone with visual and verbal communications skills. Using AI to optimize inventories may be dangerously irrelevant, if someone else is using nanotechnology and additive manufacturing techniques to produce better parts at lower cost in an on-demand model.
Be the revolution – not the residue.
Image credit - The Beatles - Revolution via YouTubeRead more on: Analytics planning and data analysisCloud platforms - infrastructure and architectureCRM and customer experienceDigital and content marketingIoT robotics and AIPartner ZoneSalesforce 