
Amidst an impressive run for tech stocks, with the NASDAQ up 20% this year, hyperconverged infrastructure (HCI) darling, Nutanix is under the gun after some weak earnings reports that have cut its stock price in half since last fall’s IPO. The reasons are many:

Worry over increased competition on several fronts including from hardware partner Dell as it emphasizes EMC’s successful VxRail HCI products, HP Enterprise after the acquisition of HCI competitor SimpliVity and Cisco with its relatively new UCS-based HyperFlex offering.
Cost pressure from components, particularly memory where average prices for DRAM have spiked by over 50% in the past six months with flash prices up double digits last quarter that is partially responsible for a 3-point decline in gross margins over the previous year.
Changes to its sales organization including a new management hierarchy, a refocus on strategic accounts and new hires that aren’t yet fully productive and led to fewer large deals of over $500,000.
Lockup expiration for almost 90% of the outstanding IPO shares.

Despite the headwinds, Nutanix continues to grow, with its top line up by 77% in the last year while doubling the number of customers. Still, there’s clearly pressure on the company to have positive news at its next earnings report on May 25th, so it’s not surprising that the company announced a significant new sales model and hardware partnerships this week.
Selling hardware appliances to the cloud buyer
Cloud services have conditioned IT to rent, not buy infrastructure and software. In a trend that’s been brewing for years, organizations do everything possible to avoid large capital expenses. Metered, pay-as-you-go services like AWS have become IT’s preferred operating model.
CIOs are tired of being locked into hardware that ends up under-used and acts as a legacy anchor when they want to adopt new technology at an ever faster pace. In response, Nutanix announced the Go acquisition model that allows customers to lease infrastructure with flexible terms as short as six months while providing the ability to rapidly scale capacity as needed.
The cloud-like pricing complements the company’s strategy of becoming the dominant platform for dedicated, enterprise-specific clouds that Nutanix Chief Product and Development Officer Sunil Potti described to Martin Banks earlier this week. Potti described his vision of “an AWS inside the enterprise” that delivers similar hardware efficiencies, workload elasticity and self-service provisioning as the public cloud, but with the control, customizations and legacy application support enterprises require.
Nutanix has progressively evolved its platform into a general-purpose private cloud foundation, first by eliminating its dependence on the VMware stack with Acropolis and then adding AWS-like management and self-service features with PRISM.
However, its reliance on a traditional sales model of upfront CapEx and ongoing support expenditures left public cloud vendors with the edge in purchasing and usage flexibility. Nutanix Go seems to address this, however financial details are still lacking, and it’s limited to a subset of Nutanix NX hardware and qualified U.S. customers.
A Nutanix spokesperson says that Go will include “a variety of software and hardware configurations based on the terms that best meet the needs of their business,” however it’s not ready to be more specific.
Buyers will need to understand how Go differs from traditional lease agreements and details about whether they pay for unused, overprovisioned hardware, how rapidly they can increase capacity, when they can upgrade platforms and which software editions are covered before inking any deals.
More hardware options
Nutanix’s competitive advantage has always been its software, not the OEMed commodity hyperconverged hardware. The company has almost completely decoupled any hardware-software dependencies.
The dissociation is critical if, as Potti described to Banks, Nutanix is to convince MSPs to use its software as the foundation for “the third cloud, providing ‘Data Center as a Service'” to enterprises unwilling to go all-in on AWS or other IaaS providers.
Since MSPs have an existing fleet of commodity x86 boxes and established relationships with one or more preferred hardware vendors, one roadblock to using Nutanix is software testing and certification on new platforms. To streamline the process, Nutanix has released the Metis qualification package that it claims “automates the deployment, testing and scaling of Nutanix software for off-the-shelf x86 platforms.”
Despite the promise of “one-click” hardware certification, enterprise customers typically eschew the DIY method and will prefer to buy Nutanix as an integrated appliance.
However, most IT organizations have built sales and support relationships with a small set of strategic equipment vendors and would rather not introduce new hardware platforms if possible. To reduce the acquisition inertia, Nutanix has added HP Enterprise to its list of hardware partners, while broadening its relationship with Cisco.
The Nutanix Enterprise Cloud can now be deployed on ProLiant rackmount servers and UCS B-series blade systems to complement previous support for the UCS C-series, along with Dell and Lenovo systems. To mitigate the risk of hardware obsolescence and lock-in, Nutanix also allows transferring software licenses to new hardware, which means buyers can upgrade platforms without buying software licenses.
My take
This week’s announcements are logical, albeit incremental steps in Nutanix’s evolution from a vendor of high-density storage appliances that happened to also run virtualized workloads into a hardware-agnostic, enterprise private cloud stack.
Adding support for HPE and Cisco products won’t quell speculation that each has its own designs on a vertically-integrated, HCI-based cloud platform, but does increase the options for Nutanix buyers and provides some assurance against locked-in, dead-ended hardware. Indeed, if Potti is right and MSPs become the preferred operators of private cloud, this week’s announcements will prove pivotal by delivering required flexibility in hardware selection that allows them to repurpose existing systems into a Nutanix cloud.
The quasi-subscription pricing model further aligns Nutanix with cloud buying patterns, but lacking details, it’s unclear how compelling Go will be compared with a la carte, usage-based public cloud pricing.
Again, if enterprises end up choosing MSPs to run private clouds, the new model is irrelevant since buyers will expect MSPs to deliver metered, pay-as-you-go services whether they capitalize the underlying infrastructure or not.
The bigger questions facing Nutanix revolve around larger trends, including:

Can it withstand withering pressure from an aggressive Dell EMC with its compelling VxRail products that could soon claim the top spot in HCI market share from Nutanix? Also, how aggressively will HPE and Cisco develop and market their internal HCI products and do these significantly cannibalize Nutanix customers?
Does Microsoft eventually get off the dime and release Azure Stack and how do both traditional hardware partners like Dell and HP and, more importantly, customers react to Microsoft’s tightly integrated hybrid cloud implementation (see my earlier coverage here, here and here)?
How rapidly does the enterprise migration to public cloud proceed and how many organizations bypass the mixed-mode hybrid model and migrate directly from legacy infrastructure to public cloud?
Do AWS, Azure or Google take a page from Oracle and offer dedicated cloud services, including bare metal systems appropriate for legacy enterprise applications directly to large enterprise customers, similar to what AWS does for VMware?

The path of cloud technology and enterprise adoption, mostly driven by factors outside of Nutanix’s control, will ultimately have more to do with its future than any new products, consumption models or sales plans.
While the company has so far succeeded against larger players, it’s now going after big leaguers like Amazon, Microsoft and Google who are as powerful in the cloud age as IBM was in the mainframe era. While the company has compelling products, the pace of cloud technology advancement is such that Nutanix customers are wise to keep an open mind to alternatives.
Image credit - featured image via © cookiecutter - Fotolia.comRead more on: Cloud platforms - infrastructure and architecture 