
Michael Reh, CEO designate, EdgeVerve
Imagine this: you’re playing one of your favorite mobile games and you need to make an in-app purchase. What would your reaction be if, instead of the expected Apple Pay or Google equivalent popped up, the game offered you a new way to bank? Would you be curious? This was the start of a conversation I had with Michael Reh, CEO designate of EdgeVerve, and it shows the cracks in the marble columns that banks are hiding behind.
Let’s assume that you’re the curious type so you click the OK button. You are then taken to a simple online registration form which you duly complete, anticipating that there will be a pile of other forms to complete, it will take days or weeks and then, maybe, you’ll have an account. Now imagine your surprise when a message comes back telling you that a person will contact you on your smartphone via video call to verify your identity. Ten minutes later, a person calls you up and asks you to show them your national identity card or passport. They can then visually verify you are who you say you are.
In reality this is a double check because your phone is as much a part of your identity as your passport. But this is banking and some rules just have to be followed. Having passed this trivial ‘test’ the bank person then asks you what kind of credit and debit cards you’d like. These are not limited to Visa or MasterCard but can be printed with your favorite image or avatar. You might want Donald Duck on one and Darth Vadar on another. No problem.
The nice person at the end of the line tells you that you will get a text message in about five minutes to tell you the process is complete and that you can start banking right from your phone via the app which is automatically downloading in background. You’ll need to deposit some funds of course but once that’s done you’re all set to go. The person also tells you that when you access your account on your phone that you will be automatically authenticated to the bank system via a biometric finger print which you have probably already stored as your way to gain access to your phone. If not then it only takes a moment to set that up. Mind blown already? Michael Reh added:
Now imagine you are also told that your account will have smart features like the ability to earn more interest on deposits when you have a certain amount of money deposited and enough people have liked the application on Facebook. That’s an interesting way to game a system for everyone’s benefit don’t you think?
And that leads to many other ideas: what if you could also do peer lending from within the community that you’ve now joined? Oh – and by the way…all transactions other than international transfers are free. And instead of getting a new toaster when I opened an account, I get an offer to upgrade my phone plan…and when I get a friend to open an account as well, we both get an offer. Now compare that with your current retail bank experience.
Retail banking is undergoing some of the most radical changes we’ve ever seen and at a pace that no-one could have predicted.
While rock solid secure bank systems are the enemy of innovation, we see many new approaches to the problem of not just getting, but keeping customers happy and engaged
The examples I mentioned above are all but here. It is a model for the future that will be enhanced beyond our current imagination. Another idea that has merit is having a virtual debit card on your phone. It works a bit like the loyalty cards Starbucks introduced, so making in store purchases a safe and secure snap. (I just made that one up but…)
Banks everywhere are challenged to meet these needs because the idea that one size fits all is disintegrating as we see new requirements for millennials and those that come next. There are challenges for banks wanting to reach the unbanked. We believe the smartphone (and, in some cases the feature phone) will be the bank branch of the future.
Do you agree? In the meantime, I encourage you to check out some of the stories we are seeing around the transformation of banking. (PDF)
Disclosure: EdgeVerve is an Infosys company, Infosys is a premier partner at time of writing.
Image credits: Michael Reh via Gregor Wolf, featured image: via fotolia.com
Read more on: Financial services and fintech 