
If readers want a commentary on the selective blindness and deaf ears in Silicon Valley then the reporting around the latest mea culpa from Zenefits is proof enough. Here’s the short version:

Co-founder and CEO Conrad Parker was ousted 8th February, 2016 following an internal investigation into the way the company operated.
Although it was not made clear at the time, it transpires that Parker had developed an extension (a ‘macro) for the Chrome browser that



…worked with online education courses offered by third-party test preparation provider Kaplan, Inc. The Kaplan courses used a timer to track users’ study hours. The macro kept the timer running, whether or not the users were at their computers studying the material. The macro did not advance users through any course content, including course quizzes and tests. To complete the courses, users still had to answer every question in the final Review Tests.



 
This is the result of an investigation initiated by Sacks and conducted by Stephen Neal of Cooley. Employees who used the macro ran the risk of falsely reporting the amount of time they spend training  and thus perjuring themselves. It is not reported how many employees took advantage of the macro although it was said to be widely available.
In other words, Parker broke the law, had been doing so since 2013 and encouraged employees to compound the law breaking by potential perjuring themselves about the amount of training they had undertaken. Each failure could lead to penalties of $20,000 per incident. To date, none of the states which are investigating Zenefits have made public their own findings or indicated what action they will likely take.
In the mea culpa, David Sacks, current CEO lays the blame for numerous corporate and cultural failings firmly at Parker’s door. The Cooley report says that Sacks was not aware of the extent to which the macro was distributed among employee, that it may mean employees had not completed pre-licensing requirements as to time spent training or that the macros was in use into 2015 until January 25th, 2016.
It has also transpired that during the last mega funding round, Parker sold $10 million in stock. The round in question was $500 million, which makes $10 million close to a rounding error. But of course the media adds this factoid in as a way of spicing up the story.

For his part, Sacks lays out an extensive program of changes that have either been instituted or are in process of being implemented including a comprehensive system of compliance procedures. To that extent, Sacks is to be applauded but in reality he had no choice. Who Parker’s ouster came to public attention, there must have been grave concerns about Zenefits survival and with it, the combined $583.6 million raised in three rounds at a top end valuation of $4.5 billion that was subsequently slashed as a result of successive Fidelity write downs that cumulatively now value the company at about $2.4 billion.
Putting all that aside, can Zenefits survive?
Big questions remain
There are a number of questions that current revelations leave unanswered. These are the ones that immediately strike me as deserving of attention:

Sacks protestations of innocence are a tad overly played. Sacks has history working as COO at PayPal another regulated business. When he took on the role of COO at Zenefits in December 2014, is he trying to convince the rest of us that he was unaware of Zenefits status as a business subject to regulation? Of course not. But then if you know that going in and you have a history of working in a regulated environment AND you are COO then shouldn’t that mean you make it your business to know the ins and outs of regulation for your chosen company? If not then what is the ‘operations’ part of your title meant to represent? We know Sacks had no sales operation oversight but is that enough distance to convince?
As part of the mea culpa it turns out that Parker controlled the board. Why would anyone who was brought in by a lead investor (Lars Dalgaard, Andreessen Horowitz) and with a comprehensive history of management take on such an important role in those circumstances?
Reports suggest Parker and Sacks were embattled with one another almost from the get go. One of the battle Sacks lost was over the micromanagement of the HR function. I find this bizarre. I can certainly see why a founder would want close involvement in early stage hiring but the reports heavily imply that he virtually ran HR. Why did Sacks tolerate this situation? It doesn’t make sense for a company under pressure from Dalgaard to grow revenue at eye watering rates and yet which was also instructed by Dalgaard to cut headcount in operations that were needed by sales. If, as suggested, Sacks and Dalgaard were such buddies then why didn’t Sacks win what seem in hindsight to be critically important organizational battles?
Sacks comprehensive compliance overhaul comes at a substantial cost. Extensive training and processes are in place to ensure the company never again fails into the morass Parker created. That will have a significant impact on operational efficiency unless Zenefits has been able to securely automate compliance.
However, if Sacks can scale the business without incrementally adding compliance overhead then the investment may well pay off. None of this has been enumerated in the public domain, Instead, Sacks says the company has maintained its revenue run rate which was last reported at $63 million. Costs will have been offset by the 250 layoffs Zenefits made earlier in the year but nothing has been said about the potential impact of state actions for law breaking. Having a go at Parker might provide some entertainment but precious little cash. Going after Zenefits might yield a good chunk of change but endanger the business. What’s the position given the authorities have been in possession of Cooley’s report since January 26th?

Will Zenefits get away with it?
The opportunity that Parker saw and the apparent ease with which he was able to programmatically circumvent regulatory requirements begs the question about how well US health insurance compliance is managed in the US. What is to prevent another Zenefits from crawling out of the woodwork in the future? Not much.
The original idea of giving HR software away in exchange for acting as a broker certainly has merit but much of that merit goes away if the health insurance system is overhauled. Is this an industry wake up call? Maybe but unlikely. The fact reports confirm ongoing struggles with this part of employment management and especially by SMBs should mean Zenefits has a long runway ahead of it – but at what price?
The real worry comes in comments made by customers. This from Bloomberg:
“As long as their problems don’t affect our company, we’ll stay,” says Todd Harmond, vice president for finance and operations of the e-book service Scribd, which uses Zenefits to offer Kaiser Permanente and Anthem health insurance plans to its 85 employees.
Holy crap. How can Harmond know if the company will be affected? I already know of companies that reported errors to Zenefits but have stayed wth them. Other reports confirm the same. I also know of situations where security was almost non-existent and yet customers are sticking with the company. Why? The very inefficiencies that Zenefits set out to solve are overwhelming for the small business. There is therefore a certain inertia to stick with a company, however faulty because the headache of trying to manage employee health insurance is too much. That’s a serious structural issue.
My take
We have previously opined in depth about Zenefits and give Sacks credit for addressing many of the points we raised and especially those around quality. However, we stand by what we said earlier. Zenefits is damaged goods. Growing from this point will not be easy. It may even require a rebranding to get from underneath the stigma associated with a company that has admitted to law breaking and the encouragement of criminal activity.
The bigger question though is how long Silicon Valley’s collective memory of this sorry incident will last. If the lack of incisive analysis available today is an indicator, sometime around about this time tomorrow, all will be forgotten. Heck, Dalgaard is still defending Parker, who between binging on Star Wars episodes is planning his next venture – allegedly.
Image credit - Story image - via Brian Sommer, Techventive Inc, featured image via Creative CommonsRead more on: HCM and the digital future of workHR admin and payroll 