
Zenefits, an HR software vendor, has undergone a lot since its inception just a couple of years ago. The company began by offering a free service to small businesses wherein businesses got easy access to a variety of benefits (e.g., employee health insurance). diginomica ‘s Phil Wainwright, Den Howlett and I recapped the volatile first few years in an earlier article. It’s quite a comprehensive piece and worth a re-read.
Earlier this year, Zenefits hit the nadir of its existence. The company changed CEOs, laid off a number of its staff and began the process of rebuilding/reinventing itself. Yesterday, the company announced Z2 – its second generation of Zenefits solutions alongside a preview of the reinvented company.
This major release is very important to Zenefits as it:

Restores a measure of credibility to the company and its leadership
Markedly expands the scope and size of its applications suite making it more competitive in the HR space
Creates a super-set of solutions via its new partner marketplace
Puts Zenefits back on a growth trajectory
Positions Zenefits more broadly as software platform not just as a benefits broker or limited applications software HR suite provider
Moves customers away from dependencies on third party payroll providers like ADP – ADP and Zenefits had a very public dustup in the last year. One of the many issues that was mentioned in this public scrap involved the integration of Zenefits customer data with ADP’s software. With Z2 offering a captive/native Payroll solution, this integration concern should go away.

Specific to the applications within the suite, Z2 significantly expands the solution set Zenefits can offer small businesses. Zenefits now offers a number of applications beyond benefits. These include:

Payroll
HR
Compliance
Time
Mobile
Integration
HR Advisor

With this set of new products Zenefits now offers an HR suite for small businesses. Except for the Payroll and HR Advisor solutions, all other products are still free for customers to use. Payroll costs $35/month plus $5/month/employee.
Further to these announcements:


Mobile – Zenefits software is now accessible via Android (in June 2016 it was accessible via iOS products). Users can access their company directory, benefits info, pay records, request PTO (Paid time off) and more. Smartphones can now be used as time clocks, too.
Payroll – Payroll functionality will get a big push in the California market. Payroll was in beta/limited release in California late last year. Functionally for other states will be released at a later time. Zenefits indicated that the product integrates with Zenefits Hiring, Time & Attendance, Time Off, Benefits and Core HR applications.



Platform – Zenefits has 17 partner integrations now and may well expand this number. In addition to simple, point and click integrations to partner solutions, a developer platform is also being introduced. The initial 17 partners include solutions for office productivity apps (e.g., Office 365), accounting apps (e.g., Xero), expense reporting apps (e.g., Expensify), recruiting apps (e.g., Lever), engagement apps (e.g., Blueboard), performance management apps (e.g., Lattice) and stock options management (e.g., eShares).  According to Zenefits, these solutions are more deeply connected than just a simple API connection. These apps connect to Zenefits to collect needed employee data and can plug into HR process workflows.




Benefits – The flagship Benefits application has been upgraded to provide more visually intuitive (e.g., side by side comparison) shopping/evaluation tools.
HR Advisor – This solution (Priced at $5/employee/month) gives businesses access to large amounts of HR subject matter expertise. Since few SMB firms can afford to have deep HR experts on staff (or on retainer), this service brings experts, thought leadership, regulatory/compliance needs and more to small firms at little cost.


My take
Z2 is a big step forward for the firm. Hopefully, the new solution will enable a better integration experience than what transpired between Zenefits and ADP.
The new solutions show a dedication and focus from the management team that should re-inspire employees and potential customers.
Z2 helps rebrand a company that suffered a lot in the last year.
Z2 won’t solve all competitive issues. Other companies like Intuit covet the small business HR space and are also rounding out their offerings. Moreover, some firms have far broader coverage for their payroll functionality. Zenefits will need to work fast to expand its payroll functionality beyond California if it is to successfully rebuild the business.
Image credit - Via ZenefitsRead more on: HCM and the digital future of work 