
I don’t think that anyone with any sort of sense of what’s good for a company, or for that matter any sort of sense of what’s good for a family, can deny that Mark Zuckerberg’s decision to take two months paternity leave is a good one.
The Facebook CEO announced on Friday last week, on his personal timeline, that he and his wife were preparing for their daughter’s arrival and that part of that process included thinking about how much time off the pair would take to spend with their newborn. Zuckerberg wrote:
Priscilla and I are starting to get ready for our daughter’s arrival. We’ve been picking out our favorite childhood books and toys.
We’ve also been thinking about how we’re going to take time off during the first months of her life. This is a very personal decision, and I’ve decided to take 2 months of paternity leave when our daughter arrives.
Studies show that when working parents take time to be with their newborns, outcomes are better for the children and families. At Facebook we offer our US employees up to 4 months of paid maternity or paternity leave which they can take throughout the year.
Every day things are getting a little more real for us, and we’re excited to start this next stage in our lives.
There are a few things to taking into account here.
Firstly, it’s incredibly rare (if not unheard of) for such a prominent male CEO to declare that he is taking paternity leave. Let alone two whole months.
Secondly, this could really pave the way for other Facebook employees to feel that it’s okay to take the maternity/paternity leave available to them.
Thirdly, this could also set an example for other high profile executives and CEOs to not only make paid maternity/paternity an option at their companies, but for them to do the same.
Finally, it’s unfortunately also a bit of a kick in the teeth for all the female executives out there that felt like that they couldn’t do something similar (in my opinion). But because Zuckerberg is a man, this may also mean that it’s easier for women to make similar decisions in the future (the world is ridiculous, right?).
The tech industry is trailblazing
As I’ve said before, although the technology industry and Silicon Valley is not without its faults – especially when it comes to sexism and the treatment of women – it also can’t be denied that it is making the most effort when it comes to implementing new corporate structures to promote equality.
 For example, quite amazingly, it is still not required by federal law in the United States for companies to offer staff any sort of paid maternity or paternity leave. It is one of only three countries in the world that doesn’t require companies to provide any benefit when it comes to their staff having kids.
Despite numerous reports and studies that indicate that such benefits lead to positive results for companies, such as higher retention rates, the US is seriously lagging when it comes to childcare benefits. It’s embarrassing. Only about 12% of US employees reported having any paid leave after having a child.
This gives you an idea of how significant Zuckerberg’s announcement is.
But the technology has been making headlines over the past year or two for its efforts to change this. For example, Twitter offers 20 weeks paid maternity leave, Google now offers 18 weeks and Netflix offers up to a year with full pay.
The technology industry is competing for talent, which is likely to be a key driver for the implementation of these policies, but nonetheless it’s still a good thing for employees. And their children.
And although Zuckerberg’s decision has been widely applauded (and rightly so), I can’t help but think of the female executives that felt like this wasn’t an option – despite the offer of paid maternity leave available to them. Or to be a bit more nuanced, what about the lack of scrutiny of Zuckerberg and his decision?
Not too long ago Yahoo! CEO Marissa Mayer announced that she was having twins and that she would only be taking two weeks maternity leave – where she said she would be “taking limited time away and working throughout”.
Mayer was criticised for not setting an example in the industry by taking the benefits on offer to her, which I completely understand. Women felt let down. I argued that the decision should be up to Mayer, but that I looked forward to a time when a prominent female CEO announced she was taking some decent maternity leave.
But regardless, everyone had an opinion. Mayer came under intense scrutiny. A scrutiny that I feel that Zuckerberg has evaded.
I did a quick Google of “women CEOs that have taken maternity leave” and I couldn’t find any. Pages and pages of results come up about Mayer though…
Which is why this must feel like a slight kick in the teeth for women in work. Whilst it’s great that a man is setting an example (which is probably what’s required for any sort of significant change, unfortunately), it’s equally a shame that it’s not a high profile woman that’s leading the way for other women to do the same.
The problem
Coincidentally another story here in the UK broke this morning that related closely to the issues discussed in this article – about how corporate structures aren’t suited to women that want to have children.
The first female chief executive of business lobby group the CBI has come out and criticised business dinners as “not very inclusive” for women, according to the BBC.
Carolyn Fairbairn said that along with sporting events, she has “never been a fan” of black-tie dinners and said that “a lot of women aren’t”.
These dinners, and sporting events, are often critical to business networking, but also happen outside of work hours and therefore cut into family time. Fairbairn said:
They’d rather go home to their families in the evening. Maybe the business dinner is a vestige of old business life.
And here lies the problem. The current way that businesses operate require that women exclude a lot of the requirements placed on them by having a family and force a decision to be made. To either be a mother, or to be successful at work.
Plenty of my female friends that are in professional jobs have expressed that they feel that they could get to a middle management position, but then would have to stop there because of the choices they’d have to make relating to having children.
If taking paternity/maternity leave was the rule, rather than the exception, for both men and women, some of this might change.
Kudos to Zuckerberg for taking a bold step, it may well set a new precedent. And I hope some women follow suit and take a stand against the obvious sexism in this industry.
However, it’s a shame that it requires a man to take a stand. If you think about it, it speaks to many of the problems women face in work.
Read more on: DiversityFuture of workTalent management 