
Mark Zuckerberg, Facebook CEO
The UK and Canada are joining forces to give Mark Zuckerberg another chance to not answer questions from their politicos, but the Facebook CEO already has plenty of other problems to deal with.
The UK Government’s Digital, Culture, Media and Sport Select Committee has previously railed at Zuckerberg’s refusal to appear before it to answer questions from legislators, despite appearing (pointlessly) before European Union representatives and the US Congress.
It’s making another attempt, this time in tandem with its Canadian counterpart, to get the elusive Zuckerberg to attend a committee session on 27 November in the Houses of Parliament in London.
Britain’s committee chair Damien Collins and Bob Zimmer, Chair of Canada’s Standing Committee on Access to Information, Privacy and Ethics, have penned a joint missive to the Facebook CEO in which they state:
Over the past year, our committees have both sought evidence from a Facebook executive with sufficient authority to give an accurate account of recent failures of process, including the recent Cambridge Analytica scandal and subsequent data breaches.
Given your self-declared objective to ‘fix’ Facebook, and to prevent the platform’s malign use in world affairs and democratic process, we would like to give you the chance to appear at this hearing.
We call on you to take up this historic opportunity to tell parliamentarians from both sides of the Atlantic and beyond about the measures Facebook is taking to halt the spread of disinformation on your platform, and to protect user data.
Zuckerberg has yet to decline.
Slowing
But then he’s a busy man and one with a lot of problems on his plate. Global user numbers for Facebook are still rising, but at a much slower pace than Wall Street is used to (or cares for). The growth that is there is coming out of India, the Philippines and Indonesia, leading Zuckerberg to observe:
On the Facebook app overall, what we see is that we are generally stable, although we may be close to saturated in developed countries while we continue to grow quickly in developing countries.
Meanwhile in privacy-sensitive parts of the world, rot has set in following the Cambridge Analytica scandal. For example, in Europe Facebook has lost a million daily and monthly active users in the past three months alone.  The number of Europeans logging on every day dropped from 279 million to 278 million, while monthly European users fell from 376 million to 37 million.
Now, the Facebook management can still point to global stats that show that it has 2.27 billion monthly active users and 1.49 billion daily users. Meanwhile the latest quarterly numbers show profits up 9% to around $5 billion on revenues up 33% to $13.73 billion.
But following Zuckerberg’s post results conference call with analysts, the schizophrenic behavior of the share price told its own story about the damage done to the Facebook brand this year and the jitters that Wall Street has about the prospects for next year and beyond.
Caution
That’s not going to have been helped by a very cautious set of statements coming out of Zuckerberg, all of which seemed intended to set lower expectations, with far less ‘changing the world’ rhetoric:
We’re seeing video grow dramatically across the ecosystem. And while Watch is now growing very quickly, we’re well behind YouTube and still working to make this a unique people-centric experience…by making businesses pay to send messages, we believe it will make them more selective with what they send. Payments will make each of these services more useful for people and businesses, even though we don’t plan to profit from it directly…beyond the mission challenges of video displacing social interactions, there is also a business challenge, which is that video monetizes significantly less well per minute than people interacting in feeds. So this means that even though we’ve made video more community-oriented and minimized displacement of social interactions, as video grows, it will still displace some other services where we’d probably make more money.
He was particularly keen to add a lot of ifs and buts to the Facebook Stories offering:
While WhatsApp Status and Instagram Stories immediately took off and have been huge successes, Facebook Stories started off slower. It’s now growing quickly and I think we’ll be in a better position soon, but our effort to shift Facebook from News Feed first to Stories first hasn’t been as smooth as I had hoped…Another challenge is that we’re earlier in developing our ads products for Stories, so we don’t make as much money from them yet as we do from feed ads…I want to be up front that even assuming that we get to where we want to go from a feed-only world to a feed plus Stories world, it will take some time and our revenue growth may be slower during that period like it was while transitioning our products to mobile.
He added:
When I say that we got started slower on Facebook, that starts with literally rolling out on Facebook a number of months after we had rolled out on either WhatsApp or Instagram. And then the initial version of what we shipped I just think wasn’t as high-quality as it needed to be. It wasn’t as fast. There were bugs. And we’ve been working on dialling that in.
Amid all that, he cautioned investors, costs are only going to go up:
I expect 2019 to be another year of significant investment…I want you to know that looking out beyond 2019, I know that we need to make sure our costs and revenue are better matched over time and that’s something that I’m focused on as well.
And of course high on those increased investment costs is playing security catch-up. Zuckerberg confirmed this is a never-ending spend:
There is a large element of this, which is an arms race. And when you’re talking about security issues and some of the safety and content issues, these are not problems that we fix. They’re problems that you manage over time and try to reduce and prevent issues from coming up, but there’s no silver bullet where you do the thing and then you’re done.
That said, I do think that we were quite behind where we needed to be a couple of years ago. We started a roadmap, which we said was going to be about a three-year roadmap. I think that we have some confidence in that timeframe, which takes us through the end of about 2019, to get our systems to the level that we generally think that they should be at, where we’re building AI systems that can flag content that might be problematic to a much larger security and review team that can manage the larger volume of stuff that our tools are flagging to them.
My take
Zuckerberg pitched 2018 as being “a tough year”, which might generously – very generously – be read as commendable understatement.
Here’s the problem though Zuck – 2018 isn’t over yet and 2019’s not looking that much more enticing.
Facebook is a damaged brand. It still has its user base as its greatest asset and COO Sheryl Sandberg can still weave some convincing stories of how companies can benefit commercially from the Facebook platform.
But Facebook has long term problems and clearly isn’t going to deal with them fast enough to keep Wall Street on side. The damage done in 2018 isn’t going away at midnight on 31 December. This annus horribilis doesn’t have an end date.
Image credit - Facebook Read more on: Data privacyDigital and content marketingGoverning identity privacy and securitySocial 