
Last week I was introduced to Zugata, a new company that has a fresh spin on the rapidly fading annual review process. It proposes an alternative method that starts with the idea of anonymous rating among peers. My immediate reaction was ‘Woah tiger – we’ve just seen Peeple blow up in the founders’ faces, you’d better have a darned good spot on this for me to buy into it.’
They might be onto something.
Here’s an observable American tendency but which could equally apply in other countries. People are hypocrites. What they say to your face, often with a beaming smile is frequently nothing like what they really think. There seems to be a culture of speaking bullshit as a way of avoiding potential conflict. Brits don’t have that problem — mostly although they are mostly polite about criticism. The French and Spanish don’t mess about.
I’m not saying this is ubiquitous  in the US , but it is something I’ve seen played out time and again in the US. From my conversations with managers and staff, it is a big part of what makes the annual review such a loathsome event from both person’s perspective.
Zugata believes that carefully metered, regular and curated appraisals conducted on an anonymous basis can solve that problem. What do they offer?
The seemingly simple system encourages review through gamification principles. It does not overload individuals with lots of people that need reviewing but selects one per week to answer a simple set of questions about that individual. Srinivas Krishnamurti, CEO Zugata explained it to me this way.
The evidence suggests that millennials want more frequent reviews. They are an increasing and important part of the workforce. We collect feedback from all the people you work with. We can figure out who you work with at any moment in time. We can build a social graph with the people you’re working with as well. Every week, we ping one person you work with. We don’t ask you to review the same person more than once a quarter.
In a demo of the product, Krishnamurti showed how the feedback mechanism builds up a social profile over time that is not designed to work for compensation purposes but for development. It attempts to discover personal, interpersonal and skills gaps the receiving employee not only sees, but is able to respond against. That might include a training request or a mentoring session or further explanation behind a particular point of view.

Zugata gets access to a person’s social graph by mining Gmail, Exchange or Slack interactions. In this context ‘people you work which may include those with whom your are on a project. Equally, it could include those who are in a wider circle with whom you interact.
I’m intrigued by this idea. The company says that Zugata has been accepted in field trials and is providing useful results. That may be so but then the company is cautious in talking about outcomes. It is clearly early days and there is still work to be done before this solution can go prime time. The UI for example could do with some work to make it more attractive.
Zugata will need many data set samples before it can be reliably used as a benchmarking tool. Zugata believes the sweet spot is mid-market or organizations with 150 to 3,500 to 4,000 employees but is not offering guidance as to the size of company to which it can scale.
Although I have some doubts about anonymous feedback, largely because of the inherent bias that method introduces, it is conceivable that over time, Zugata could become widely accepted — provided that it continues to prove itself in the field.
Interesting development or a barking mad idea?
Read more on: HCM and the digital future of work 