
QVC
Flagging one-time e-commerce high-flyer Zulily has found a rescuer in the shape of home shopping network QVC, a reminder of how tough it can be to compete in a marketing dominated by Amazon.
Two years after a high-profile IPO, Zulily has agreed to be sold to Liberty Interactive, which owns home shopping network QVC, in a deal worth $2.4 billion.
The firm, best known for its flash sales of products ranging from toys to children’s apparel and maternity clothing, turned in revenues of $1 billion last year. But while that on the surface seems impressive, it’s a figure that represents only 4% year-on-year growth.
Zulily and QVC will operate separately, but Mike George, QVC President and CEO, said:
As the world leader in video and eCommerce retail, QVC is dedicated to reimagining shopping, entertainment and community as one. In Zulily, we see a like-minded brand that shares our passion for discovering great products, for delivering honest value, and for building long term relationships with customers. Our teams are committed to learning from and inspiring each other and leveraging our platforms in new ways to accelerate growth, serve our customers better, and realize the full potential of both of these extraordinary brands.
Specific areas of collaboration and leverage were cited as:

The ability to leverage QVC’s global scale.
The breadth of QVC’s vendor relationships.
Zulily’s video commerce expertise.
Zulily’s younger customer demographic, personalization expertise and eCommerce capabilities.

Greg Maffei, CEO of QVC’s parent company Liberty Interactive. said:
Combined under Liberty, we have an incredible opportunity to delight shoppers from the TV to the Internet.
Negative interpretation
But while those are the positives, there’s a negative interpretation that can be applied as well with this transaction another reminder of how difficult it can be for e-commerce start-ups to compete in a sector dominated by Amazon.
Zulily had originally attempted to differentiate itself by selling products from lesser known or niche brands, shipped directly from the suppliers with no inventory held by Zulily.
Earlier this month CEO and co-founder Darrell Cavens referenced the problems that the firm had run into in recent years, not the least of which was low customer retention rates:
From mid-2013 to early 2015, we were overly focused on rapidly growing our customer base and found, with hindsight, the customers we acquired had a higher rate of initial activations, but also lower retention rates and had lower lifetime values than we had expected.
This is partly attributable to Zulily’s focus on transactional advertising, he added:
Transactional advertising tends to focus on specific brands or products to drive near-term purchase behavior rather than attracting visitors for ongoing repeat engagement with our unique Zulily model that emphasizes discovery and entertainment. Less transactional ads are ones that highlight the Zulily brand were the concept of discovery shopping with fresh, unique products, a great value every day.
Cavens highlighted the example of two sets of customers from 2012:
Both came in through the same channel, a display ad on a major homepage, but through two different types of ads. The first ad featured a globally distributed well-known shoe brand, and the second was a set of uniquely styled but unbranded women’s dresses.
When we analyzed customers coming in through the two different ad types, the shoe ad had more than twice the rate of customer activations on day one, but two-and-a-half years later, the spend from customers that came in through the women’s dresses ad was significantly higher than the shoe ad with the difference increasing over time.
Customer experience
Another factor in the firm’s problems was a less-than-satisfactory customer experience. Cavens admitted:
An exceptional customer experience is critical to bringing our customers back again and again. Historically, our high repeat engagement has been driven by providing an entertaining shopping experience with great products at great prices that exceed our customer’s expectations every day. In 2014, we believe that at times we had a sub-optimal customer experience as we tried to keep up with the rapid growth of the business. In 2015, we put a tremendous amount of effort into fixing these customer experience issues.
Zulily
Those fixes included a potential reversing of a controversial policy of not accepting returns from customers, in stark contrast to the likes of Amazon which makes it as easy as possible to do so. Cavens said:
In the second quarter we launched several pilot return programs to a subset of customers. Traditionally, we’ve not accepted returns in our US operations, but we’ve always empowered our customer service team to make it right if a customer is not satisfied with their order.
He added:
As we look at returns, we’re looking to make sure that we’re seeing, at the end of the day, trust from customers and that leads to lift in sales. We’re watching very carefully what the return rates are from those customers and making sure that on an economic basis it’s rational to do that.
I think returns is somewhat of a learned behavior and I think we have to watch it over a period of time to understand how those consumers behave. How they behave in the first few weeks of a program may be different than how they behave over the long-term. I just want to take the appropriate amount of time to do that well and just make sure that our core economics aren’t eroded.
He concluded:
While it’s still early, we’re encouraged by the results of the pilot program.
Encouraged perhaps, but it’s not been enough to enable Zulily to remain an independent competitor.
My take
A sound move by QVC and a reminder that the e-commerce marketplace sector is a tough place in which to thrive.  Zulily made some bad mistakes in the two years since its IPO.
Read more on: CRM and customer experienceDigital and content marketinge-commerceRetail e-commerce and the omni-channel 