
A number of global 100 boards are not ready for the forthcoming European Union (EU) General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR), despite some having spent hundreds of millions of pounds on the road to compliance thus far. The UK’s data regulator, the ICO, is being pragmatic and has assured companies that hefty fines won’t be issued come 25th May, but other experts have warned that consumer privacy groups will test and poke the governance structures that have been put in place.
Are you likely to weather the GDPR storm better if you’re a B2B company? What about if you’re an SME that’s cloud-based? Or a large company with a host of legacy systems? We sat down with a panel of experts this week in London to discuss the impending deadline.
GDPR comes into force one month from today. From the 25th May, organisations will need to comply with the new data protection regulations if they have any dealings with companies or consumers in EU member states (including the UK).
The ultimate aim of the regulation is to give individuals more rights over their data and restrict how companies process private information. GDPR has a number of requirements, which include:

a requirement for consent – businesses will need to ensure that all customers know that you have their data and that they consent to the business having that data
businesses will have three days to report data breaches to both the authorities and customers
the Right to be Forgotten – customers will have the right to ask businesses to delete all of their data, and to prove that they have
data portability – the aim being to create an environment where businesses can easily swap their data between different providers, whilst ensuring the data is erased from the old provider’s systems.
hefty fines for data breaches will be introduced – up to €20 million or 4% of global annual turnover for the preceding financial year, whichever is the greater.

The Direct Marketing Association (DMA) conducted a roundtable this week with a range of data protection experts, including a spokesperson from the Information Commissioner’s Office (ICO), to discuss where businesses are at in terms of compliance and to offer some advice for what steps to take.
Richard Sisson, senior policy officer at the ICO, said that the number of GDPR-related questions coming through on its helplines is “going up dramatically” and that the closer to the deadline we get, the greater this is becoming.
However, Sisson was keen to offer some words of comfort for those organisations still working through compliance and worried about the impending deadline. He said:
I think the thing we are trying to say more of is that, as far as we can be, we are still trying to be a pragmatic organisation. We don’t expect May 25th to be the end. You can’t forget about GDPR and it’s done. It’s an ongoing thing.
We are trying to reassure people that if you are trying to do the work that you can to comply, if you are working towards the accountability principle and ensuring you have records of what you’re doing, and you can show that you are working towards compliance – we may not be entirely happy all the time, but we will take those things into consideration. We understand that. We’re not going to be issuing huge fines on 25th May.
What to expect
Mark Thompson, global privacy advocacy lead for KPMG, expressed his view that many large organisations will not be GDPR-ready come 25th May and plenty of money will still be ploughed into compliance after this deadline. He said:
I’ve been with a number of Global 100 boards over the last several weeks and they’re not going to be compliant. They’ve spent multiple, multiple millions – some in excess of £100 million so far. If you look at spending patterns, I would say that 20-30% is going to be pre-May and the rest post-May.
There’s a very, very long journey for a lot of organisations. A lot of people are putting in measures that are creating a negative impact on customer journeys. But privacy is absolutely a way you can improve customer journeys and improve trust.
One person in attendance at the roundtable was Richard Merrygold, director of group data protection at Homeserve, a company that provides home emergency cover for boilers. Merrygold, very much at the coalface of getting his company GDPR-compliant, believes that companies that have historically had good data protection processes in place will be in a good position. He said:
We were very fortunate, as we were already in a fairly good place. I’ve been doing this job at Homeserve for five years. We already had a structure in place. If you’re generally good at data protection, you’re probably going to be okay with GDPR. Good compliance is good compliance. The bigger companies are very well prepared. My concern is the SMEs, who have never really had to think about data protection and are now having to think about the whole of GDPR.
However, Robert Bond, a partner at law firm Bristows, did have a word of warning for large companies for once GDPR kicks in. In particular, Bond referenced the right for consumers to request and get access to the data a company holds – free of charge. He believes that some privacy groups will use this right to test whether or not companies are taking the right actions. He said:
I would say, going to the more worrying side of this, you will see post-25th May a big spike in the number of aggressive subject access requests. Particularly driven by consumer privacy facing groups, which want to poke particular brands, because they can. There is no cost. And then once they’ve found what’s going on about them, then there will be the rights of erasure request, the portability requests.
And then when we see some of the well publicised events occurring post-May, we will get the ‘databreachlawyersforyou.com’ – no win no fee – coming up. The businesses that proactively reach out and say ‘you should trust us’ because we take a proactive, ethical approach, are going to manage the storm better than those pretending it isn’t going to happen.
B2B vs B2C vs SME vs Multi-national
The group of panelists also had a view on what types of companies are going to face a tougher time – despite the face that every organisation, no matter the sector or size, will have to become compliant. Bristows’ Bond pointed to B2C companies as being directly in the firing line, as well as those companies overseas that haven’t historically had to be compliant. He said:
I tend to say that B2B focused companies are at a lower risk. It’s very much the B2C that have got more risk in terms of adverse reaction. The compliance is exactly the same, it really doesn’t matter who you are. The big organisations – the healthcare companies, the banks, the insurers – they already work under big compliance requirements. So it’s not really a revolution for them, more evolution.
Where I’m seeing a lot of panic is the third party overseas processors, who have never, ever had to comply, and are suddenly being caught by the fact that GDPR is extra-territorial.
Different panelists had different views on whether larger or smaller companies would struggle to reach compliance. For example, Homeserve’s Merrygold said that SMEs can now hold a whole host of data thanks to cloud-based technologies, but won’t necessarily have the resources to figure out the ins and outs of GDPR. He said:
20 years ago, big organisations had big data. Small organisations didn’t. Very, very small organisations who are cloud based, they can now have huge volumes of information. Those organisations that are growing, who only have five or six people, can hold records that have incredibly sensitive information for huge swathes of people. They’re really going to struggle with this, because they don’t have the resources or the expertise to do it. They were never built to comply with these things.
However, DMA’s CEO Chris Combemale disagreed and said that at least those smaller companies can work with their cloud providers and make use of the expertise that they have. Whereas, larger organisations with a whole host of legacy systems may struggle more. He said:
For larger companies the biggest issue we’ve found, is not the desire to become compliant, but the number of legacy systems and the number of legacy systems that don’t necessarily talk to each other – this creates an implementation barrier.
Equally, KPMG’s Thompson said that the biggest challenge for large organisations will be the cultural change, particularly those that are adapting to new business models that put data at the centre of what they do. He said:
Big, large, multi-national organisations, trying to turn them is trying to turn an oil tanker. It’s not impossible, but a small start-up can change very quickly. The level of effort with a large organisation is much more significant.
The other thing that’s come into play is that a lot of organisations have had a business model for a long period of time. I’ll use pharmaceuticals as an example. They do not interact with the patient. There are very few scenarios where anything prescription based, they will know who the end user is.
But they are starting to move to digital products, where they take a pill and this provides a reading to an app on your phone telling you your sugar levels, for example. That data has to go somewhere and primarily it goes back to the pharmaceutical. So the shift in business is changing the way that organisations that didn’t use to interact, are now starting to interact with very significant volumes of data. And they’re just not culturally programmed in the way to focus on that and manage that.
Finally, Jonathan Carter, head of strategy consulting and planning for Europe at Acxiom, a third party data processing and marketing service, said that one impact of GDPR – which he cites as a good – is that companies’ legal teams and marketing teams are finally talking to each other. He said:
I’ve sat in a number of board rooms, where the marketing people sit over there, and the legal people sit over there. They’re the same organisation, but that level of interaction between the legal team and the marketing team didn’t exist.
As soon as you start to unpick some of the data processing activities, you reach a point in the meeting where all the lawyers go, ‘oh we didn’t know you were doing that with the data’. And the level of engagement that GDPR is driving between marketing and legal teams is huge. And that can only be a good thing. A good thing to protect the organisation from doing something stupid, but also to protect the consumer.
My take
My main takeaways from the discussion this week were that the ICO doesn’t want to bankrupt anyone as a result of GDPR and that GDPR should be infused into your organisation to improve the customer experience. As long as you’re showing you’re on the road to compliance and making an active effort to do so, you’re probably going to be okay. Equally, this is an opportunity to embed customer centricity into the fabric of your organisation. However, ignore it at your peril.
Image credit - GDPR compliance notes dated 25 May 2018 with office tools © Stanislau_V - Fotolia.comRead more on: Governing identity privacy and securityRegulation 