
US President Donald Trump may not have been present in person at the Nasscom Leadership Forum in Mumbai last week, but his shadow hung over India’s biggest IT executive talking shop.
Trump’s “America First” commitment, his threats of renegotiating existing global trade deals and his administration’s proposed policies on immigration and H-1B visas have created such a climate of uncertainly that for the first time, Nasscom has felt it necessary to delay its fiscal 2017/2018 growth forecasts for the Indian IT industry.
Nasscom President R. Chandrashekhar said that the association would be better placed to make accurate projections after the sector gets past the first quarter of the year:
A certain level of … uncertainty will continue over the medium-term. Businesses therefore have to take essential decisions on new technology in the face of a certain degree of uncertainty.
We are initiating deeper interactions with all stakeholders – global customers and industry providers – to get a more reliable and clear perspective on the projections for FY2018 and will give the guidance in the next quarter.
That said, there was a distinct attitude of ‘Keep Calm and Carry On’ coming from a number of delegates at the Forum, not least the outgoing CEO of Tata Consultancy Services, N. Chandrasekaran, who admonished the sense of crisis being generated around Trump’s executive orders:
Every time there is a regulatory change or some kind of a perceived challenge, in our industry, everybody says ‘there is a problem’ … and it is hyped up whether it is H1-B, whether it is increase in re-staffing,
Change is something you have to live with. You cannot get overly paranoid, I don’t think there is a cause for concern, I really feel the opportunity is immense.
Fundamentally, every business is going to be powered by technology. So, the opportunity and the demand that we are going to see is just exponential..Every business is getting reimagined. So, the opportunity and the demand that we are going to see is just huge. Whether it’s products or platforms — it’s almost like a cricket pitch where the occasional ball will do something.
Not that important
Anand Mahindra, founder of Mahindra Group, added that Trump’s influence shouldn’t be over-exaggerated
Trump is out to re-imagine his country, not the world. America is still powerful; it can wake up and keep us on edge. The reality is that his ‘Make America Great Again ‘ policy is going to make America a wonderful place to invest in. Our group is going to double our bets on America because we think it is going to be very robust.
Mahindra also painted a picture of new opportunities for India:
India can serve as a bridge-builder at a time when nations are separating.India should become the app of choice for the world. Technology can be used to offshore work to India, which will reduce dependency on H-1B visas, as well as lead to improved margins.
The potential opportunities in the domestic market was a point reiterated by Reliance Industries chairman Mukesh Ambani:
Trump can actually be a blessing in disguise. The domestic IT industry can focus on solving problems right here, which is a huge market…It will help Indian talent and Indian IT industry to focus on solving problems in India. The domestic market is huge and this provides an opportunity to improve people’s quality of life and to make sure industries are more productive.
We have a very big advantage in this new world of digitisation. Its very very important to be open, to have partnerships and not be closed. That is really a strength we should build on, and continue to be open and never think whatever the world changes. The world might want to build walls around. I think it is very important for us not to be influenced by those developments, to make sure that we are always open, always connected.
This is going to require rethinking much of the way that India does business:
We really have to adopt next generation technologies. As a nation we have to be the capital of real implementation of blockchain. We have the opportunity to make sure that we adopt artificial intelligence and natural language processing, adopt drones in our own logistics. I think the opportunities are immense and we now have the infrastructure to do it in our own market and make India one of the largest software markets in the world.
Close to Trump
Delegates also heard from a US tech leader who’s sitting on Trump’s advisory council, IBM CEO Ginny Rometty. In 2016, IBM filed 2390 Labor Condition Applications (LCA), a first step in the H-1B process, with the US Department of Labor. Rometty said:
When it comes to visas we also use them. We use visas to fill short-term skill gap, these are part of our standard skills model. And it is small part of our population. I cannot tell you what will be in the future. IBM is a company built on diversity, inclusion and we move our workforce around the world and in order to respond to our clients and we will continue to do that. Clients expect us to solve their problems with the best talents from around the world. We do that and we will continue to do so.
Despite Rometty’s closeness to the President, any Nasscom delegate expecting insight into his thinking was to be disappointed. Rometty chose her words with care, understandably so give the criticism she’s received after writing to Trump after the election promising IBM’s assistance. She told Nasscom:
It’s both a responsibility and an honour to be called to give an opinion and to give advice to the council. What has also taught us over the years is that the way to get progress in this world is to engage and to bring solutions. And cases where there are dilemma between freedom of movement and security, there is always a trade-off in these. There are ways to make the world safer and secure so that people can move freely. That, to me, is a very big answer.
My take
Malcolm Frank, Chief Strategy Officer at Cognizant, summed up the mood best when he described it as one of:
fear and optimism.
The ‘glass half full’ mindset of Indian tech leaders is admirable, although it remains to be seen if it’s misguided. With Trump set to introduce a revised travel ban executive order this week, how long the keep calm and carry on philosophy holds up is open to question.
Image credit - Postergen.com Read more on: DiversityOutsourcingTalent management 