
You got talent?
German rail company, Deutsche Bahn, takes talent acquisition incredibly seriously. It needs to: every year the company has to recruit 12,000 staff in Germany alone across a range of jobs from engineers, electricians, blue-collar workers to school leavers. Filling this wide variety of roles is a tough task, says Kerstin Wagner, Deutsche Bahn’s head of talent acquisition:
It’s very challenging, because it’s not one-size-fits-all, so we have to have a good strategy to attract all these different people.
Deutsche Bahn also aims to become a top employer by 2020. To do this, the company recognizes it needs to be proactive in the way it attracts people to work for the business and that means creating a strong company brand that entices people to join the organization.
In 2012, it founded the 300-strong talent acquisition team to do just this. It’s a huge team (and it doesn’t include the team responsible for temporary appointments) but it reflects how important it is to the company to attract the right candidates, particularly in the current economic climate. As Wagner explains:
It’s a candidate’s market now. If they have the right profile, they can pick and choose, so we really have to focus on the candidate and we have to keep changing, so we ask ourselves every day: ‘what can we do it better?’
Constant innovation within the talent team is the order of the day. This is helped by the fact that the team is made up of a mix of operational and strategic experts with a wide range of skills, from social media specialists, market researchers to recruiters. This mix promotes innovation. It was one of the younger employees with a background in the gaming industry, for example, who came up with the idea of using virtual reality in recruitment. This was quickly rolled out and has been a huge success. Wagner says:
Innovation like virtual reality helps us achieve our goals in terms of making these jobs more tangible to people while giving them a flavor of the company.
Wider audience
The company is constantly looking for new ways to reach wider audiences. One way it is doing this is through its employer branding campaign, which Wagner describes as “brave new marketing”:
We are very brave with our employer branding campaign, which we launched in April, because we are really, really open in describing who we are. We don’t only talk about how great we are and that we are a top employer, but we are also very authentic and tell people that from time to time there are things not great in our company and need improving. Because that is the attitude we are looking for: people who want to improve the company every day and people who want to improve themselves.
The idea is to give people “the real picture” rather than the glossy brochure version of what it’s like to work at the company. They want people who don’t expect perfection, but who want to work at getting better and better every day.
As talent acquisition experts, the team has a key strategic role to play. The team has a good insight into the talent market, just as sales or marketing people know about the products they are selling. It’s vital this knowledge is shared and acted on, says Wagner:
You need to talk about jobs in the same way as sales or marketing talk about products. The important question is: are you successful in selling the product? So thinking backwards – the talent acquisition team knows quite well where there is something to improve in our ‘product’ in terms of corporate culture, in terms of benefits or the job description.
So, in my opinion, a recruiter is not just someone who finds the right people for a job. HR should see the bigger picture. Talent acquisition should have a major influence on the company’s strategy since talent acquisitions experts bring a deep knowledge of the market, expectations of the candidates and skill availability to the table.
I’m convinced that talent acquisition is so much more than just hiring people. If you want to think of it in a bigger way: we have 200,000 employees in Germany and 320,000 in total worldwide. If we just take the market in German, in the last five years we have exchanged and hired one third of employees. That means we are not only the gatekeeper but the lever for supporting a transformation, because in hiring that amount of people you also change your company culture.
It’s a huge opportunity for the talent team to support digital transformation by hiring people with the right attitude who can help change the culture.
Looking forward, Wagner believes candidates will expect things to be increasingly simple and personalized. Ordering books online can be done in a few clicks and applying for a job should be just as simple.
In November, Deutsche Bahn will be launching “the biggest job interview in Germany”, says Wagner. There is a specific career website for an event where people can apply for a range of jobs. Then they can choose an interview time that suits them (from 6am to 10pm) at one of seven locations across the company over a seven day period:
We will see about 3,000 interviewees in one week. We are really trying to get a lot of output from the event and hire lot of people. And we’re also really trying to make it simple: the only thing you have to do is click on our website, choose a job and upload a CV.
Kerstin Wagner will be talking in depth about how Deutsche Bahn’s talent acquisition approach is paying dividends for the company at HR Tech World, Amsterdam.

Image credit - Talent-card-with-colorful-background-with-defocused-lights-©-gustavofrazao-Fotolia.jpgRead more on: HCM and the digital future of workTalent management 